<doc id="31717" wikidata="Q145" url="?curid=31717" title="United Kingdom">
<text>The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known as the United Kingdom (UK) or Britain, is a country in Northwestern Europe, off the coast of the continental mainland. It comprises England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. The UK includes the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern part of the island of Ireland, and most of the smaller islands within the British Isles, covering . Northern Ireland shares a land border with the Republic of Ireland; otherwise, the United Kingdom is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, the North Sea, the English Channel, the Celtic Sea, and the Irish Sea. The United Kingdom had an estimated population of 68.2 million people in 2023. The capital and largest city of both England and the United Kingdom is London, whose wider metropolitan area is the largest in Western Europe, with a population of 14.9 million. The cities of Edinburgh, Cardiff, and Belfast are the national capitals of Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland, respectively.

The UK has been inhabited continuously since the Neolithic. In AD 43, the Roman conquest of Britain began; the Roman departure was followed by Anglo-Saxon settlement. In 1066, the Normans conquered England. With the end of the Wars of the Roses, the English state stabilised and began to grow in power, resulting by the 16th century in the annexation of Wales, and the establishment of the British Empire. Over the course of the 17th century, the role of the British monarchy was reduced, particularly as a result of the English Civil War. In 1707, the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland united under the Treaty of Union to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In the Georgian era, the office of prime minister became established. The Acts of Union 1800 incorporated the Kingdom of Ireland to create the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in 1801. Most of Ireland seceded from the UK in 1922 as the Irish Free State, and the Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927 created the present United Kingdom.

The UK became the first industrialised country and was the world&#x27;s foremost power for the majority of the 19th and early 20th centuries, particularly during the &quot;Pax Britannica&quot; between 1815 and 1914. The British Empire was the leading economic power for most of the 19th century, a position supported by its agricultural prosperity, its role as a dominant trading nation, a massive industrial capacity, significant technological achievements, and the rise of 19th-century London as the world&#x27;s principal financial centre. At its height in the 1920s, the British Empire encompassed almost a quarter of the world&#x27;s landmass and population, and was the largest empire in history. However, its involvement in the First World War and the Second World War damaged Britain&#x27;s economic power and a global wave of decolonisation led to the independence of most British colonies.

The United Kingdom is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy. The UK has three distinct jurisdictions: England and Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. Since 1999, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have their own governments and parliaments which control various devolved matters. A developed country with an advanced economy, the UK ranks among the largest economies by nominal GDP, and is one of the world&#x27;s largest exporters and importers. It is a nuclear state with one of the world&#x27;s highest military budgets. Its soft power influence can be observed in the legal and political systems of many of its former colonies, and British culture remains globally influential, particularly in language, literature, music and sport. English is the world&#x27;s most widely spoken language and the third-most spoken native language. The country is part of multiple international organisations and forums.

== Etymology and terminology ==

The Acts of Union 1707 declared that the Kingdom of England and Kingdom of Scotland were &quot;United into One Kingdom by the Name of Great Britain&quot;. The term &quot;United Kingdom&quot; has occasionally been used as a description for the former Kingdom of Great Britain, although its official name from 1707 to 1800 was simply &quot;Great Britain&quot;. The Acts of Union 1800 formed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Following the partition of Ireland and the independence of the Irish Free State in 1922, which left Northern Ireland as the only part of the island of Ireland within the United Kingdom, the name was changed in 1927 to the &quot;United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland&quot;.

Although the United Kingdom is a sovereign country, England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are also widely referred to as countries. The UK Prime Minister&#x27;s website has used the phrase &quot;countries within a country&quot; to describe the United Kingdom. Some statistical summaries, such as those for the twelve NUTS 1 regions, refer to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland as &quot;regions&quot;. Northern Ireland is also referred to as a &quot;province&quot;. With regard to Northern Ireland, the descriptive name used &quot;can be controversial, with the choice often revealing one&#x27;s political preferences&quot;.

The term &quot;Great Britain&quot; conventionally refers to the island of Great Britain, or politically to England, Scotland and Wales in combination. It is sometimes used as a loose synonym for the United Kingdom as a whole. The word &quot;England&quot; is occasionally used incorrectly to refer to the United Kingdom as a whole, a mistake principally made by people from outside the UK.

The term &quot;Britain&quot; is used as a synonym for Great Britain, but also sometimes for the United Kingdom. Usage is mixed: the UK Government style guide prefers the term &quot;UK&quot; rather than &quot;Britain&quot; or &quot;British&quot; (except when referring to embassies), while other government documents acknowledge that both terms refer to the United Kingdom and that elsewhere &quot;British government&quot; is used at least as frequently as &quot;United Kingdom government&quot;. The UK Permanent Committee on Geographical Names recognises &quot;United Kingdom&quot;, &quot;UK&quot; and &quot;U.K.&quot; as shortened and abbreviated geopolitical terms for the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in its toponymic guidelines; it does not list &quot;Britain&quot; but notes that &quot;it is only the one specific nominal term &#x27;Great Britain&#x27; which invariably excludes Northern Ireland&quot;. The BBC historically preferred to use &quot;Britain&quot; as shorthand only for Great Britain, though the present style guide does not take a position except that &quot;Great Britain&quot; excludes Northern Ireland.

The adjective &quot;British&quot; is commonly used to refer to matters relating to the United Kingdom and is used in law to refer to United Kingdom citizenship and nationality. People of the United Kingdom use several different terms to describe their national identity and may identify themselves as being British, English, Scottish, Welsh, Northern Irish, or Irish; or as having a combination of different national identities.

== History ==

=== Prior to the Treaty of Union ===


Settlement by Cro-Magnons of what was to become the United Kingdom occurred in waves beginning by about 30,000 years ago. The island has been continuously inhabited only since the last retreat of the ice around 11,500 years ago. By the end of the region&#x27;s prehistoric period, the population is thought to have belonged largely to a culture termed Insular Celtic, comprising Brittonic Britain and Gaelic Ireland.

The Roman conquest, beginning in 43 AD, and the 400-year rule of southern Britain, was followed by an invasion by Germanic Anglo-Saxon settlers, reducing the Brittonic area mainly to what was to become Wales, Cornwall and, until the latter stages of the Anglo-Saxon settlement, the Hen Ogledd (northern England and parts of southern Scotland). Most of the region settled by the Anglo-Saxons became unified as the Kingdom of England in the 10th century. Meanwhile, Gaelic speakers in north-west Britain (with connections to the north-east of Ireland and traditionally supposed to have migrated from there in the 5th century) united with the Picts to create the Kingdom of Scotland in the 9th century.

In 1066, the Normans invaded England from northern France. After conquering England, they seized large parts of Wales, conquered much of Ireland and were invited to settle in Scotland, bringing to each country feudalism on the Northern French model and Norman-French culture. The Anglo-Norman ruling class greatly influenced, but eventually assimilated with, the local cultures. Subsequent medieval English kings completed the conquest of Wales and tried unsuccessfully to annex Scotland. Asserting its independence in the 1320 Declaration of Arbroath, Scotland maintained its independence thereafter, albeit in near-constant conflict with England.

In 1215, the Magna Carta was the first document to state that no government was above the law, that citizens have rights protecting them, and that they were entitled to a fair trial.

The English monarchs, through inheritance of substantial territories in France and claims to the French crown, were also heavily involved in conflicts in France, most notably the Hundred Years&#x27; War, while the Kings of Scots were in an alliance with the French during this period.
Early modern Britain saw religious conflict resulting from the Reformation and the introduction of Protestant state churches in each country. The English Reformation ushered in political, constitutional, social and cultural change in the 16th century and established the Church of England. Moreover, it defined a national identity for England and slowly, but profoundly, changed people&#x27;s religious beliefs. Wales was fully incorporated into the Kingdom of England, and Ireland was constituted as a kingdom in personal union with the English crown. In what was to become Northern Ireland, the lands of the independent Catholic Gaelic nobility were confiscated and given to Protestant settlers from England and Scotland.

In 1603, the kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland were united in a personal union when James VI, King of Scots, inherited the crowns of England and Ireland and moved his court from Edinburgh to London; each country nevertheless remained a separate political entity and retained its separate political, legal, and religious institutions.

In the mid-17th century, all three kingdoms were involved in a series of connected wars (including the English Civil War) which led to the temporary overthrow of the monarchy, with the execution of King Charles I, and the establishment of the short-lived unitary republic of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland.

Although the monarchy was restored, the Interregnum along with the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and the subsequent Bill of Rights 1689 in England and Claim of Right Act 1689 in Scotland ensured that, unlike much of the rest of Europe, royal absolutism would not prevail, and a professed Catholic could never accede to the throne. The British constitution would develop on the basis of constitutional monarchy and the parliamentary system. With the founding of the Royal Society in 1660, science was greatly encouraged. During this period, particularly in England, the development of naval power and the interest in voyages of discovery led to the acquisition and settlement of overseas colonies, particularly in North America and the Caribbean.

Though previous attempts at uniting the two kingdoms within Great Britain in 1606, 1667, and 1689 had proved unsuccessful, the attempt initiated in 1705 led to the Treaty of Union of 1706 being agreed and ratified by both parliaments.
=== Union of England and Scotland ===
On 1 May 1707, the Kingdom of Great Britain was formed, the result of the Acts of Union 1707 between the Kingdom of England and Kingdom of Scotland. In the 18th century, cabinet government developed under Robert Walpole, in practice the first prime minister (1721–1742). A series of Jacobite uprisings sought to remove the Protestant House of Hanover from the throne and restore the Catholic House of Stuart. The Jacobites were finally defeated at the Battle of Culloden in 1746, after which the Scottish Highlanders were forcibly assimilated into Scotland by revoking the feudal independence of clan chiefs. The British colonies in North America that broke away in the American War of Independence became the United States. British imperial ambition turned towards Asia, particularly to India.

British merchants played a leading part in the Atlantic slave trade, mainly between 1662 and 1807 when British or British-colonial slave ships transported nearly 3.3 million slaves from Africa. The slaves were taken to work on plantations, principally in the Caribbean but also North America. However, with pressure from the abolitionism movement, Parliament banned the trade in 1807, banned slavery in the British Empire in 1833, and Britain took a leading role in the movement to abolish slavery worldwide through the blockade of Africa and pressing other nations to end their trade with a series of treaties.

=== United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland ===
In 1800, the parliaments of Great Britain and Ireland each passed an Act of Union, uniting the two kingdoms and creating the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland on 1 January 1801.

After the defeat of France at the end of the French Revolutionary Wars and Napoleonic Wars (1792–1815), the United Kingdom emerged as the principal naval and imperial power (with London the largest city in the world from about 1830). Unchallenged at sea, British dominance was later described as &quot;Pax Britannica&quot; (&quot;British Peace&quot;), a period of relative peace among the great powers (1815–1914) during which the British Empire became the global hegemon and foremost power and adopted the role of global policeman. From 1853 to 1856, Britain took part in the Crimean War, allied with the Ottoman Empire against Tsarist Russia, participating in the naval battles of the Baltic Sea known as the Åland War in the Gulf of Bothnia and the Gulf of Finland, among others. Following the Indian Rebellion in 1857, the British government led by Lord Palmerston assumed direct rule over India. Alongside the formal control it exerted over its own colonies, British dominance of much of world trade meant that it effectively controlled the economies of regions such as East Asia and Latin America.

Throughout the Victorian era, political attitudes favoured free trade and laissez-faire policies. Beginning with the Great Reform Act in 1832, Parliament gradually widened the voting franchise, with the 1884 Reform Act championed by William Gladstone granting suffrage to a majority of males for the first time. The British population increased at a dramatic rate, accompanied by rapid urbanisation, causing significant social and economic stresses. By the late 19th century, the Conservatives under Benjamin Disraeli and Lord Salisbury initiated a period of imperial expansion in Africa, maintained a policy of splendid isolation in Europe, and attempted to contain Russian influence in Afghanistan and Persia, in what came to be known as the Great Game. During this time, Canada, Australia and New Zealand were granted self-governing dominion status. At the turn of the century, Britain&#x27;s industrial dominance became challenged by the German Empire and the United States. The Edwardian era saw social reform and home rule for Ireland become important domestic issues, while the Labour Party emerged from an alliance of trade unions and small socialist groups in 1900, and suffragettes campaigned for women&#x27;s right to vote.

=== World wars and partition of Ireland ===

Britain was one of the principal Allies that defeated the Central Powers in the First World War (1914–1918). Alongside their French, Russian and (after 1917) American counterparts, British armed forces were engaged across much of the British Empire and in several regions of Europe, particularly on the Western Front. The high fatalities of trench warfare caused the loss of much of a generation of men, with lasting social effects in the nation and a great disruption in the social order. Britain had suffered 2.5 million casualties and finished the war with a huge national debt. The consequences of the war persuaded the government to expand the right to vote in national and local elections to all adult men and most adult women with the Representation of the People Act 1918. After the war, Britain became a permanent member of the Executive Council of the League of Nations and received a mandate over a number of former German and Ottoman colonies. Under the leadership of David Lloyd George, the British Empire reached its greatest extent, covering a fifth of the world&#x27;s land surface and a quarter of its population.

By the mid-1920s, most of the British population could listen to BBC radio programmes. Experimental television broadcasts began in 1929 and the first scheduled BBC Television Service commenced in 1936. The rise of Irish nationalism, and disputes within Ireland over the terms of Irish Home Rule, led eventually to the partition of the island in 1921. A period of conflict in what is now Northern Ireland occurred from June 1920 until June 1922. The Irish Free State became independent, initially with Dominion status in 1922, and unambiguously independent in 1931. Northern Ireland remained part of the United Kingdom. The 1928 Equal Franchise Act gave women electoral equality with men in national elections. Strikes in the mid-1920s culminated in the General Strike of 1926. Britain had still not recovered from the effects of the First World War when the Great Depression (1929–1932) led to considerable unemployment and hardship in the old industrial areas, as well as political and social unrest with rising membership in communist and socialist parties. A coalition government was formed in 1931.

Nonetheless, &quot;Britain was a very wealthy country, formidable in arms, ruthless in pursuit of its interests and sitting at the heart of a global production system.&quot; After Nazi Germany invaded Poland in 1939, Britain entered the Second World War. Winston Churchill became prime minister and head of a coalition government in 1940. Despite the defeat of its European allies in the first year, Britain and its Empire continued the war against Germany. Churchill engaged industry, scientists and engineers to support the government and the military in the prosecution of the war effort.

In 1940, the Royal Air Force defeated the German Luftwaffe in the Battle of Britain. Urban areas suffered heavy bombing during the Blitz. The Grand Alliance of Britain, the United States and the Soviet Union formed in 1941, leading the Allies against the Axis powers. There were eventual hard-fought victories in the Battle of the Atlantic, the North Africa campaign and the Italian campaign. British forces played important roles in the Normandy landings of 1944 and the liberation of Europe. The British Army led the Burma campaign against Japan, and the British Pacific Fleet fought Japan at sea. British scientists contributed to the Manhattan Project whose task was to build an atomic weapon. Once built, it was decided, with British consent, to use the weapon against Japan.

=== Post-war 20th century ===

The UK was one of the Big Three powers (along with the US and the Soviet Union) who met to plan the post-war world; it drafted the Declaration by United Nations with the United States and became one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. It worked closely with the United States to establish the IMF, World Bank and NATO. The war left the UK severely weakened and financially dependent on the Marshall Plan, but it was spared the total war that devastated eastern Europe.

In the immediate post-war years, the Labour government under Clement Attlee initiated a radical programme of reforms, which significantly impacted British society in the following decades. Major industries and public utilities were nationalised, a welfare state was established, and a comprehensive, publicly funded healthcare system, the National Health Service, was created. The rise of nationalism in the colonies coincided with Britain&#x27;s much-diminished economic position after its involvement in the First World War and the Second World War, so that a policy of decolonisation was unavoidable. Independence was granted to India and Pakistan in 1947. Over the next three decades, most colonies of the British Empire gained their independence, and many became members of the Commonwealth of Nations.

The UK was the third country to develop a nuclear weapons arsenal (with its first atomic bomb test, Operation Hurricane, in 1952), but the post-war limits of Britain&#x27;s international role were illustrated by the Suez Crisis of 1956. The international spread of the English language, the world&#x27;s most widely spoken language and third-most spoken native language, ensured the continuing international influence of its literature and culture. As a result of a shortage of workers in the 1950s, the government encouraged immigration from Commonwealth countries. In the following decades, the UK became a more multi-ethnic society. Despite rising living standards in the late 1950s and 1960s, the UK&#x27;s economic performance was less successful than many of its main competitors such as France, West Germany and Japan. The UK was the first democratic nation to lower its voting age to 18 in 1969.

In the decades-long process of European integration, the UK was a founding member of the Western European Union, established with the London and Paris Conferences in 1954. In 1960 the UK was one of the seven founding members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), but in 1973 it left to join the European Communities (EC). In a 1975 referendum 67% voted to stay in it. When the EC became the European Union (EU) in 1992, the UK was one of the 12 founding member states.

From the late 1960s, Northern Ireland suffered communal and paramilitary violence (sometimes affecting other parts of the UK) conventionally known as the Troubles. It is usually considered to have ended with the 1998 Belfast &quot;Good Friday&quot; Agreement. Following a period of widespread economic slowdown and industrial strife in the 1970s, the Conservative government of the 1980s led by Margaret Thatcher initiated a radical policy of monetarism, deregulation, particularly of the financial sector (for example, the Big Bang in 1986) and labour markets, the sale of state-owned companies (privatisation), and the withdrawal of subsidies to others.

In 1982, Argentina invaded the British territories of South Georgia and the Falkland Islands, leading to the 10-week Falklands War in which Argentine forces were defeated. The inhabitants of the islands are predominantly descendants of British settlers, and strongly favour British sovereignty, expressed in a 2013 referendum. From 1984, the UK economy was helped by the inflow of substantial North Sea oil revenues. Another British overseas territory, Gibraltar, ceded to Great Britain in the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht, is a key military base. A referendum in 2002 on shared sovereignty with Spain was rejected by 98.97% of voters in the territory.

Around the end of the 20th century, there were major changes to the governance of the UK with the establishment of devolved administrations for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The statutory incorporation followed acceptance of the European Convention on Human Rights. The UK remained a great power with global diplomatic and military influence and a leading role in the United Nations and NATO.

=== 21st century ===

The UK broadly supported the United States&#x27; approach to the &quot;war on terror&quot; in the early 21st century. British troops fought in the War in Afghanistan, but controversy surrounded Britain&#x27;s military deployment in Iraq, which saw the largest protest in British history in opposition to the government led by Tony Blair.

The Great Recession severely affected the UK economy. The Cameron–Clegg coalition government of 2010 introduced austerity measures intended to tackle the substantial public deficits. Studies have suggested that policy led to significant social disruption and suffering. A referendum on Scottish independence in 2014 resulted in the Scottish electorate voting by 55.3 to 44.7% to remain part of the United Kingdom.

In 2016, 51.9% of voters in the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union. The UK left the EU in 2020. On 1 May 2021, the EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement came into force.

The COVID-19 pandemic had a severe impact on the UK&#x27;s economy, caused major disruptions to education and had far-reaching impacts on society and politics in 2020 and 2021. The United Kingdom was the first country in the world to use an approved COVID-19 vaccine, developing its own vaccine through a collaboration between Oxford University and AstraZeneca, which allowed the UK&#x27;s vaccine rollout to be among the fastest in the world.

== Geography ==
The total area of the United Kingdom is approximately , with a land area of . The country occupies the major part of the British Isles archipelago and includes the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern one-sixth of the island of Ireland and some smaller surrounding islands, meaning it comprises England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. It lies between the North Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea with the southeast coast coming within of the coast of northern France, from which it is separated by the English Channel.

The Royal Greenwich Observatory in London was chosen as the defining point of the Prime Meridian at the International Meridian Conference in 1884.

The United Kingdom lies between latitudes 49° and 61° N, and longitudes 9° W and 2° E. Northern Ireland shares a land boundary with the Republic of Ireland. The coastline of Great Britain is long, though measurements can vary greatly due to the coastline paradox. It is connected to continental Europe by the Channel Tunnel, which at ( underwater) is the longest underwater tunnel in the world.

The UK contains four terrestrial ecoregions: Celtic broadleaf forests, English Lowlands beech forests, North Atlantic moist mixed forests, and Caledonian conifer forests. The area of woodland in the UK in 2023 is estimated to be 3.25 million hectares, which represents 13% of the total land area in the UK.

=== Climate ===


Most of the United Kingdom has a temperate climate, with generally cool temperatures and plentiful rainfall all year round. The temperature varies with the seasons seldom dropping below or rising above . Some parts, away from the coast, of upland England, Wales, Northern Ireland and most of Scotland, experience a subpolar oceanic climate. Higher elevations in Scotland experience a continental subarctic climate and the mountains experience a tundra climate.

The prevailing wind is from the southwest and bears frequent spells of mild and wet weather from the Atlantic Ocean, although the eastern parts are mostly sheltered from this wind. Since the majority of the rain falls over the western regions, the eastern parts are the driest. Atlantic currents, warmed by the Gulf Stream, bring mild winters, especially in the west where winters are wet and even more so over high ground. Summers are warmest in the southeast of England and coolest in the north. Heavy snowfall can occur in winter and early spring on high ground, and occasionally settles to great depth away from the hills.

The average total annual sunshine in the United Kingdom is 1,339.7 hours, which is just under 30% of the maximum possible. The hours of sunshine vary from 1,200 to about 1,580 hours per year, and since 1996 the UK has been and still is receiving above the 1,981 to 2,010 average hours of sunshine.

Climate change has a serious impact on the country. A third of food price rise in 2023 is attributed to climate change. As of 2022, the United Kingdom is ranked 2nd out of 180 countries in the Environmental Performance Index. A law has been passed that UK greenhouse gas emissions will be net zero by 2050.

=== Topography ===

England accounts for 53% of the UK, covering . Most of the country consists of lowland terrain, with upland and mountainous terrain northwest of the Tees–Exe line which roughly divides the UK into lowland and upland areas. Lowland areas include Cornwall, the New Forest, the South Downs and the Norfolk Broads. Upland areas include the Lake District, the Pennines, the Yorkshire Dales, Exmoor, and Dartmoor. The main rivers and estuaries are the Thames, Severn, and the Humber. England&#x27;s highest mountain is Scafell Pike, at in the Lake District; its largest island is the Isle of Wight.

Scotland accounts for 32% of the UK, covering . This includes nearly 800 islands, notably the Hebrides, Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands. Scotland is the most mountainous constituent country of the UK, the Highlands to the north and west are the more rugged region containing the majority of Scotland&#x27;s mountainous land, including the Cairngorms, Loch Lomond and The Trossachs and Ben Nevis which at is the highest point in the British Isles. Wales accounts for less than 9% of the UK, covering . Wales is mostly mountainous, though South Wales is less mountainous than North and mid Wales. The highest mountains in Wales are in Snowdonia and include Snowdon () which, at , is the highest peak in Wales. Wales has over of coastline including the Pembrokeshire Coast. Several islands lie off the Welsh mainland, the largest of which is Anglesey (&quot;Ynys Môn&quot;).

Northern Ireland, separated from Great Britain by the Irish Sea and North Channel, has an area of and is mostly hilly. It includes Lough Neagh which, at , is the largest lake in the British Isles by area, Lough Erne which has over 150 islands and the Giant&#x27;s Causeway which is a World Heritage Site. The highest peak in Northern Ireland is Slieve Donard in the Mourne Mountains at .

== Politics ==
The UK is a constitutional monarchy and a parliamentary democracy operating under the Westminster system, otherwise known as a &quot;democratic parliamentary monarchy&quot;. It is a centralised, unitary state wherein the Parliament of the United Kingdom is sovereign. Parliament is made up of the elected House of Commons, the appointed House of Lords and the Crown (as personified by the monarch). The main business of parliament takes place in the two houses, but royal assent is required for a bill to become an act of parliament (that is, statute law). As a result of parliamentary sovereignty, the British constitution is uncodified, consisting mostly of disparate written sources, including parliamentary statutes, judge-made case law and international treaties, together with constitutional conventions. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court recognises a number of principles underlying the British constitution, such as parliamentary sovereignty, the rule of law, democracy, and upholding international law.

King Charles III is the monarch and head of state of the UK and of 14 other independent countries. These 15 countries are referred to as &quot;Commonwealth realms&quot;. The monarch is formally vested with all executive authority as the personal embodiment of the Crown and is &quot;fundamental to the law and working of government in the UK&quot;. The disposition of such powers however, including those belonging to the royal prerogative, is generally exercised only on the advice of ministers of the Crown responsible to Parliament and thence to the electorate. Nevertheless, in the performance of official duties, the monarch has &quot;the right to be consulted, the right to encourage, and the right to warn&quot;. In addition, the monarch has a number of reserve powers at his disposal to uphold responsible government and prevent constitutional crises.

For general elections (elections to the House of Commons), the UK is divided into 650 constituencies, each of which is represented by one member of Parliament (MP) elected by the first-past-the-post system. MPs hold office for up to five years and must then stand for re-election if they wish to continue to be an MP. The Conservative Party, colloquially known as the Tory Party or the Tories, and the Labour Party have been the dominant political parties in the UK since the 1920s, leading to the UK being described as a two-party system. However, since the 1920s other political parties have won seats in the House of Commons, although never more than the Conservatives or Labour.

The prime minister is the head of government in the UK. Acting under the direction and supervision of a Cabinet of senior ministers selected and led by the prime minister, the Government serves as the principal instrument for public policymaking, administers public services and, through the Privy Council, promulgates statutory instruments and tenders advice to the monarch. Nearly all prime ministers have served concurrently as First Lord of the Treasury and all prime ministers have continuously served as First Lord of the Treasury since 1905, Minister for the Civil Service since 1968, and Minister for the Union since 2019. While appointed by the monarch, in modern times the prime minister is, by convention, an MP, the leader of the political party with the most seats in the House of Commons, and holds office by virtue of their ability to command the confidence of the House of Commons. The Prime Minister as of July 2024 is Sir Keir Starmer, leader of the Labour Party.

Although not part of the United Kingdom, the three Crown Dependencies of Jersey, Guernsey and Isle of Man and 14 British Overseas Territories across the globe are subject to the sovereignty of the British Crown. The Crown exercises its responsibilities in relation to the Crown Dependencies mainly through the British government&#x27;s Home Office and for the British Overseas Territories principally through the Foreign Office.

=== Administrative divisions ===

The geographical division of the United Kingdom into counties or shires began in England and Scotland in the early Middle Ages, and was completed throughout Great Britain and Ireland by the early Modern Period. Modern local government by elected councils, partly based on the ancient counties, was established by separate Acts of Parliament: in England and Wales in 1888, Scotland in 1889 and Ireland in 1898, meaning there is no consistent system of administrative or geographic demarcation across the UK, and England and Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland each have their own distinct jurisdictions. Until the 19th century there was little change to those arrangements, but there has since been a constant evolution of role and function.

Local government in England is complex, with the distribution of functions varying according to local arrangements. The upper-tier subdivisions of England are the nine regions, used primarily for statistical purposes. One of the regions, Greater London, has had a directly elected assembly and mayor since 2000 following popular support for the proposal in a 1998 referendum.

Local government in Scotland is divided into 32 council areas with a wide variation in size and population. The cities of Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Dundee are separate council areas, as is the Highland Council, which includes a third of Scotland&#x27;s area but only just over 200,000 people. Local councils are made up of elected councillors, of whom there are 1,223.

Local government in Wales consists of 22 unitary authorities, each led by a leader and cabinet elected by the council itself. These include the cities of Cardiff, Swansea and Newport, which are unitary authorities in their own right. Elections are held every four years under the first-past-the-post system.

Local government in Northern Ireland since 1973, has been organised into 26 district councils, each elected by single transferable vote. Their powers are limited to services such as waste collection, dog control, and maintaining parks and cemeteries. In 2008 the executive agreed on proposals to create 11 new councils to replace the existing system.

===Devolution===


In the United Kingdom a process of devolution has transferred various powers from the UK Government to three of the four UK countries - Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales, as well as to the regions of England, which since 1999 have their own governments and parliaments which control various devolved matters. These powers vary and have been moved to the Scottish Government, the Welsh Government, the Northern Ireland Executive and in England, the Greater London Authority, Combined Authorities and Combined County Authorities. Amongst the devolved parliaments across the United Kingdom, the Scottish Parliament has the most extensive responsibilities for devolved powers, and has been described as &quot;one of the most powerful devolved parliaments in the world&quot;.

The UK has an uncodified constitution and constitutional matters are not among the powers that have been devolved. Under the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty, the UK Parliament could, in theory, therefore, abolish the Scottish Parliament, Senedd or Northern Ireland Assembly. Though in the Scotland Act 2016 and the Wales Act 2017 it states that the Scottish Government and the Welsh Government &quot;are a permanent part of the United Kingdom&#x27;s constitutional arrangements&quot;.

In practice, it would be politically difficult for the UK Parliament to abolish devolution to the Scottish Parliament and the Senedd, because these institutions were created by referenda. The political constraints placed upon the UK Parliament&#x27;s power to interfere with devolution in Northern Ireland are greater still, because devolution in Northern Ireland rests upon an international agreement with the Government of Ireland. The UK Parliament restricts the three devolved parliaments&#x27; legislative powers in economic policy matters through an act passed in 2020.

==== England ====
Unlike Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales, England does not have a separate devolved government or national parliament, rather a process of devolution of powers from the central government to local authorities has taken place, first in 1998. The Greater London Authority (GLA) was set up following a referendum in 1998. Colloquially known as City Hall, it is the devolved regional government body for Greater London. It consists of two political branches: an Executive Mayor and the London Assembly, which serves as a check and balance on the Mayor.

A Combined Authority (CA) is a type of local government institution introduced in England outside Greater London by the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009. CAs allow a group of local authorities to pool appropriate responsibility and receive certain devolved functions from central government in order to deliver transport and economic policy more effectively over a wider area.

A Combined County Authority (CCA) is a similar type of local-government institution introduced in England outside Greater London by the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023, but may only be formed by upper-tier authorities: county councils and unitary authorities.

==== Scotland ====
Since 1999, Scotland has had a devolved national government and parliament with wide-ranging powers over any matter that has not been specifically reserved to the UK Parliament. Scotland has the most devolved powers of any of the three devolved parliaments in the United Kingdom, with full legislative control over education, law and order, the economy, healthcare, elections, the crown estate, the planning system and housing. Additional powers were transferred to the Scottish Parliament as a result of both the Scotland Act 2012 and Scotland Act 2016, such as some taxation powers, including full control of Income Tax on income earned through employment, Land and Buildings Transaction Tax, Landfill Tax, Aggregates Levy, Air Departure Tax and Revenue Scotland, as well as aspects of the energy network, including renewable energy, energy efficiency and onshore oil and gas licensing. Their power over economic issues is significantly constrained by an act of the UK parliament passed in 2020.

The Scottish Government is a Scottish National Party minority government, led by First Minister John Swinney, leader of the Scottish National Party. In 2014, the Scottish independence referendum was held, with 55.3% voting against independence from the United Kingdom and 44.7% voting in favour, resulting in Scotland staying within the United Kingdom. Local government in Scotland is divided into 32 council areas with a wide variation in size and population. Local councils are made up of elected councillors, of whom there are 1,223.

The Scottish Parliament is separate from the Scottish Government. It is made up of 129 elected Members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs). It is the law-making body of Scotland, and thus it scrutinises the work of the incumbent Scottish Government and considers any piece of proposed legislation through parliamentary debates, committees and parliamentary questions.

==== Wales ====
Since 1999, Wales has had a devolved national government and legislature, known as the Senedd. Elections to the Senedd use the additional member system. It has more limited powers than those devolved to Scotland. The Senedd can legislate on any matter not specifically reserved to the UK Parliament by Acts of Senedd Cymru. The Welsh Government is Labour, led by First Minister Eluned Morgan, who has been the First Minister since 2024. Local government in Wales consists of 22 unitary authorities, each led by a leader and cabinet elected by the council itself.

==== Northern Ireland ====
The devolved form of government in Northern Ireland is based on the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, which brought to an end a 30-year period of unionist-nationalist communal conflict known as The Troubles. The Agreement was confirmed by referendum and implemented later that year. It established power sharing arrangements for a devolved government and legislature, referred to as the Executive and Assembly respectively. Elections to the Assembly use the single transferable vote system. The Executive and Assembly have powers similar to those devolved to Scotland. The Executive is led by a diarchy representing unionist and nationalist members of the Assembly. The First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland are the joint heads of government of Northern Ireland. Local government in Northern Ireland since 2015 has been divided between 11 councils with limited responsibilities.

=== Foreign relations ===

The UK is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, a member of NATO, AUKUS, the Commonwealth of Nations, the G7 finance ministers, the G7 forum, the G20, the OECD, the WTO, the Council of Europe and the OSCE. The UK has the British Council which is a British organisation in over 100 countries specialising in international cultural and educational opportunities. The UK is said to have a &quot;Special Relationship&quot; with the United States and a close partnership with France – the &quot;Entente cordiale&quot; – and shares nuclear weapons technology with both countries; the Anglo-Portuguese Alliance is considered to be the oldest binding military alliance in the world. The UK is also closely linked with the Republic of Ireland; the two countries share a Common Travel Area and co-operate through the British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference and the British-Irish Council. Britain&#x27;s global presence and influence is further amplified through its trading relations, foreign investments, official development assistance and military engagements. Canada, Australia and New Zealand, all of which are former colonies of the British Empire which share King Charles as their head of state, are the most favourably viewed countries in the world by British people.

=== Law and criminal justice ===
 

The United Kingdom does not have a single legal system as Article 19 of the 1706 Treaty of Union provided for the continuation of Scotland&#x27;s separate legal system. The UK has three distinct systems of law: English law, Northern Ireland law and Scots law. A new Supreme Court of the United Kingdom came into being in October 2009 to replace the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, including the same members as the Supreme Court, is the highest court of appeal for several independent Commonwealth countries, the British Overseas Territories and the Crown Dependencies.

Both English law, which applies in England and Wales, and Northern Ireland law are based on common law (or case law) principles. It originated in England in the Middle Ages and is the basis for many legal systems around the world. The courts of England and Wales are headed by the Senior Courts of England and Wales, consisting of the Court of Appeal, the High Court of Justice (for civil cases) and the Crown Court (for criminal cases). Scots law is a hybrid system based on common-law and civil-law principles. The chief courts are the Court of Session, for civil cases, and the High Court of Justiciary, for criminal cases. The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom serves as the highest court of appeal for civil cases under Scots law.

Crime in England and Wales increased in the period between 1981 and 1995, though since that peak there has been an overall fall of 66% in recorded crime from 1995 to 2015, according to crime statistics. As of June 2023, the United Kingdom has the highest per-capita incarceration rate in Western Europe.

UK labour laws establish employment rights including a minimum wage, a minimum of 28 days annual holiday, parental leave, statutory sick pay and a pension. Same-sex marriage has been legal in England, Scotland, and Wales since 2014, and in Northern Ireland since 2020. LGBT equality in the United Kingdom is considered advanced by modern standards.

Since leaving the EU, most disputes under UK-EU agreements are addressed through consultation between the parties. If consultation fails to resolve the issue, either party can request arbitration, typically at the PCA in The Hague. Under the Windsor Framework, Northern Ireland matters requiring interpretation of EU law go to the ECJ, though the Stormont Brake can prevent new EU rules from taking effect.

=== Military ===

The British Armed Forces consist of three professional service branches: the Royal Navy and Royal Marines (forming the Naval Service), the British Army and the Royal Air Force. The armed forces of the United Kingdom are managed by the Ministry of Defence and controlled by the Defence Council, chaired by the Secretary of State for Defence. The Commander-in-Chief is the British monarch, to whom members of the forces swear an oath of allegiance. The Armed Forces are charged with protecting the UK and its overseas territories, promoting the UK&#x27;s global security interests and supporting international peacekeeping efforts. They are active and regular participants in NATO (including the Allied Rapid Reaction Corps), the Five Power Defence Arrangements, RIMPAC and other worldwide coalition operations. Overseas garrisons and facilities are maintained in Ascension Island, Bahrain, Belize, Brunei, Canada, Cyprus, Diego Garcia, the Falkland Islands, Germany, Gibraltar, Kenya, Oman, Qatar and Singapore.

According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute and the International Institute for Strategic Studies, the UK has the fourth- or fifth-highest military expenditure. Total defence spending in 2024 is estimated at 2.3% of GDP. Following the end of the Cold War, defence policy has a stated assumption that &quot;the most demanding operations&quot; will be undertaken as part of a coalition.

== Economy ==


The UK has a regulated social market economy. Based on market exchange rates, the UK is the sixth-largest economy in the world and the second-largest in Europe, both by nominal GDP. Its currency, the pound sterling, is the fourth most-traded currency in the foreign exchange market and the world&#x27;s fourth-largest reserve currency (after the United States dollar, euro, and yen). Sterling was the 2nd best-performing G10 currency against the dollar in 2023 with a gain of about 5%, with only the Swiss franc performing better. London is the world capital for foreign exchange trading, with a market share of 38.1% in 2022 of the daily $7.5 trillion global turnover.

HM Treasury, led by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, is responsible for developing and executing the government&#x27;s public finance policy and economic policy. The Department for Business and Trade is responsible for business, international trade, and enterprise. The Bank of England is the UK&#x27;s central bank and is responsible for issuing notes and coins in the pound sterling. Banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland retain the right to issue their own notes, subject to retaining enough Bank of England notes in reserve to cover their issue. In 2022, the UK became the world&#x27;s fourth-largest exporter behind only China, the US, and Germany. The estimated nominal GDP of the UK for 2024 is £2.765 trillion. This value is 23% higher than the 2019 figure of £2.255 trillion before leaving the EU (at similar US and EU exchange rates to 2019). Inflation in the UK rose by 2% in the year to May 2024 which was the government&#x27;s target.

The service sector made up around 80% of the UK&#x27;s GVA in 2021. As of 2022, the UK is the world&#x27;s second-largest exporter of services. London is one of the world&#x27;s largest financial centres, ranking second in the world in the Global Financial Centres Index in 2022. London also has the largest city GDP in Europe. Edinburgh ranks 17th in the world, and sixth in Western Europe in the Global Financial Centres Index in 2020.

The country&#x27;s tourism sector is very important to the British economy; London was named as Europe&#x27;s most popular destination for 2022. The creative industries accounted for 5.9% of the UK&#x27;s GVA in 2019, having grown by 43.6% in real terms from 2010. Creative industries contributed more than £111bn to the UK economy in 2018, growth in the sector is more than five times larger than growth across the UK economy as a whole as reported in 2018. Lloyd&#x27;s of London is the world&#x27;s largest insurance and reinsurance market and is located in London. WPP plc, the world&#x27;s biggest advertising company, is also based in the UK. The UK is one of the leading retail markets in Europe and is home to Europe&#x27;s largest e-commerce market. With consumption expenditures of over $2 trillion in 2023, the UK has the second-largest consumer market in Europe. John Lewis is the UK&#x27;s largest employee-owned business.

The British automotive industry employs around 800,000 people, with a turnover in 2022 of £67 billion, generating £27 billion of exports (10% of the UK&#x27;s total export of goods). In 2023, the UK produced around 905,100 passenger vehicles and 120,400 commercial vehicles, output was up 17.0% on the previous year. Britain is known for iconic cars such as Mini and Jaguar, also other luxury cars such as Rolls-Royce, Bentley and Range Rover. The UK is a major centre for engine manufacturing: in 2022 around 1.5 million engines were produced. It is also the world&#x27;s fourth-largest exporter of engines, as of 2021. The UK motorsport industry employs more than 40,000 people, comprises around 4,300 companies and has an annual turnover of around £10 billion. 7 of the 10 Formula One teams are based in the UK, with their technology being used in supercars and hypercars from McLaren, Aston Martin and Lotus.

The aerospace industry of the UK is the second-largest national aerospace industry in the world and has an annual turnover of around £30 billion. The UK space industry was worth £17.5bn in 2020/21 and employed 48,800 people. Since 2012, the number of space organisations has grown on average nearly 21% per year, with 1,293 organisations reported in 2021. The UK Space Agency has stated in 2023 that it is investing £1.6 billion in space-related projects.

Its agriculture industry is intensive, highly mechanised and efficient by European standards, producing approximately 60% of the country&#x27;s overall food requirements and 73% of its indigenous food needs, utilising around 0.9% of the labour force (292,000 workers). Around two-thirds of production is devoted to livestock, one-third to arable crops. The UK retains a significant, though much reduced fishing industry, with at least 49% of UK fish sustainably caught in 2020. The UK gains sovereign rights over its exclusive economic zone from July 2026, enabling it to enforce sustainable fishing practices and protect marine habitats. It is rich in a variety of other natural resources including coal, petroleum, natural gas, tin, limestone, iron ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum, lead, silica and an abundance of arable land. The UK has among the highest levels of income inequality in the OECD, but has a very high HDI ranking.

=== Science and technology ===
England and Scotland were leading centres of the Scientific Revolution from the 17th century. The United Kingdom led the Industrial Revolution from the 18th century, and has continued to produce scientists and engineers credited with important advances. Major theorists from the 17th and 18th centuries include Isaac Newton, whose laws of motion and illumination of gravity have been seen as a keystone of modern science; from the 19th century Charles Darwin, whose theory of evolution by natural selection was fundamental to the development of modern biology, and James Clerk Maxwell, who formulated classical electromagnetic theory; and more recently Stephen Hawking, who advanced major theories in the fields of cosmology, quantum gravity and the investigation of black holes.

The Department for Science, Innovation and Technology (DSIT) is responsible for helping to encourage, develop and manage the UK&#x27;s scientific, research, and technological outputs. Scientific research and development remains important in British universities, with many establishing science parks to facilitate production and co-operation with industry. In 2022, the UK retained its number one spot for technology in Europe reaching a combined market value of $1 trillion. Cambridge was named the number one university in the world for producing successful technology founders. The UK ranked third globally in a 2024 report on artificial intelligence development.

In 2024, the UK ranked 5th in the Global Innovation Index, a position determined by approximately 80 indicators encompassing the political environment, education, infrastructure, and knowledge creation, among others. During 2022, the UK produced 6.3% of the world&#x27;s scientific research papers and had a 10.5% share of scientific citations, the third highest in the world for both. The UK ranked 1st in the world for Field-Weighted Citation Impact. Scientific journals produced in the UK include publications by the &quot;Royal Society&quot;, &quot;Nature&quot;, the &quot;British Medical Journal&quot; and &quot;The Lancet&quot;.

=== Transport ===

A radial road network totals of main roads, of motorways and of paved roads. The M25, encircling London, is the largest and busiest bypass in the world. In 2022, there were a total of 40.8 million licensed vehicles in Great Britain.

The UK has an extensive railway network of . In Great Britain, the British Rail network was privatised between 1994 and 1997, followed by a rapid rise in passengers. Great British Railways is a planned state-owned public body that will oversee rail transport in Great Britain. The UK was ranked eighth among national European rail systems in the 2017 European Railway Performance Index assessing intensity of use, quality of service and safety.

The UK has a train direct from London to Paris which takes 2hrs 16mins called the Eurostar, it travels through the Channel Tunnel under the English Channel, at 23.5 miles long it is the world&#x27;s longest undersea tunnel. There is also a car service through the tunnel to France called LeShuttle. The Elizabeth line, a rail link running between East and West London, was named in honour of Queen Elizabeth II in 2016 and opened in 2022. It was Europe&#x27;s largest construction project at the time and is estimated to bring in £42 billion to the UK economy. Another major infrastructure project is High Speed 2 (HS2), a new high speed railway under construction. It will link London with Birmingham, with the potential to extend further north and capable of speeds of up to 225 mph.

In 2014, there were 5.2 billion bus journeys in the UK, 2.4 billion of which were in London. The red double-decker bus has entered popular culture as an internationally recognised icon of England. The London bus network is extensive, with over 6,800 scheduled services every weekday carrying about 6 million passengers on over 700 different routes making it one of the most extensive bus systems in the world and the largest in Europe.

During 2024, UK airports handled a total of 292.5 million passengers. In that period the three largest airports were London Heathrow Airport (83.9 million passengers), Gatwick Airport (43.2 million passengers) and Manchester Airport (30.8 million passengers). London Heathrow Airport, located west of the capital, is the world&#x27;s second busiest airport by international passenger traffic and has the most international passenger traffic of any airport in the world; it is the hub for the UK flag carrier British Airways, as well as Virgin Atlantic.

=== Energy ===


In 2021, the UK was the world&#x27;s 14th-largest consumer of energy and the 22nd-largest producer. The UK is home to many large energy companies, including two of the six major oil and gas companies – BP and Shell.

Renewable electricity sources provided 51% of the electricity generated in the UK in 2024. Wind power was the largest source of electricity in 2024, generating 30% of the UK&#x27;s total electricity. The UK has the largest offshore wind farm in the world, which is located off the coast of Yorkshire.

In 2023, the UK had nine nuclear reactors generating about 15% of the UK&#x27;s electricity. Unlike Germany and Japan, there are two reactors under construction and more planned. In the late 1990s, nuclear power plants contributed around 25% of the total annual electricity generation in the UK, but this has gradually declined as old plants have been shut down. The UK Government is investing in Small Modular Reactors, Advanced Modular Reactors and Nuclear Fusion Reators research and development.

At the end of 2023 it was estimated that there was 1.1 billion boe (barrels of oil equivalent) of ‘proven’ and ‘probable’ gas reserves and 2.3 billion boe of ‘proven’ and ‘probable’ oil reserves offshore, reducing reliance on imports for energy security and transitioning to renewables. Emissions from UK gas production are roughly four times lower than imported liquefied natural gas (LNG), according to the UK&#x27;s oil and gas regulator. 

In September 2024 the last coal power station was closed, making coal no longer a power source in the UK. The UK currently has no fracking (Hydraulic fracturing) for shale gas despite a large supply, due to environmental concerns.

=== Water supply and sanitation ===

Access to improved water supply and sanitation in the UK is universal. It is estimated that 96% of households are connected to the sewer network. According to the Environment Agency, total water abstraction for public water supply in the UK was 16,406 megalitres per day in 2007.

In England and Wales water and sewerage services are provided by 10 private regional water and sewerage companies and 13 mostly smaller private &quot;water only&quot; companies. In Scotland, water and sewerage services are provided by a single public company, Scottish Water. In Northern Ireland water and sewerage services are also provided by a single public entity, Northern Ireland Water.

== Demographics ==
In the 2011 census, the population of the United Kingdom was 63,181,775. It is the fourth-largest in Europe (after Russia, Germany and France), the fifth-largest in the Commonwealth and the 22nd-largest in the world. In 2012 and 2013, births contributed the most to population growth. In 2014 and 2015, net international migration contributed more to population growth. Between 2001 and 2011, the population increased at an average annual rate of 0.7%. The 2011 census also showed that, over the previous 100 years, the proportion of the population aged 0–14 fell from 31 to 18%, and the proportion of people aged 65 and over rose from 5 to 16%. In 2018, the median age of the UK population was 41.7 years.


England&#x27;s population in 2011 was 53 million, representing some 84% of the UK total. It is one of the most densely populated countries in the world, with 420 people per square kilometre in mid-2015, with a particular concentration in London and the south-east. London&#x27;s wider metropolitan area is the largest in Western Europe, with a population of 14.9 million in 2024. The 2011 census put Scotland&#x27;s population at 5.3 million, Wales at 3.06 million and Northern Ireland at 1.81 million.

In 2017, the total fertility rate across the UK was 1.74 children born per woman. While a rising birth rate is contributing to population growth, it remains considerably below the baby boom peak of 2.95 children per woman in 1964, or the high of 6.02 children born per woman in 1815, below the replacement rate of 2.1, but higher than the 2001 record low of 1.63. In 2011, 47.3% of births in the UK were to unmarried women. The Office for National Statistics reported in 2015 that among the UK population aged 16 and over, 1.7% identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual (2.0% of males and 1.5% of females); 4.5% of respondents responded with &quot;other&quot;, &quot;I don&#x27;t know&quot;, or did not respond. The number of transgender people in the UK was estimated to be between 65,000 and 300,000 by research between 2001 and 2008.
=== Ethnicity ===
Historically, indigenous British people were thought to be descended from ethnic groups that settled there before the 12th century: the Celts, Romans, Anglo-Saxons, Norse and the Normans. Welsh people could be the oldest ethnic group in the UK. The UK has a history of non-white immigration with Liverpool having the oldest black population in the country, dating back to at least the 1730s during the African slave trade. During this period, it is estimated the Afro-Caribbean population of Great Britain was 10,000 to 15,000 which later declined after the abolition of slavery. The UK also has the oldest Chinese community in Europe, dating to the arrival of Chinese seamen in the 19th century. , 87.2% of the UK population identified themselves as white, meaning 12.8% of the UK population identify themselves as of one of an ethnic minority group.

Ethnic diversity varies significantly across the UK. 30.4% of London&#x27;s population and 37.4% of Leicester&#x27;s was estimated to be non-white , whereas less than 5% of the populations of North East England, Wales and the South West were from ethnic minorities, according to the 2001 census. , 31.4% of primary and 27.9% of secondary pupils at state schools in England were members of an ethnic minority.

=== Languages ===
The English language is official, and the most widely spoken language in the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom promotes the language globally to build connections, understanding and trust between people in the UK and countries worldwide. It is estimated that 95% of the UK&#x27;s population are monolingual English speakers. Over 5% of the population are estimated to speak languages brought to the UK as a result of immigration. South Asian languages are the largest group, which includes Punjabi, Urdu, Bengali, Sylheti, Hindi, Pahari-Pothwari, Tamil, and Gujarati. According to the 2011 census, Polish has become the second-largest language spoken in England and has 546,000 speakers. In 2019, some three-quarters of a million people spoke little or no English.
Three indigenous Celtic languages are spoken in the UK: Welsh, Irish and Scottish Gaelic. Cornish, which became extinct as a first language in the late 18th century, is being revived and has a small group of second language speakers. According to the 2021 census, the Welsh-speaking population of Wales aged three or older was 538,300 (17.8%). In addition, it is estimated that about 200,000 Welsh speakers live in England. In the 2021 census in Northern Ireland 12.4% of people had some Irish language ability and 10.4% of people had some facility in the Ulster-Scots language. Over 92,000 people in Scotland (just under 2% of the population) had some Gaelic language ability, including 72% of those living in the Outer Hebrides. The number of children being taught either Welsh or Scottish Gaelic is increasing. Scots, a language descended from early northern Middle English, has limited recognition alongside its regional variant, Ulster Scots in Northern Ireland, without specific commitments to protection and promotion. As of April 2020, there are around 151,000 users of British Sign Language (BSL), a sign language used by deaf people, in the UK.

=== Religion ===
Christianity has dominated religious life in the United Kingdom for more than 1,400 years. Although a majority of citizens still identify with Christianity in surveys, regular church attendance has fallen dramatically since the middle of the 20th century, while immigration and demographic change have contributed to the growth of Islam and other faiths. This has led some commentators to describe the UK as a multi-faith, secularised, or post-Christian society.

In the 2001 census, 71.6% of respondents reported that they were Christians, with the next largest faiths being Islam (2.8%), Hinduism (1.0%), Sikhism (0.6%), Judaism (0.5%), Buddhism (0.3%) and all other religions (0.3%). Of the respondents, 15% stated that they had no religion and a further 7% stated no religious preference. A Tearfund survey in 2007 showed that only one in ten Britons attend church weekly. Between the 2001 and 2011 census, there was a 12% decrease in those who identified as Christian, while the percentage reporting no religious affiliation doubled. This contrasted with growth in the other main religious group categories, with the number of Muslims increasing the most to about 5%. The Muslim population has increased from 1.6 million in 2001 to 2.7 million in 2011, making it the second-largest religious group in the UK.

The Church of England is the established church. It retains representation in the UK Parliament, and the British monarch is its Supreme Governor. In Scotland, the Church of Scotland is the national church. It is not subject to state control, and the British monarch is an ordinary member, required to swear an oath to &quot;maintain and preserve the Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Church Government&quot; upon his or her accession. The Church in Wales was disestablished in 1920 and, because the Church of Ireland was disestablished in 1870 before the partition of Ireland, there is no established church in Northern Ireland. Although there are no UK-wide data in the 2001 census on adherence to individual Christian denominations, it has been estimated that 62% of Christians are Anglican, 13.5% Catholic, 6% Presbyterian, and 3.4% Methodist, with smaller numbers of other denominations.

=== Migration ===

Immigration is contributing to a rising UK population, with arrivals and UK-born children of migrants accounting for about half of the population increase between 1991 and 2001. According to statistics released in 2015, 27% of UK live births in 2014 were to mothers born outside the UK. The ONS reported that net migration rose from 2009 to 2010 by 21% to 239,000.

In 2013, approximately 208,000 foreign nationals were naturalised as British citizens, the highest number since 1962. This figure fell to around 125,800 in 2014. Between 2009 and 2013, the average number of British citizenships granted annually was 195,800. The most common origins of those naturalised in 2014 were Indian, Pakistani, Filipino, Nigerian, Bangladeshi, Nepali, Chinese, South African, Polish and Somali. The number of grants of settlement, which confer permanent residence in the UK but not citizenship, was approximately 154,700 in 2013, higher than the previous two years. Long-term net migration (the number of people immigrating minus the number emigrating) reached a record of 764,000 in 2022, with immigration at 1.26 million and emigration at 493,000. In 2023, net migration was 685,000; 10% of the total who came to the UK in that year were EU Nationals. More EU Nationals left the UK than arrived.

Emigration was an important feature of British society in the 19th century. Between 1815 and 1930, around 11.4 million people emigrated from Britain and 7.3 million from Ireland. Estimates show that by the end of the 20th century, some 300 million people of British and Irish descent were permanently settled around the globe. In 2006 at least 5.5 million UK-born people lived abroad, mainly in Australia, Spain, the United States and Canada.

=== Education ===

Education in the United Kingdom is a devolved matter, with each country having a separate education system. About 38% of the United Kingdom population has a university or college degree, which is the highest percentage in Europe, and among the highest percentage in the world. The United Kingdom is home to many universities, including the University of Oxford and University of Cambridge which often achieve first place on global rankings.

University education has varied tuition fees in different regions of the UK. England and Wales have a fixed maximum annual fee for all UK citizens, contingent on attaining a certain level of income. Only those who reach a certain salary threshold (£21,000) pay this fee through general taxation. Northern Ireland and Scotland have a reduced maximum fee or no fee for citizens where it is their home region. Some NHS courses have bursaries which pay the fee and in 2017 it was stated that each doctor gets subsidised by £230,000 during their training.

In 2022, the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), coordinated by the OECD, ranked the overall knowledge and skills of British 15-year-olds as 14th in the world in reading, mathematics and science. The average British student scored 494, above the OECD average of 478.

=== Healthcare ===
The modern system of universal publicly funded healthcare in the United Kingdom has its origins in the creation of the National Health Service (NHS) in 1949, which still exists and is the primary healthcare provider in the United Kingdom. The widespread popularity of the NHS has led to it being described as a &quot;national religion&quot;. Healthcare in the United Kingdom is a devolved matter and each country has its own system of universal publicly funded healthcare, although private healthcare is also available. Public healthcare is provided to all UK permanent residents and is mostly free at the point of need, being paid for from general taxation. The World Health Organization, in 2000, ranked the provision of healthcare in the United Kingdom as fifteenth best in Europe and eighteenth in the world.

Since 1979, expenditure on healthcare has increased significantly. The 2018 OECD data, which incorporates in health a chunk of what in the UK is classified as social care, has the UK spending £3,121 per person. In 2017, the UK spent £2,989 per person on healthcare, near the median for members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Regulatory bodies are organised on a UK-wide basis such as the General Medical Council, the Nursing and Midwifery Council and non-governmental-based, such as the Royal Colleges. Political and operational responsibility for healthcare lies with four national executives; healthcare in England is the responsibility of the UK Government; healthcare in Northern Ireland is the responsibility of the Northern Ireland Executive; healthcare in Scotland is the responsibility of the Scottish Government; and healthcare in Wales is the responsibility of the Welsh Government. Each National Health Service has different policies and priorities, resulting in contrasts.

== Culture ==
The culture of the United Kingdom is influenced by the nation&#x27;s island status, its history, and being a political union of four countries with each preserving distinctive traditions, customs and symbolism. British influence can be observed in the language, culture and legal systems of many of its former colonies, in particular, the United States, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and Ireland, a common culture known as the Anglosphere. The influence of the United Kingdom has led to it being described as a cultural superpower. A global survey in 2023 ranked the UK 3rd in the &#x27;Most Influential Countries&#x27; rankings, behind the US and China.

=== Literature ===


British literature includes that associated with the United Kingdom, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. Most British literature is in English. In 2022, 669 million physical books were sold in the UK, which is the most ever. Britain is renowned for children&#x27;s literature, writers includes Daniel Defoe, Rudyard Kipling, Lewis Carroll and Beatrix Potter who also illustrated her own books. Other writers include A.A. Milne, Enid Blyton, J.R.R. Tolkien, Roald Dahl, Terry Pratchett, and J.K. Rowling who wrote the best selling book series of all time.

The English playwright and poet William Shakespeare is generally regarded as the greatest dramatist ever. Other important English writers are Geoffrey Chaucer, known for The Canterbury Tales, the poet William Wordsworth, and other romantic poets, also the novelists Charles Dickens, H. G. Wells, George Orwell, and Ian Fleming. The 20th-century English crime writer Agatha Christie is the best-selling novelist of all time. Twelve of the top 25 of 100 novels by British writers chosen by a BBC poll of global critics were written by women; these included works by George Eliot, Virginia Woolf, Charlotte, Emily Brontë, Mary Shelley, Jane Austen, Doris Lessing, and Zadie Smith.

Scotland&#x27;s contributions include Arthur Conan Doyle (the creator of Sherlock Holmes), Sir Walter Scott, J. M. Barrie, Robert Louis Stevenson, and the poet Robert Burns. More recently Hugh MacDiarmid and Neil M. Gunn contributed to the Scottish Renaissance, with grimmer works from Ian Rankin and Iain Banks. Scotland&#x27;s capital, Edinburgh, was UNESCO&#x27;s first worldwide City of Literature.

Welsh literature includes Britain&#x27;s oldest known poem, &quot;Y Gododdin&quot;, which was composed most likely in the late 6th century. It was written in Cumbric or Old Welsh and contains the earliest known reference to King Arthur. The Arthurian legend was further developed by Geoffrey of Monmouth. Poet Dafydd ap Gwilym (&quot;fl.&quot; 1320–1370) is regarded as one of the greatest European poets of his age. Daniel Owen is credited as the first Welsh-language novelist, publishing &quot;Rhys Lewis&quot; in 1885. The best-known of the Anglo-Welsh poets are Dylan Thomas and R. S. Thomas, the latter nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1996. Leading Welsh novelists of the twentieth century include Richard Llewellyn and Kate Roberts.

Northern Ireland&#x27;s most popular writer is C. S. Lewis who was born in Belfast and wrote The Chronicles of Narnia. Irish writers, living at a time when all of Ireland was part of the United Kingdom, include Oscar Wilde, Bram Stoker, and George Bernard Shaw. There have been many authors whose origins were from outside the United Kingdom but who moved to the UK, including Joseph Conrad, T. S. Eliot, Kazuo Ishiguro, Sir Salman Rushdie, and Ezra Pound.

=== Philosophy ===

The United Kingdom is famous for &#x27;British Empiricism&#x27;, a branch of the philosophy that states that only knowledge verified by experience is valid, and &#x27;Scottish Philosophy&#x27;, sometimes referred to as the &#x27;Scottish School of Common Sense&#x27;. The most famous philosophers of British Empiricism are John Locke, George Berkeley and David Hume; while Dugald Stewart, Thomas Reid, and William Hamilton were major exponents of the Scottish &quot;common sense&quot; school. Two Britons are also notable for the ethical theory of utilitarianism, a moral philosophy first used by Jeremy Bentham and later by John Stuart Mill in his short work &quot;Utilitarianism&quot;.

=== Music ===


Various styles of music have become popular in the UK, including the indigenous folk music of England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. Historically, there has been exceptional Renaissance music from the Tudor period, with masses, madrigals and lute music by Thomas Tallis, John Taverner, William Byrd, Orlando Gibbons, and John Dowland. After the Stuart Restoration, an English tradition of dramatic masques, anthems and airs became established, led by Henry Purcell, followed by Thomas Arne and others. The German-born composer George Frideric Handel became a naturalised British citizen in 1727, when he composed the anthem &quot;Zadok the Priest&quot; for the coronation of George II; it became the traditional ceremonial music for anointing all future monarchs. Handel&#x27;s many oratorios, such as his famous &quot;Messiah&quot;, were written in the English language. In the second half of the 19th century, as Arthur Sullivan and his librettist W. S. Gilbert wrote their popular Savoy operas, Edward Elgar&#x27;s wide range of music rivalled that of his contemporaries on the continent. Increasingly, however, composers became inspired by the English countryside and its folk music, notably Gustav Holst, Ralph Vaughan Williams, and Benjamin Britten, a pioneer of modern British opera. Among the many post-war composers, some of the most notable have made their own personal choice of musical identity: Peter Maxwell Davies (Orkney), Harrison Birtwistle (mythological), and John Tavener (religious). Recent classical singers include: Alfie Boe, Bryn Terfel, Katherine Jenkins, Michael Ball, Roderick Williams, Russell Watson, and Sarah Brightman, while Nicola Benedetti and Nigel Kennedy are renowned for their violin ability.

According to &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot;, the term &quot;pop music&quot; originated in Britain in the mid-1950s to describe rock and roll&#x27;s fusion with the &quot;new youth music&quot;. &quot;The Oxford Dictionary of Music&quot; states that artists such as the Beatles and the Rolling Stones drove pop music to the forefront of popular music in the early 1960s. Birmingham became known as the birthplace of heavy metal, with the band Black Sabbath starting there in the 1960s. In the following years, Britain took part in the development of rock music, with British acts pioneering hard rock, raga rock, heavy metal, space rock, glam rock, Gothic rock, psychedelic rock, and punk rock. British acts also developed neo soul and created dubstep. The modern UK produces some of the most prominent English-speaking rappers along with the United States, including Stormzy, Kano, Yxng Bane, Ramz, Little Simz, and Skepta.

The Beatles have international sales of over 1 billion units and are the biggest-selling and most influential band in the history of popular music. Other prominent British contributors to popular music over the last 50 years include the Rolling Stones, Pink Floyd, Queen, Led Zeppelin, the Bee Gees, and Elton John, all of whom have worldwide record sales of 200 million or more. The Brit Awards are the BPI&#x27;s annual music awards, and some of the British recipients of the Outstanding Contribution to Music award include the Who, David Bowie, Eric Clapton, Rod Stewart, the Police, and Fleetwood Mac (who are a British-American band). More recent UK music acts that have had international success include George Michael, Oasis, Spice Girls, Radiohead, Coldplay, Arctic Monkeys, Robbie Williams, Amy Winehouse, Susan Boyle, Adele, Ed Sheeran, Lewis Capaldi, One Direction, Harry Styles, and Dua Lipa.

A number of UK cities are known for their music. Acts from Liverpool have had 54 UK chart number 1 hit singles, more per capita than any other city worldwide. Glasgow&#x27;s contribution was recognised in 2008 when it was named a UNESCO City of Music. Manchester played a role in the spread of dance music such as acid house, and from the mid-1990s, Britpop. London and Bristol are closely associated with the origins of electronic music sub-genres such as drum and bass and trip hop.

UK dance music traces its roots back to the black British Sound System Culture and the New Age Traveller movement of the 60s and 70s, it also has influences from New Wave and Synth-pop such as from bands New Order and Depeche Mode and also has influences from the Chicago House and Detroit Techno scenes. In the late 80&#x27;s, dance music exploded with Rave culture mainly Acid House tracks which were made mainstream with novelty records (such as Smart E&#x27;s Sesame&#x27;s Treet and the Prodigy&#x27;s Charly) and the Balearic sound brought back from the Ibiza club scene. This led on to genres such as UK Garage, Speed Garage, Drum and bass, Jungle, Trance, and Dubstep. Influential UK dance acts past and present include 808 State, Orbital, the Prodigy, Underworld, Roni Size, Leftfield, Massive Attack, Groove Armada, Fatboy Slim, Faithless, Basement Jaxx, Chemical Brothers, Sub Focus, Chase &amp; Status, Disclosure, Calvin Harris, and Fred Again. Other influential UK DJs include Judge Jules, Pete Tong, Carl Cox, Paul Oakenfold, John Digweed, and Sasha.

=== Visual art ===

Major British artists include: the Romantics William Blake, John Constable, Samuel Palmer, and J. M. W. Turner; the portrait painters Sir Joshua Reynolds and Lucian Freud; the landscape artists Thomas Gainsborough and L. S. Lowry; the pioneer of the Arts and Crafts Movement William Morris; the figurative painter Francis Bacon; the Pop artists Peter Blake, Richard Hamilton, and David Hockney; the pioneers of Conceptual art movement Art &amp; Language; the collaborative duo Gilbert and George; the abstract artist Howard Hodgkin; and the sculptors Antony Gormley, Anish Kapoor, and Henry Moore. During the late 1980s and 1990s the Saatchi Gallery in London helped to bring to public attention a group of multi-genre artists who would become known as the &quot;Young British Artists&quot;: Damien Hirst, Chris Ofili, Rachel Whiteread, Tracey Emin, Mark Wallinger, Steve McQueen, Sam Taylor-Wood, and the Chapman Brothers are among the better-known members of this loosely affiliated movement.

The Royal Academy in London is a key organisation for the promotion of the visual arts in the United Kingdom. Major schools of art in the UK include: the six-school University of the Arts London, which includes the Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design and Chelsea College of Art and Design; Goldsmiths, University of London; the Slade School of Fine Art (part of University College London); the Glasgow School of Art; the Royal College of Art; and The Ruskin School of Drawing and Fine Art (part of the University of Oxford). The Courtauld Institute of Art is a leading centre for the teaching of the history of art. Important art galleries in the United Kingdom include the National Gallery, National Portrait Gallery, Tate Britain, and Tate Modern (the most-visited modern art gallery in the world, with around 4.7 million visitors per year).

=== Cinema ===

The United Kingdom has had a considerable influence on the history of the cinema. The British directors Alfred Hitchcock, whose film &quot;Vertigo&quot; is considered by some critics as the best film of all time, and David Lean who directed Lawrence of Arabia are among the most critically acclaimed directors ever. Recent popular directors include: Christopher Nolan, Sam Mendes, Steve McQueen, Richard Curtis, Danny Boyle, Tony Scott, and Ridley Scott. Many British actors have achieved international fame and critical success. Some of the most commercially successful films have been produced in the United Kingdom, including two of the highest-grossing film franchises (&quot;Harry Potter&quot; and &quot;James Bond&quot;).

2019 was a particularly good year for British films which grossed around £10.3 billion globally which was 28.7% of global box office revenue. UK box-office takings totalled £1.25 billion in 2019, with around 176 million admissions. In 2023 UK film and television studio stage space stands at 6.9 million sq ft, with 1 million sq ft added in the past year with more in development. The annual BAFTA Film Awards are hosted by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts.

=== Cuisine ===


British cuisine developed from influences reflective of its land, settlements, arrivals of new settlers and immigrants, trade and colonialism. The food of England has historically been characterised by simplicity of approach and a reliance on the high quality of natural produce. The traditional Sunday roast is one example, featuring a roasted joint, usually of beef, lamb, chicken, or pork, often free range (and generally grass-fed, in the case of beef). Roasts are served with either roasted or boiled vegetables, Yorkshire pudding, and gravy. Other traditional meals include meat pies and stews. A 2019 YouGov poll rated classic British food, with more than 80% of eaters liking: Sunday roast, Yorkshire pudding, fish and chips, crumpets, and full English breakfast.

The UK is home to a large selection of fine dining. In, 2024 there were 187 restaurants with a Michelin Star; 49 of them consider their cuisine to be &#x27;Modern British&#x27;. Sweet foods are common within British cuisine, and there is a long list of British desserts. Afternoon tea is a light afternoon meal served with tea in tea rooms and hotels around the United Kingdom, with the tradition dating back to around 1840. A poll from July 2024 revealed that 3% of the UK population follows a vegan diet, 6% are vegetarian, and 13% identify as flexitarian (following a mainly vegetarian diet). The British Empire facilitated knowledge of Indian cuisine with its &quot;strong, penetrating spices and herbs&quot;. British cuisine has absorbed the cultural influence of those who have settled in Britain, producing hybrid dishes, such as chicken tikka masala. The British have embraced world cuisine and regularly eat recipes or fast food from other European countries, the Caribbean and Asia.

The UK has many gastropubs and is the birthplace of many alcoholic drinks including many beer styles such as pale ale, India pale ale, bitter, brown ale, porter, and stout. The number of craft beers and microbreweries have expanded rapidly in the last two decades. Other popular alcoholic drinks produced in the UK include Scotch whisky, English wine, gin, perry, and cider.

=== Media ===


The BBC, founded in 1922, is the UK&#x27;s publicly funded radio, television and Internet broadcasting corporation, and is the oldest and largest broadcaster in the world. It operates television and radio stations across the UK and abroad and its domestic services are funded by the television licence. The BBC World Service is an international broadcaster owned and operated by the BBC, and the world&#x27;s largest. It broadcasts radio news, speech and discussions in more than 40 languages.

Other major players in the UK media include ITV, which operates 11 of the 15 regional television broadcasters that make up the ITV Network, and Sky. Newspapers produced in the United Kingdom include the &quot;Daily Mail&quot;, &quot;The Guardian&quot;, &quot;The Telegraph&quot;, &quot;The Times&quot;, and the &quot;Financial Times&quot;. Magazines and journals published in the United Kingdom that have achieved worldwide circulation include &quot;The Spectator&quot;, &quot;The Economist&quot;, &quot;New Statesman&quot;, and &quot;Radio Times&quot;.

London dominates the media sector in the UK: national newspapers and television and radio are largely based there, although MediaCityUK in Manchester is also a significant national media centre. Edinburgh and Glasgow, and Cardiff, are important centres of newspaper and broadcasting production in Scotland and Wales, respectively. The UK publishing sector, including books, directories and databases, journals, magazines and business media, newspapers and news agencies, has a combined turnover of around £20 billion and employs 167,000 people. In 2015, the UK published 2,710 book titles per million inhabitants, more than any other country, with much of this exported to other Anglophone countries.

In 2010, 82.5% of the UK population were Internet users, the highest proportion among the 20 countries with the largest total number of users in that year. The British video game industry is the largest in Europe, and, since 2022, the UK has the largest video game market in Europe by sales, overtaking Germany. It is the world&#x27;s third-largest producer of video games after Japan and the United States.

=== Sport ===


Association football, tennis, table tennis, badminton, rugby union, rugby league, rugby sevens, golf, boxing, netball, water polo, field hockey, billiards, darts, rowing, rounders, and cricket originated or were substantially developed in the UK, with the rules and codes of many modern sports invented and codified in late 19th-century Victorian Britain.

A 2003 poll found that football is the most popular sport in the UK. England is recognised by FIFA as the birthplace of club football, and the Football Association is the oldest of its kind, with the rules of football first drafted in 1863 by Ebenezer Cobb Morley. Each of the Home Nations (England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland) has its own football association, national team and league system, and each is individually a governing member of the International Football Association Board alongside FIFA. The English top division, the Premier League, is the most watched football league in the world. The first international football match was contested by England and Scotland on 30 November 1872. England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland usually compete as separate countries in international competitions.

In 2003, rugby union was ranked the second most popular sport in the UK. The sport was created in Rugby School, Warwickshire, and the first rugby international took place on 27 March 1871 between England and Scotland. England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, France, and Italy compete in the Six Nations Championship, which is the premier international rugby union tournament in the northern hemisphere. Sports governing bodies in England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland organise and regulate the game separately. Every four years, the Home Nations make a combined team known as the British and Irish Lions which tours Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa.

The United Kingdom hosted the Summer Olympic Games in 1908, 1948, and 2012, with London acting as the host city on all three occasions. Birmingham hosted the 2022 Commonwealth Games, the seventh time a country of the United Kingdom hosted the Commonwealth Games (England, Scotland, and Wales have each hosted the Commonwealth Games at least once).

=== Symbols ===
The flag of the United Kingdom is the Union Flag (also referred to as the Union Jack). It was created in 1606 by the superimposition of the flag of England, representing Saint George, on the flag of Scotland, representing Saint Andrew, and was updated in 1801 with the addition of Saint Patrick&#x27;s Flag. Wales is not represented in the Union Flag, as Wales had been conquered and annexed to England prior to the formation of the United Kingdom. The possibility of redesigning the Union Flag to include representation of Wales was discussed in 2007. The national anthem of the United Kingdom is &quot;God Save the King&quot;, with &quot;King&quot; replaced with &quot;Queen&quot; in the lyrics whenever the monarch is a woman.

Britannia is a national personification of the United Kingdom, originating from Roman Britain. Beside The Lion and the Unicorn and the dragon of heraldry, the bulldog is an iconic animal and commonly represented with the Union Flag. A rare personification is a character originating in the 18th century, John Bull.

England, Wales, and Scotland each have their own national symbols, including their national flags. Northern Ireland also has symbols, many of which are shared with the Republic of Ireland.

== See also ==
* Outline of the United Kingdom
** Outline of England
** Outline of Northern Ireland
** Outline of Scotland
** Outline of Wales
* Index of United Kingdom-related articles
* International rankings of the United Kingdom
* Historiography of the United Kingdom
* Historiography of the British Empire
* United Kingdom–Crown Dependencies Customs Union

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* United Kingdom from BBC News
* United Kingdom. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* United Kingdom from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot; (archived 6 April 2009)
* 
* Key Development Forecasts for the United Kingdom from International Futures

=== Government ===
* Official website of HM Government
* Official website of the British Monarchy
* Official website of the British Prime Minister&#x27;s Office

=== Travel ===
* Official tourist guide to Britain</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4" end="56" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="80" end="94" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="96" end="98" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="103" end="110" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414323" start="128" end="147" title="Northwestern Europe" label="Northwestern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="166" end="190" title="European mainland" label="the continental mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="205" end="212" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="214" end="222" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="224" end="229" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="235" end="251" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="283" end="296" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="338" end="345" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624514" start="359" end="378" title="List of islands of the United Kingdom" label="the smaller islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="390" end="403" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q670200" start="440" end="453" title="Republic of Ireland–United Kingdom border" label="a land border"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="463" end="482" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="535" end="549" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="555" end="564" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="570" end="585" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81499" start="591" end="601" title="Celtic Sea" label="Celtic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="611" end="620" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="772" end="778" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422792" start="780" end="809" title="London metropolitan area" label="whose wider metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="828" end="842" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="893" end="902" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="904" end="911" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="917" end="924" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1057" end="1066" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="1082" end="1107" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="Roman conquest of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632793" start="1119" end="1134" title="end of Roman rule in Britain" label="Roman departure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="1151" end="1173" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="Anglo-Saxon settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1184" end="1213" title="Norman conquest of England" label="the Normans conquered England"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="1235" end="1252" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q988326" start="1348" end="1367" title="Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542" label="annexation of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1398" end="1412" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="1467" end="1483" title="British monarchy" label="British monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="1529" end="1546" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="1561" end="1579" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="1588" end="1607" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="1625" end="1640" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1655" end="1679" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="1688" end="1700" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="1716" end="1730" title="prime minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="1755" end="1773" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="1791" end="1809" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="1824" end="1867" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="1893" end="1900" title="secession" label="seceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="1928" end="1944" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375047" start="1954" end="1993" title="Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927" label="Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2038" end="2077" title="History of industrialisation#Industrial Revolution in Europe" label="became the first industrialised country"/>
<link wikidata="Q85761640" start="2103" end="2117" title="foremost power" label="foremost power"/>
<link wikidata="Q545701" start="2203" end="2217" title="Pax Britannica" label="Pax Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400813" start="2282" end="2296" title="economic power" label="economic power"/>
<link wikidata="Q18293488" start="2351" end="2378" title="British Agricultural Revolution" label="its agricultural prosperity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832242" start="2403" end="2417" title="trading nation" label="trading nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12700342" start="2450" end="2488" title="List of British innovations and discoveries in the 19th century" label="significant technological achievements"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595843" start="2506" end="2525" title="19th-century London" label="19th-century London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2707" end="2732" title="List of largest empires#Empires at their greatest extent" label="largest empire in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080106" start="2743" end="2781" title="History of the United Kingdom during the First World War" label="its involvement in the First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012319" start="2786" end="2806" title="Military history of the United Kingdom during World War II" label="the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803177" start="2815" end="2844" title="Economy of the British Empire" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s economic power"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="2866" end="2880" title="decolonisation" label="decolonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="2956" end="2979" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="2984" end="3007" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="3050" end="3067" title="English law" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="3069" end="3077" title="Scots law" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058568" start="3083" end="3099" title="Law of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q744894" start="3215" end="3223" title="Devolution in the United Kingdom" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="3235" end="3252" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q323138" start="3258" end="3277" title="Economy of the United Kingdom" label="an advanced economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="3302" end="3334" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="largest economies by nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q383715" start="3367" end="3384" title="List of countries by exports" label="largest exporters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053969" start="3389" end="3398" title="List of countries by imports" label="importers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="3408" end="3421" title="nuclear state" label="nuclear state"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="3451" end="3475" title="List of countries by military expenditures" label="highest military budgets"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="3477" end="3501" title="Anglicisation" label="Its soft power influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583705" start="3564" end="3583" title="List of countries that have gained independence from the United Kingdom" label="its former colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q32501" start="3589" end="3604" title="Culture of the United Kingdom" label="British culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="3648" end="3659" title="English-speaking world" label="in language"/>
<link wikidata="Q764912" start="3661" end="3671" title="British literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q268673" start="3673" end="3678" title="Music of the United Kingdom" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282250" start="3683" end="3688" title="Sport in the United Kingdom" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3690" end="3697" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394450" start="3718" end="3745" title="List of languages by total number of speakers" label="most widely spoken language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319" start="3754" end="3787" title="list of languages by number of native speakers" label="third-most spoken native language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3812" end="3859" title="Foreign relations of the United Kingdom#International organisations" label="multiple international organisations and forums"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="3899" end="3917" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="3936" end="3954" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="3959" end="3978" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="4145" end="4169" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="4258" end="4276" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="4288" end="4331" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="4347" end="4367" title="partition of Ireland" label="partition of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="4396" end="4412" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="4433" end="4449" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="4751" end="4760" title="countries" label="countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391979" start="4947" end="4961" title="NUTS of the United Kingdom" label="NUTS 1 regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240725" start="5651" end="5675" title="Britain (place name)" label="term &amp;quot;Britain&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="5701" end="5714" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="5779" end="5792" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="UK Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247706" start="6149" end="6190" title="Permanent Committee on Geographical Names for British Official Use" label="Permanent Committee on Geographical Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="6583" end="6586" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="6960" end="6971" title="British nationality law" label="nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="7103" end="7110" title="British people" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="7112" end="7119" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="7121" end="7129" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="7131" end="7136" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165964" start="7138" end="7152" title="People of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="7157" end="7162" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="7294" end="7305" title="Cro-Magnons" label="Cro-Magnons"/>
<link wikidata="Q435405" start="7527" end="7559" title="Prehistoric Britain" label="region&amp;#x27;s prehistoric period"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958274" start="7632" end="7646" title="Insular Celts" label="Insular Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="7659" end="7676" title="Britons (historical)" label="Brittonic Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327860" start="7681" end="7695" title="Gaelic Ireland" label="Gaelic Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="7702" end="7716" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="Roman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="7755" end="7779" title="Roman Britain" label="rule of southern Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="7812" end="7820" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="7821" end="7832" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7878" end="7905" title="Wales#Post-Roman era" label="to what was to become Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="7907" end="7915" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q547241" start="7980" end="7990" title="Hen Ogledd" label="Hen Ogledd"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="8054" end="8088" title="Anglo-Saxon England" label="region settled by the Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="8162" end="8199" title="Dál Riata" label="Gaelic speakers in north-west Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="8338" end="8343" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="8358" end="8377" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="8412" end="8419" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="8464" end="8482" title="Norman conquest of England" label="conquering England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394805" start="8496" end="8516" title="Norman invasion of Wales" label="large parts of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q901714" start="8518" end="8543" title="Norman invasion of Ireland" label="conquered much of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="8609" end="8618" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="8652" end="8665" title="Norman-French" label="Norman-French"/>
<link wikidata="Q541508" start="8679" end="8691" title="Anglo-Normans" label="Anglo-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q385166" start="8692" end="8704" title="ruling class" label="ruling class"/>
<link wikidata="Q106151" start="8789" end="8811" title="House of Plantagenet" label="medieval English kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162450" start="8826" end="8843" title="conquest of Wales" label="conquest of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="8869" end="8886" title="Wars of Scottish Independence" label="to annex Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q598496" start="8927" end="8950" title="Declaration of Arbroath" label="Declaration of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640586" start="9011" end="9046" title="Anglo-Scottish Wars" label="near-constant conflict with England"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="9062" end="9073" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757432" start="9220" end="9230" title="fair trial" label="fair trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q538677" start="9278" end="9311" title="Angevin Empire" label="substantial territories in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="9412" end="9435" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214188" start="9447" end="9461" title="List of Scottish monarchs" label="Kings of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="9470" end="9497" title="Auld Alliance" label="an alliance with the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326880" start="9518" end="9538" title="Early modern Britain" label="Early modern Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="9581" end="9592" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="9617" end="9627" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="9664" end="9683" title="English Reformation" label="English Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="9773" end="9784" title="State religion" label="established"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="9789" end="9806" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q988326" start="9940" end="9986" title="Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542" label="fully incorporated into the Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q393046" start="10186" end="10214" title="Plantation of Ulster" label="given to Protestant settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="10315" end="10329" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="10335" end="10358" title="James I of England" label="James VI, King of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="10429" end="10438" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="10630" end="10673" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="were involved in a series of connected wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="10689" end="10706" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088700" start="10771" end="10798" title="execution of Charles I" label="execution of King Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="10841" end="10857" title="unitary republic" label="unitary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="10865" end="10888" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="10926" end="10947" title="Restoration (1660)" label="monarchy was restored"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848254" start="10953" end="10964" title="Interregnum (1649–1660)" label="Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="10980" end="10999" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="11027" end="11046" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407381" start="11062" end="11085" title="Claim of Right Act 1689" label="Claim of Right Act 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="11147" end="11163" title="royal absolutism" label="royal absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="11246" end="11266" title="British constitution" label="British constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="11297" end="11320" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="11329" end="11349" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="11376" end="11389" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="11495" end="11506" title="English navy" label="naval power"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="11527" end="11547" title="Age of Discovery" label="voyages of discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="11589" end="11606" title="First British Empire" label="overseas colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="11822" end="11837" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="12005" end="12023" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="12036" end="12054" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="12059" end="12078" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="12136" end="12150" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="12214" end="12232" title="Jacobite uprisings" label="Jacobite uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="12265" end="12281" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="12323" end="12338" title="House of Stuart" label="House of Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="12383" end="12401" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="12427" end="12447" title="Scottish Highlanders" label="Scottish Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669851" start="12527" end="12538" title="Scottish clan chief" label="clan chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="12601" end="12629" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="12641" end="12654" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="12719" end="12724" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="12774" end="12794" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q251355" start="12858" end="12869" title="slave ships" label="slave ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578694" start="12954" end="12965" title="Plantation economy" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869161" start="12986" end="12995" title="History of the British West Indies" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="13005" end="13018" title="British America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821697" start="13052" end="13073" title="Abolitionism in the United Kingdom" label="abolitionism movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927224" start="13247" end="13265" title="blockade of Africa" label="blockade of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="13626" end="13651" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="13656" end="13671" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625002" start="13771" end="13812" title="List of largest cities throughout history" label="largest city in the world from about 1830"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13815" end="13834" title="Royal Navy#1815–1914" label="Unchallenged at sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q545701" start="13883" end="13897" title="Pax Britannica" label="Pax Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002695" start="13945" end="13982" title="International relations of the Great Powers (1814–1919)" label="relative peace among the great powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="14012" end="14026" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="14045" end="14052" title="hegemon" label="hegemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q85761640" start="14057" end="14071" title="foremost power" label="foremost power"/>
<link wikidata="Q43205865" start="14096" end="14112" title="global policeman" label="global policeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="14158" end="14169" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="14187" end="14201" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="14210" end="14224" title="Russian Empire" label="Tsarist Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="14268" end="14278" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885643" start="14292" end="14301" title="Åland War" label="Åland War"/>
<link wikidata="Q122574" start="14309" end="14324" title="Gulf of Bothnia" label="Gulf of Bothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="14333" end="14348" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="14378" end="14402" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion in 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="14434" end="14449" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029385" start="14458" end="14469" title="direct rule" label="direct rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="14475" end="14480" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030562" start="14612" end="14636" title="Informal Empire" label="controlled the economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="14656" end="14665" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="14670" end="14683" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="14701" end="14714" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="14745" end="14755" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="14760" end="14773" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="14803" end="14819" title="Great Reform Act" label="Great Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307387" start="14850" end="14878" title="Reform Acts" label="widened the voting franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314210" start="14889" end="14904" title="Representation of the People Act 1884" label="1884 Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="14919" end="14936" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="14946" end="14954" title="suffrage" label="suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="15072" end="15084" title="Urbanization" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="15166" end="15179" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="15186" end="15203" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="15208" end="15222" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="15245" end="15273" title="Scramble for Africa" label="imperial expansion in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505242" start="15298" end="15316" title="splendid isolation" label="splendid isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335260" start="15374" end="15385" title="Emirate of Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="15390" end="15396" title="Qajar Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="15430" end="15440" title="Great Game" label="Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="15460" end="15466" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="15468" end="15477" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="15482" end="15493" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="15522" end="15530" title="dominion" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="15628" end="15641" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="15650" end="15663" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q185852" start="15669" end="15682" title="Edwardian era" label="Edwardian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q59554918" start="15687" end="15700" title="Liberal welfare reforms" label="social reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="15705" end="15726" title="Irish Home Rule movement" label="home rule for Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="15771" end="15783" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q104591398" start="15812" end="15824" title="Trade unions in the United Kingdom" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="15865" end="15877" title="suffragettes" label="suffragettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="16000" end="16006" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="16025" end="16039" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16047" end="16062" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="16270" end="16283" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="16308" end="16322" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427309" start="16709" end="16746" title="Representation of the People Act 1918" label="Representation of the People Act 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="16829" end="16846" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="16862" end="16869" title="League of Nations mandate" label="mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="16905" end="16912" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="16947" end="16965" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="17164" end="17167" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17221" end="17234" title="History of television#United Kingdom" label="began in 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q96117872" start="17243" end="17281" title="First day of BBC television" label="first scheduled BBC Television Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="17313" end="17330" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="17378" end="17393" title="Irish Home Rule" label="Irish Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="17417" end="17440" title="Partition of Ireland" label="partition of the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q18028947" start="17450" end="17502" title="The Troubles in Ulster (1920–1922)" label="A period of conflict in what is now Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="17548" end="17564" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="17600" end="17608" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17629" end="17662" title="Statute of Westminster 1931#Irish Free State" label="unambiguously independent in 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314203" start="17722" end="17746" title="1928 Equal Franchise Act" label="1928 Equal Franchise Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="17852" end="17874" title="General Strike of 1926" label="General Strike of 1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599058" start="17957" end="17973" title="Great Depression in the United Kingdom" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453430" start="18161" end="18181" title="National Government (1931)" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="18383" end="18395" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18440" end="18456" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="18458" end="18475" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118241" start="18512" end="18532" title="Churchill war ministry" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="18809" end="18824" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="18845" end="18854" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="18862" end="18879" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="18923" end="18932" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="18938" end="18952" title="Grand Alliance (World War II)" label="Grand Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18991" end="19003" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="19032" end="19038" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="19051" end="19062" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="19113" end="19135" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="19141" end="19162" title="North Africa campaign" label="North Africa campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="19171" end="19187" title="Italian campaign (World War II)" label="Italian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="19234" end="19251" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="19268" end="19288" title="liberation of Europe" label="liberation of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="19315" end="19329" title="Burma campaign" label="Burma campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417872" start="19353" end="19374" title="British Pacific Fleet" label="British Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712664" start="19415" end="19451" title="British contribution to the Manhattan Project" label="contributed to the Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q132673972" start="19631" end="19640" title="Big Three (World War II)" label="Big Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349904" start="19709" end="19723" title="Aftermath of World War II" label="post-war world"/>
<link wikidata="Q176930" start="19740" end="19769" title="Declaration by United Nations" label="Declaration by United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="19845" end="19876" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="19936" end="19939" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="19941" end="19951" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="19956" end="19960" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="20033" end="20046" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724649" start="20150" end="20167" title="Labour Government 1945–1951" label="Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="20174" end="20188" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105865" start="20276" end="20300" title="Post-war consensus" label="in the following decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="20345" end="20357" title="Nationalization" label="nationalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="20361" end="20374" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="20452" end="20475" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080106" start="20600" end="20638" title="History of the United Kingdom during the First World War" label="its involvement in the First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012319" start="20643" end="20663" title="Military history of the United Kingdom during World War II" label="the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="20685" end="20699" title="decolonisation" label="decolonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="20896" end="20919" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987562" start="20962" end="20987" title="Nuclear weapons and the United Kingdom" label="a nuclear weapons arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q924138" start="21022" end="21041" title="Operation Hurricane" label="Operation Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="21138" end="21149" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="21163" end="21207" title="English-speaking world" label="international spread of the English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394450" start="21226" end="21253" title="List of languages by total number of speakers" label="most widely spoken language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319" start="21258" end="21291" title="List of languages by number of native speakers" label="third-most spoken native language"/>
<link wikidata="Q764912" start="21343" end="21357" title="British literature" label="its literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q32501" start="21362" end="21369" title="Culture of the United Kingdom" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757823" start="21465" end="21487" title="Commonwealth countries" label="Commonwealth countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="21724" end="21736" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314208" start="21790" end="21816" title="Representation of the People Act 1969" label="lower its voting age to 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="21858" end="21878" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="21916" end="21938" title="Western European Union" label="Western European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q450503" start="21961" end="21989" title="London and Paris Conferences" label="London and Paris Conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="22059" end="22090" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="22131" end="22151" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="22163" end="22178" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="1975 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="22227" end="22241" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="22456" end="22468" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="22523" end="22564" title="Belfast Agreement" label="Belfast &amp;quot;Good Friday&amp;quot; Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="22657" end="22669" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="22701" end="22718" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q373177" start="22749" end="22759" title="monetarism" label="monetarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902142" start="22830" end="22838" title="Big Bang (financial markets)" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="22972" end="22981" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q35086" start="23017" end="23030" title="South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands" label="South Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="23039" end="23055" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="23080" end="23093" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359115" start="23273" end="23288" title="2013 Falkland Islands sovereignty referendum" label="2013 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="23356" end="23369" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="23416" end="23425" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q248897" start="23484" end="23503" title="Port of Gibraltar" label="a key military base"/>
<link wikidata="Q170110" start="23507" end="23525" title="2002 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum" label="referendum in 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="23726" end="23734" title="devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q477072" start="23797" end="23820" title="Human Rights Act 1998" label="statutory incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="23848" end="23883" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23903" end="23914" title="List of modern great powers#United Kingdom" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="24006" end="24010" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="24106" end="24119" title="war on terror" label="war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="24182" end="24200" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="24244" end="24271" title="Iraq War" label="military deployment in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580246" start="24287" end="24321" title="15 February 2003 anti-war protests" label="largest protest in British history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="24361" end="24371" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="24378" end="24393" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="24432" end="24455" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="Cameron–Clegg coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888043" start="24486" end="24504" title="United Kingdom government austerity programme" label="austerity measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="24660" end="24681" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="24726" end="24749" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="voting by 55.3 to 44.7%"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="24836" end="24869" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="voted to leave the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="24875" end="24889" title="Brexit" label="UK left the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q104469222" start="24918" end="24955" title="EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement" label="EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="24978" end="24995" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356512" start="25009" end="25040" title="Economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="impact on the UK&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q92018048" start="25055" end="25079" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on education in the United Kingdom" label="disruptions to education"/>
<link wikidata="Q97671591" start="25088" end="25132" title="Social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="far-reaching impacts on society and politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="25224" end="25240" title="COVID-19 vaccine" label="COVID-19 vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q95042269" start="25253" end="25268" title="Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine" label="its own vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="25301" end="25318" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q731938" start="25323" end="25334" title="AstraZeneca" label="AstraZeneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="25556" end="25569" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624514" start="25681" end="25713" title="List of islands of the United Kingdom" label="some smaller surrounding islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="25736" end="25743" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="25745" end="25753" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="25755" end="25760" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="25766" end="25782" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="25949" end="25964" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="25971" end="25998" title="Royal Observatory, Greenwich" label="Royal Greenwich Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="26049" end="26063" title="Prime Meridian" label="Prime Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194993" start="26071" end="26104" title="International Meridian Conference" label="International Meridian Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="26157" end="26160" title="49th parallel north" label="49°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254936" start="26165" end="26170" title="61st parallel north" label="61° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698923" start="26187" end="26191" title="9th meridian west" label="9° W"/>
<link wikidata="Q938807" start="26196" end="26200" title="2nd meridian east" label="2° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797373" start="26360" end="26377" title="coastline paradox" label="coastline paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="26424" end="26438" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079227" start="26556" end="26580" title="Celtic broadleaf forests" label="Celtic broadleaf forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848716" start="26582" end="26612" title="English Lowlands beech forests" label="English Lowlands beech forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079301" start="26614" end="26648" title="North Atlantic moist mixed forests" label="North Atlantic moist mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663355" start="26654" end="26680" title="Caledonian Forest" label="Caledonian conifer forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="27152" end="27176" title="subpolar oceanic climate" label="subpolar oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="27221" end="27250" title="Subarctic climate" label="continental subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459798" start="27282" end="27296" title="tundra climate" label="tundra climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="27610" end="27621" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261772" start="28419" end="28450" title="Environmental Performance Index" label="Environmental Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604172" start="28479" end="28506" title="Greenhouse gas emissions by the United Kingdom" label="UK greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="28515" end="28523" title="net zero" label="net zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365965" start="28554" end="28561" title="Geography of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694523" start="28703" end="28716" title="Tees–Exe line" label="Tees–Exe line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="28799" end="28807" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q277755" start="28813" end="28823" title="New Forest" label="New Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q584108" start="28829" end="28840" title="South Downs" label="South Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999046" start="28849" end="28863" title="The Broads" label="Norfolk Broads"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="28890" end="28903" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="28909" end="28917" title="Pennines" label="Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q977613" start="28923" end="28938" title="Yorkshire Dales" label="Yorkshire Dales"/>
<link wikidata="Q593627" start="28940" end="28946" title="Exmoor" label="Exmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="28952" end="28960" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="29000" end="29006" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="29008" end="29014" title="River Severn" label="Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="29024" end="29030" title="Humber" label="Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146222" start="29067" end="29079" title="Scafell Pike" label="Scafell Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="29132" end="29145" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118306" start="29148" end="29156" title="Geography of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="29221" end="29228" title="List of islands of Scotland" label="islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="29242" end="29250" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="29252" end="29258" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="29271" end="29279" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="29357" end="29366" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q747064" start="29491" end="29501" title="Cairngorms" label="Cairngorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q116661" start="29503" end="29532" title="Loch Lomond and The Trossachs" label="Loch Lomond and The Trossachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="29537" end="29546" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670632" start="29599" end="29604" title="Geography of Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="29689" end="29700" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="29726" end="29731" title="North Wales" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094811" start="29736" end="29745" title="mid Wales" label="mid Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q867913" start="29785" end="29794" title="Snowdonia" label="Snowdonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217142" start="29807" end="29814" title="Snowdon" label="Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893297" start="29902" end="29921" title="Pembrokeshire Coast" label="Pembrokeshire Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="29991" end="29999" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q822900" start="30025" end="30041" title="Geography of Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="30079" end="30088" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209113" start="30093" end="30106" title="North Channel (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="North Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q206942" start="30156" end="30167" title="Lough Neagh" label="Lough Neagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324180" start="30230" end="30240" title="Lough Erne" label="Lough Erne"/>
<link wikidata="Q106187" start="30276" end="30297" title="Giant&amp;#x27;s Causeway" label="Giant&amp;#x27;s Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q550163" start="30370" end="30383" title="Slieve Donard" label="Slieve Donard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478931" start="30391" end="30407" title="Mourne Mountains" label="Mourne Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="30441" end="30464" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="30471" end="30494" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="30515" end="30533" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25585330" start="30611" end="30622" title="Centralized government" label="centralised"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="30624" end="30637" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="30650" end="30682" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139084" start="30686" end="30695" title="Parliamentary sovereignty in the United Kingdom" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="30734" end="30750" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="30766" end="30780" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="30785" end="30794" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="30814" end="30825" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="the monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="30895" end="30907" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677783" start="30941" end="30961" title="Act of Parliament (UK)" label="an act of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="30972" end="30983" title="statute law" label="statute law"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="31032" end="31052" title="Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="British constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135084" start="31056" end="31066" title="Uncodified constitution" label="uncodified"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="31140" end="31147" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022655" start="31161" end="31169" title="case law" label="case law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31212" end="31238" title="British Constitution#Conventions" label="constitutional conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="31258" end="31271" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139084" start="31351" end="31376" title="Parliamentary sovereignty in the United Kingdom" label="parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="31382" end="31393" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="31395" end="31404" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q695838" start="31420" end="31437" title="Internationalism (politics)" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="31440" end="31456" title="Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="31476" end="31489" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="31583" end="31601" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375091" start="31862" end="31879" title="Royal prerogative in the United Kingdom" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="31916" end="31922" title="Advice (constitutional law)" label="advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315109" start="31926" end="31948" title="ministers of the Crown" label="ministers of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32201" end="32215" title="Reserve power#United Kingdom" label="reserve powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="32242" end="32264" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="32277" end="32298" title="constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q15283424" start="32305" end="32322" title="General elections in the United Kingdom" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="32387" end="32401" title="United Kingdom constituencies" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="32439" end="32459" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="32480" end="32499" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="32623" end="32641" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="32703" end="32715" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="32823" end="32839" title="two-party system" label="two-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757551" start="32872" end="32889" title="List of political parties in the United Kingdom" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="32985" end="33003" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="The prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="33011" end="33029" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="33089" end="33096" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="33161" end="33171" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="33277" end="33290" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604686" start="33304" end="33325" title="statutory instrument (UK)" label="statutory instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q609884" start="33416" end="33442" title="First Lord of the Treasury" label="First Lord of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315116" start="33534" end="33564" title="Minister for the Civil Service" label="Minister for the Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q65988624" start="33581" end="33603" title="Minister for the Union" label="Minister for the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164321" start="33690" end="33700" title="Constitutional conventions of the United Kingdom" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014425" start="33835" end="33857" title="Confidence motions in the United Kingdom" label="command the confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="33921" end="33937" title="Keir Starmer" label="Sir Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="33953" end="33965" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="34019" end="34037" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="34041" end="34047" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="34049" end="34057" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="34062" end="34073" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="34081" end="34109" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="34304" end="34315" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="34381" end="34395" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379030" start="34485" end="34493" title="Counties of the United Kingdom" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664051" start="34795" end="34802" title="Local Government Act 1888" label="in 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664029" start="34813" end="34820" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889" label="in 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664026" start="34833" end="34840" title="Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898" label="in 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="34943" end="34960" title="English law" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="34962" end="34970" title="Scots law" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058568" start="34976" end="34992" title="Law of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112653" start="35176" end="35203" title="Local government in England" label="Local government in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q171634" start="35307" end="35330" title="subdivisions of England" label="subdivisions of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q48091" start="35344" end="35351" title="Regions of England" label="regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135166" start="35414" end="35428" title="Greater London Authority" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q723138" start="35535" end="35550" title="1998 Greater London Authority referendum" label="1998 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="35553" end="35581" title="Local government in Scotland" label="Local government in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="35598" end="35614" title="subdivisions of Scotland" label="32 council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="35675" end="35682" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="35695" end="35703" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="35708" end="35714" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225388" start="35753" end="35769" title="Politics of the Highland council area" label="Highland Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q123758171" start="35930" end="35955" title="Local government in Wales" label="Local government in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049540" start="36239" end="36275" title="Local government in Northern Ireland" label="Local government in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="36696" end="36709" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="UK Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="36967" end="36986" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="36992" end="37008" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="37014" end="37040" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Ireland Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135166" start="37061" end="37085" title="Greater London Authority" label="Greater London Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q124612297" start="37087" end="37107" title="Combined authorities and combined county authorities" label="Combined Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q124612297" start="37112" end="37139" title="Combined authorities and combined county authorities" label="Combined County Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="37205" end="37224" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315283" start="37269" end="37284" title="Devolved, reserved and excepted matters" label="devolved powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135084" start="37399" end="37422" title="uncodified constitution" label="uncodified constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139084" start="37522" end="37547" title="Parliamentary sovereignty in the United Kingdom" label="parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713000" start="37680" end="37697" title="Scotland Act 2016" label="Scotland Act 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130483" start="37706" end="37720" title="Wales Act 2017" label="Wales Act 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="38288" end="38309" title="Government of Ireland" label="Government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135166" start="38720" end="38744" title="Greater London Authority" label="Greater London Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q723138" start="38774" end="38792" title="1998 Greater London Authority referendum" label="referendum in 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="38933" end="38948" title="Mayor of London" label="Executive Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="38957" end="38972" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q124612297" start="39027" end="39045" title="Combined authorities and combined county authorities" label="Combined Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961057" start="39145" end="39208" title="Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009" label="Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q124612297" start="39436" end="39461" title="Combined authorities and combined county authorities" label="Combined County Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q123265971" start="39570" end="39608" title="Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023" label="Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="39660" end="39674" title="county council" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="39680" end="39699" title="Unitary authority" label="unitary authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315283" start="39868" end="39876" title="Reserved and excepted matters" label="reserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509538" start="40036" end="40045" title="Education in Scotland" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="40047" end="40060" title="Scots law" label="law and order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175225" start="40062" end="40073" title="Economy of Scotland" label="the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197199" start="40075" end="40085" title="Health in Scotland" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354822" start="40087" end="40096" title="Elections in Scotland" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603015" start="40098" end="40114" title="Crown Estate Scotland" label="the crown estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124048219" start="40120" end="40135" title="Planning system in Scotland" label="planning system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845811" start="40140" end="40147" title="Housing in Scotland" label="housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435631" start="40235" end="40252" title="Scotland Act 2012" label="Scotland Act 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713000" start="40257" end="40274" title="Scotland Act 2016" label="Scotland Act 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403787" start="40284" end="40304" title="Taxation in Scotland" label="some taxation powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48769383" start="40332" end="40342" title="Income tax in Scotland" label="Income Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647592" start="40380" end="40414" title="Land and Buildings Transaction Tax" label="Land and Buildings Transaction Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059551" start="40416" end="40428" title="Scottish Landfill Tax" label="Landfill Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417486" start="40447" end="40464" title="Air Departure Tax" label="Air Departure Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163474" start="40469" end="40485" title="Revenue Scotland" label="Revenue Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q124607787" start="40513" end="40527" title="Energy in Scotland" label="energy network"/>
<link wikidata="Q840695" start="40539" end="40555" title="Renewable energy in Scotland" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124607849" start="40587" end="40608" title="Oil industry in Scotland" label="oil and gas licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q99340975" start="40678" end="40702" title="United Kingdom Internal Market Act 2020" label="act of the UK parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="40724" end="40743" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="40749" end="40772" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="40801" end="40815" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q333811" start="40816" end="40828" title="John Swinney" label="John Swinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="40882" end="40914" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="Scottish independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="41073" end="41101" title="Local government in Scotland" label="Local government in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="41118" end="41134" title="subdivisions of Scotland" label="32 council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="41353" end="41387" title="Members of the Scottish Parliament" label="Members of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="41768" end="41792" title="additional member system" label="additional member system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676706" start="41943" end="41963" title="Acts of Senedd Cymru" label="Acts of Senedd Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="41969" end="41985" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="41989" end="41995" title="Welsh Labour" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q18996" start="42004" end="42018" title="First Minister of Wales" label="First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q336521" start="42019" end="42032" title="Eluned Morgan" label="Eluned Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123758171" start="42078" end="42103" title="Local government in Wales" label="Local government in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="42305" end="42326" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="42372" end="42380" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="42381" end="42392" title="Irish nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="42420" end="42432" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058504" start="42452" end="42475" title="1998 Northern Ireland Good Friday Agreement referendum" label="confirmed by referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969678" start="42524" end="42537" title="power sharing" label="power sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="42684" end="42708" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="42821" end="42828" title="diarchy" label="diarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188122" start="42842" end="42850" title="Designated Unionist" label="unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188122" start="42855" end="42866" title="Designated Nationalist" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362221" start="42896" end="42956" title="First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland" label="First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049540" start="43012" end="43048" title="Local government in Northern Ireland" label="Local government in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688521" start="43168" end="43187" title="Big Five (United Nations)" label="permanent member of"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="43192" end="43223" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="43237" end="43241" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q108556886" start="43243" end="43248" title="AUKUS" label="AUKUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="43254" end="43277" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="43283" end="43303" title="G7 finance ministers" label="G7 finance ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="43309" end="43317" title="G7 forum" label="G7 forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="43323" end="43326" title="G-20 major economies" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="43332" end="43336" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="43342" end="43345" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="43351" end="43368" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="43377" end="43381" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q45433" start="43398" end="43413" title="British Council" label="British Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904466" start="43569" end="43589" title="Special Relationship" label="Special Relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q464399" start="43667" end="43683" title="Entente cordiale" label="Entente cordiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838032" start="43755" end="43780" title="Anglo-Portuguese Alliance" label="Anglo-Portuguese Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324796" start="43938" end="43956" title="Common Travel Area" label="Common Travel Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971473" start="43984" end="44026" title="British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference" label="British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655795" start="44035" end="44056" title="British-Irish Council" label="British-Irish Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q954977" start="44176" end="44207" title="official development assistance" label="official development assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="44430" end="44444" title="British people" label="British people"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="44559" end="44579" title="Treaty of Union" label="1706 Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005600" start="44678" end="44692" title="Legal systems of the world" label="systems of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="44694" end="44705" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178760" start="44707" end="44727" title="Courts of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="44732" end="44741" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="44749" end="44784" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058404" start="44832" end="44873" title="judicial functions of the House of Lords" label="Appellate Committee of the House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="44879" end="44918" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="45052" end="45080" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="45089" end="45107" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="45115" end="45126" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058568" start="45168" end="45188" title="Northern Ireland law" label="Northern Ireland law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="45202" end="45212" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022655" start="45217" end="45225" title="case law" label="case law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="45271" end="45282" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q614305" start="45345" end="45372" title="courts of England and Wales" label="courts of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q614305" start="45391" end="45425" title="Senior Courts of England and Wales" label="Senior Courts of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137751" start="45445" end="45460" title="Court of Appeal of England and Wales" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="45466" end="45487" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q203895" start="45514" end="45525" title="Crown Court" label="Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="45548" end="45557" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="45601" end="45610" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="45648" end="45664" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128540" start="45691" end="45715" title="High Court of Justiciary" label="High Court of Justiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185444" start="46034" end="46050" title="Crime statistics in the United Kingdom" label="crime statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039774" start="46154" end="46168" title="United Kingdom labour law" label="UK labour laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974345" start="46209" end="46221" title="National Minimum Wage Act 1998" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164793" start="46301" end="46308" title="Pensions Act 2008" label="pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="46310" end="46327" title="Same-sex marriage" label="Same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="46394" end="46410" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288654" start="46423" end="46436" title="LGBT rights in the United Kingdom" label="LGBT equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="46522" end="46524" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q207946" start="46688" end="46699" title="arbitration" label="arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="46718" end="46721" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="PCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q834448" start="46725" end="46734" title="Peace Palace" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q116930211" start="46746" end="46763" title="Windsor Framework" label="Windsor Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="46765" end="46781" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="46835" end="46838" title="European Court of Justice" label="ECJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q116930211" start="46851" end="46865" title="Stormont Brake" label="Stormont Brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="46934" end="46954" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="47007" end="47017" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="47022" end="47035" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873395" start="47049" end="47062" title="Naval Service (United Kingdom)" label="Naval Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="47069" end="47081" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="47090" end="47105" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="47165" end="47184" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993771" start="47207" end="47222" title="Defence Council of the United Kingdom" label="Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747647" start="47239" end="47269" title="Secretary of State for Defence" label="Secretary of State for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="47275" end="47293" title="Commander-in-Chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="47301" end="47316" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="British monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="47604" end="47608" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q471494" start="47624" end="47651" title="Allied Rapid Reaction Corps" label="Allied Rapid Reaction Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045582" start="47658" end="47689" title="Five Power Defence Arrangements" label="Five Power Defence Arrangements"/>
<link wikidata="Q633954" start="47691" end="47697" title="RIMPAC" label="RIMPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885778" start="47740" end="47758" title="Overseas military bases of the United Kingdom" label="Overseas garrisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968916" start="47792" end="47808" title="RAF Ascension Island" label="Ascension Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4285320" start="47810" end="47817" title="Mina Salman" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328515" start="47819" end="47825" title="Military of Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852298" start="47827" end="47833" title="Military Forces based in Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969481" start="47835" end="47841" title="British Army Training Unit Suffield" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969989" start="47843" end="47849" title="British Forces Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184851" start="47851" end="47863" title="Diego Garcia" label="Diego Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857762" start="47869" end="47885" title="Military of the Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q780918" start="47887" end="47894" title="British Forces Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q129144" start="47896" end="47905" title="British Forces Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018854" start="47907" end="47912" title="British Army Training Unit Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="47914" end="47918" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q542588" start="47920" end="47925" title="Al Udeid Air Base" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="47930" end="47939" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140407" start="47959" end="48007" title="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute" label="Stockholm International Peace Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206709" start="48016" end="48061" title="International Institute for Strategic Studies" label="International Institute for Strategic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="48078" end="48123" title="List of countries by military expenditures" label="fourth- or fifth-highest military expenditure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="48210" end="48218" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="48389" end="48410" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="48428" end="48441" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="48458" end="48479" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="sixth-largest economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q897188" start="48501" end="48515" title="List of sovereign states in Europe by GDP (nominal)" label="second-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="48566" end="48580" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q66076" start="48624" end="48647" title="foreign exchange market" label="foreign exchange market"/>
<link wikidata="Q756202" start="48684" end="48700" title="reserve currency" label="reserve currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="48712" end="48732" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="48734" end="48738" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8146" start="48744" end="48747" title="yen" label="yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="48866" end="48877" title="Swiss franc" label="Swiss franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="48897" end="48903" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="49037" end="49048" title="HM Treasury" label="HM Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="49061" end="49088" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q274490" start="49156" end="49170" title="public finance" label="public finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q582577" start="49182" end="49197" title="economic policy" label="economic policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116726347" start="49203" end="49236" title="Department for Business and Trade" label="Department for Business and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="49307" end="49322" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="49340" end="49352" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q383715" start="49628" end="49651" title="List of countries by exports" label="fourth-largest exporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="49991" end="50005" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q994873" start="50042" end="50045" title="Gross value added" label="GVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q117336735" start="50094" end="50129" title="List of countries by service exports" label="second-largest exporter of services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772346" start="50227" end="50257" title="Global Financial Centres Index" label="Global Financial Centres Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079848" start="50287" end="50303" title="List of cities by GDP" label="largest city GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829239" start="50426" end="50459" title="Tourism in the United Kingdom" label="The country&amp;#x27;s tourism sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="50575" end="50594" title="creative industries" label="creative industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430712" start="50885" end="50907" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London" label="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="50936" end="50945" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q476118" start="50950" end="50961" title="reinsurance" label="reinsurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318049" start="50995" end="51002" title="WPP plc" label="WPP plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164722" start="51190" end="51214" title="Consumer spending" label="consumption expenditures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831590" start="51259" end="51289" title="List of largest consumer markets" label="second-largest consumer market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244782" start="51301" end="51311" title="John Lewis Partnership" label="John Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056338" start="51367" end="51394" title="Automotive industry in the United Kingdom" label="British automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781425" start="51721" end="51725" title="Mini Hatch" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="51730" end="51736" title="Jaguar Cars" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q234803" start="51769" end="51780" title="Rolls-Royce Motor Cars" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q27224" start="51782" end="51789" title="Bentley" label="Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134042" start="51794" end="51805" title="Range Rover" label="Range Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716005" start="51936" end="51970" title="List of countries by engine exports" label="fourth-largest exporter of engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="51991" end="52001" title="auto racing" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="52139" end="52150" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351854" start="52243" end="52250" title="McLaren Automotive" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074" start="52252" end="52264" title="Aston Martin" label="Aston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35935" start="52269" end="52274" title="Lotus Cars" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688454" start="52281" end="52309" title="Aerospace industry in the United Kingdom" label="aerospace industry of the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529737" start="52427" end="52444" title="British space programme" label="UK space industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140638" start="52637" end="52652" title="UK Space Agency" label="UK Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827157" start="52734" end="52758" title="Agriculture in the United Kingdom" label="Its agriculture industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="53251" end="53274" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015063" start="53602" end="53619" title="Income inequality in the United Kingdom" label="income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="53627" end="53631" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="53653" end="53656" title="Human Development Index" label="HDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="53747" end="53768" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="53819" end="53840" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="54009" end="54021" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="54029" end="54043" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="laws of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="54064" end="54071" title="gravitation" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="54142" end="54156" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="54174" end="54183" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="54187" end="54204" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="54263" end="54282" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="54309" end="54331" title="electromagnetic theory" label="electromagnetic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="54351" end="54366" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="54413" end="54422" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="54424" end="54439" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="54465" end="54476" title="black holes" label="black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q116719150" start="54483" end="54532" title="Department for Science, Innovation and Technology" label="Department for Science, Innovation and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q918342" start="54720" end="54740" title="Universities in the United Kingdom" label="British universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976594" start="54765" end="54777" title="science park" label="science park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="55109" end="55132" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="55181" end="55204" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="55673" end="55686" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="55700" end="55706" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q546003" start="55724" end="55747" title="BMJ" label="British Medical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q939416" start="55764" end="55774" title="The Lancet" label="The Lancet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872" start="55883" end="55886" title="M25 motorway" label="M25"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="56103" end="56115" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404257" start="56128" end="56138" title="privatisation of British Rail" label="privatised"/>
<link wikidata="Q106910077" start="56202" end="56224" title="Great British Railways" label="Great British Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505124" start="56280" end="56311" title="rail transport in Great Britain" label="rail transport in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q156013" start="56564" end="56572" title="Eurostar" label="Eurostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="56597" end="56611" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="56622" end="56637" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q731711" start="56770" end="56779" title="LeShuttle" label="LeShuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="56785" end="56799" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="56874" end="56892" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q798868" start="57083" end="57095" title="High Speed 2" label="High Speed 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q854585" start="57370" end="57383" title="Double-decker bus" label="double-decker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="57470" end="57488" title="London Buses" label="London bus network"/>
<link wikidata="Q741071" start="57719" end="57730" title="List of airports in the United Kingdom and the British Crown Dependencies" label="UK airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="57823" end="57846" title="London Heathrow Airport" label="London Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="57874" end="57889" title="Gatwick Airport" label="Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694" start="57920" end="57938" title="Manchester Airport" label="Manchester Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q935262" start="58040" end="58097" title="List of busiest airports by passenger traffic" label="second busiest airport by international passenger traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="58214" end="58229" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q32277" start="58242" end="58257" title="Virgin Atlantic" label="Virgin Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="58479" end="58481" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="58486" end="58491" title="Shell plc" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543123" start="59193" end="59215" title="Small Modular Reactors" label="Small Modular Reactors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59217" end="59242" title="Nuclear reactor#Future and developing technologies" label="Advanced Modular Reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="59247" end="59269" title="Nuclear Fusion" label="Nuclear Fusion Reators"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827361" start="59419" end="59431" title="Oil and gas reserves and resource quantification" label="gas reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="59479" end="59491" title="North Sea oil" label="oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="59660" end="59681" title="Liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993378" start="59706" end="59737" title="North Sea Transition Authority" label="UK&amp;#x27;s oil and gas regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="59806" end="59810" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="59871" end="59879" title="fracking" label="fracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q564726" start="59907" end="59916" title="shale gas" label="shale gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="60262" end="60271" title="megalitre" label="megalitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438022" start="60551" end="60565" title="Scottish Water" label="Scottish Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058537" start="60660" end="60682" title="Northern Ireland Water" label="Northern Ireland Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="60711" end="60722" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606487" start="60787" end="60801" title="List of European countries by population" label="fourth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="60894" end="60906" title="List of countries by population" label="22nd-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q329823" start="61363" end="61373" title="median age" label="median age"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="61519" end="61551" title="List of countries and dependencies by population density" label="most densely populated countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422792" start="61678" end="61715" title="London metropolitan area" label="London&amp;#x27;s wider metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="61734" end="61748" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="61930" end="61950" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q610548" start="62097" end="62106" title="baby boom" label="baby boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="62345" end="62375" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="62639" end="62650" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532903" start="62827" end="62855" title="Genetic history of the British Isles" label="descended from ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="62904" end="62909" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="62947" end="62954" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="62956" end="62968" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh people"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="63064" end="63073" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658204" start="63375" end="63382" title="British Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="63597" end="63612" title="minority group" label="ethnic minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="63721" end="63730" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="63813" end="63831" title="North East England" label="North East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="63847" end="63857" title="South West England" label="South West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="63969" end="63981" title="state school" label="state school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="64053" end="64069" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287002" start="64345" end="64356" title="monolingual" label="monolingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="64540" end="64547" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="64549" end="64553" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="64555" end="64562" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044560" start="64564" end="64571" title="Sylheti language" label="Sylheti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="64573" end="64578" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33739" start="64580" end="64595" title="Pahari-Pothwari" label="Pahari-Pothwari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="64597" end="64602" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="64608" end="64616" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="64648" end="64654" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="64832" end="64848" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="64871" end="64876" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="64878" end="64883" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="64888" end="64903" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="64905" end="64912" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="65066" end="65077" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="65083" end="65108" title="Welsh-speaking population" label="Welsh-speaking population"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071608" start="65303" end="65317" title="Irish language in Northern Ireland" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="65371" end="65383" title="Ulster Scots dialect" label="Ulster-Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="65530" end="65544" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="65629" end="65634" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="65677" end="65691" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="65705" end="65716" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="65749" end="65761" title="Ulster Scots dialects" label="Ulster Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="65893" end="65914" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="65924" end="65937" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160232" start="66015" end="66051" title="History of Christianity in Britain" label="religious life in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="66411" end="66422" title="secularised" label="secularised"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826706" start="66427" end="66441" title="post-Christian" label="post-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674069" start="66564" end="66569" title="Islam in the United Kingdom" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200877" start="66578" end="66586" title="Hinduism in the United Kingdom" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513730" start="66595" end="66602" title="Sikhism in the United Kingdom" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q702718" start="66611" end="66618" title="Judaism in the United Kingdom" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097994" start="66627" end="66635" title="Buddhism in the United Kingdom" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10729600" start="66720" end="66731" title="Irreligion in the United Kingdom" label="no religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974827" start="66783" end="66791" title="Tearfund" label="Tearfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="67332" end="67350" title="State religion" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915459" start="67363" end="67377" title="Lords Spiritual" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052674" start="67431" end="67447" title="Supreme Governor of the Church of England" label="Supreme Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q777707" start="67452" end="67460" title="religion in Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="67466" end="67484" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649443" start="67492" end="67507" title="national church" label="national church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="67677" end="67707" title="Presbyterian polity" label="Presbyterian Church Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089788" start="67745" end="67760" title="Church in Wales" label="Church in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="67805" end="67822" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="67861" end="67881" title="partition of Ireland" label="partition of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="68919" end="68927" title="Philippines" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="68929" end="68936" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="68939" end="68949" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="68952" end="68957" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="68995" end="69001" title="Somalia" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q689095" start="69052" end="69071" title="Permanent residency" label="permanent residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971328" start="69507" end="69517" title="British diaspora" label="Emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="70007" end="70015" title="Devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="70141" end="70155" title="college degree" label="college degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746976" start="70277" end="70294" title="List of universities in the United Kingdom" label="many universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="70310" end="70330" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="70335" end="70358" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308200" start="70690" end="70706" title="Taxation in the United Kingdom" label="general taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q323481" start="70977" end="71023" title="Programme for International Student Assessment" label="Programme for International Student Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="71051" end="71055" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480510" start="71291" end="71300" title="Universal service" label="universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q294308" start="71301" end="71327" title="Publicly funded health care" label="publicly funded healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="71389" end="71412" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="71650" end="71665" title="Devolution" label="devolved matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="71827" end="71849" title="British nationality law" label="UK permanent residents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308200" start="71911" end="71927" title="Taxation in the United Kingdom" label="general taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="71933" end="71958" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="72160" end="72164" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="72385" end="72439" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q795264" start="72505" end="72528" title="General Medical Council" label="General Medical Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q19360000" start="72534" end="72563" title="Nursing and Midwifery Council" label="Nursing and Midwifery Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995300" start="72604" end="72617" title="Medical royal college" label="Royal College"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="72700" end="72710" title="executive (government)" label="executives"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152524" start="72712" end="72733" title="healthcare in England" label="healthcare in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152501" start="72778" end="72808" title="healthcare in Northern Ireland" label="healthcare in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="72838" end="72864" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Ireland Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691295" start="72866" end="72888" title="healthcare in Scotland" label="healthcare in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="72918" end="72937" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691323" start="72943" end="72962" title="healthcare in Wales" label="healthcare in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="72992" end="73008" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="73015" end="73038" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q113162" start="73201" end="73212" title="History of the United Kingdom" label="its history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140229" start="73226" end="73241" title="political union" label="political union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="73365" end="73377" title="English language" label="the language"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="73391" end="73404" title="Common law" label="legal systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583705" start="73416" end="73435" title="List of countries that have gained independence from the United Kingdom" label="its former colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="73546" end="73557" title="Anglosphere" label="Anglosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345203" start="73630" end="73649" title="cultural superpower" label="cultural superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="73869" end="73880" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="73889" end="73904" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="74050" end="74076" title="Literature for children" label="children&amp;#x27;s literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="74095" end="74107" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="74109" end="74124" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="74126" end="74139" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q214565" start="74144" end="74158" title="Beatrix Potter" label="Beatrix Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207036" start="74217" end="74227" title="A.A. Milne" label="A.A. Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q192069" start="74229" end="74240" title="Enid Blyton" label="Enid Blyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="74242" end="74256" title="J.R.R. Tolkien" label="J.R.R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="74258" end="74268" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="74270" end="74285" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="74291" end="74303" title="J.K. Rowling" label="J.K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="74389" end="74408" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="74499" end="74515" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="74527" end="74547" title="The Canterbury Tales" label="The Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="74558" end="74576" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735649" start="74588" end="74602" title="Romantic Poetry" label="romantic poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="74623" end="74638" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="74640" end="74651" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="74653" end="74666" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q82104" start="74672" end="74683" title="Ian Fleming" label="Ian Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="74723" end="74738" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q260894" start="74746" end="74767" title="List of best-selling fiction authors" label="best-selling novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="74921" end="74933" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="74935" end="74949" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q127332" start="74951" end="74960" title="Charlotte Brontë" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q80137" start="74962" end="74974" title="Emily Brontë" label="Emily Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="74976" end="74988" title="Mary Shelley" label="Mary Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="74990" end="75001" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40874" start="75003" end="75016" title="Doris Lessing" label="Doris Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q140052" start="75022" end="75033" title="Zadie Smith" label="Zadie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180995" start="75036" end="75065" title="Scottish literature" label="Scotland&amp;#x27;s contributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="75074" end="75092" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="75109" end="75124" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="75127" end="75143" title="Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="75145" end="75157" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="75159" end="75181" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="75196" end="75208" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q981981" start="75224" end="75239" title="Hugh MacDiarmid" label="Hugh MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988888" start="75244" end="75256" title="Neil M. Gunn" label="Neil M. Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783150" start="75276" end="75296" title="Scottish Renaissance" label="Scottish Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q318431" start="75322" end="75332" title="Ian Rankin" label="Ian Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q312579" start="75337" end="75347" title="Iain Banks" label="Iain Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467764" start="75419" end="75437" title="City of Literature" label="City of Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q430891" start="75506" end="75516" title="Y Gododdin" label="Y Gododdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="75598" end="75605" title="Cumbric language" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="75609" end="75618" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="75664" end="75675" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="75723" end="75743" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q517287" start="75750" end="75766" title="Dafydd ap Gwilym" label="Dafydd ap Gwilym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395446" start="75857" end="75868" title="Daniel Owen" label="Daniel Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321804" start="75936" end="75946" title="Rhys Lewis (novel)" label="Rhys Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178726" start="75984" end="76001" title="Anglo-Welsh poetry" label="Anglo-Welsh poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q191023" start="76006" end="76018" title="Dylan Thomas" label="Dylan Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q725745" start="76023" end="76035" title="R. S. Thomas" label="R. S. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="76066" end="76091" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q561435" start="76158" end="76175" title="Richard Llewellyn" label="Richard Llewellyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402447" start="76180" end="76192" title="Kate Roberts (author)" label="Kate Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="76242" end="76253" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="76270" end="76277" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q483412" start="76288" end="76312" title="The Chronicles of Narnia" label="The Chronicles of Narnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="76406" end="76417" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="76419" end="76430" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="76436" end="76455" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="76572" end="76585" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="76587" end="76598" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q272855" start="76600" end="76614" title="Kazuo Ishiguro" label="Kazuo Ishiguro"/>
<link wikidata="Q44306" start="76620" end="76634" title="Salman Rushdie" label="Salman Rushdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="76640" end="76650" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="76712" end="76730" title="British Empiricism" label="British Empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116026" start="76902" end="76933" title="Scottish School of Common Sense" label="Scottish School of Common Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="76996" end="77006" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q82049" start="77008" end="77023" title="George Berkeley" label="George Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="77028" end="77038" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q218254" start="77046" end="77060" title="Dugald Stewart" label="Dugald Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q316347" start="77062" end="77073" title="Thomas Reid" label="Thomas Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15474" start="77079" end="77095" title="Sir William Hamilton, 9th Baronet" label="William Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="77221" end="77235" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="77270" end="77284" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="77298" end="77314" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197767" start="77339" end="77353" title="Utilitarianism (book)" label="Utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="77458" end="77468" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771297" start="77472" end="77479" title="Folk music of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77481" end="77486" title="Music of Wales#Folk music" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018487" start="77488" end="77496" title="Folk music of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482056" start="77502" end="77518" title="Folk music of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="77588" end="77600" title="Tudor period" label="Tudor period"/>
<link wikidata="Q207789" start="77643" end="77656" title="Thomas Tallis" label="Thomas Tallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q315353" start="77658" end="77671" title="John Taverner" label="John Taverner"/>
<link wikidata="Q208375" start="77673" end="77685" title="William Byrd" label="William Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q311913" start="77687" end="77702" title="Orlando Gibbons" label="Orlando Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q207355" start="77708" end="77720" title="John Dowland" label="John Dowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="77732" end="77750" title="Stuart Restoration" label="Stuart Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9695" start="77838" end="77851" title="Henry Purcell" label="Henry Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q309709" start="77865" end="77876" title="Thomas Arne" label="Thomas Arne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="77914" end="77936" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="77946" end="77957" title="Naturalization" label="naturalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="77958" end="77973" title="British nationality law" label="British citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q656769" start="78017" end="78033" title="Zadok the Priest" label="Zadok the Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q117760620" start="78048" end="78071" title="coronation of George II" label="coronation of George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q207732" start="78206" end="78213" title="Messiah (Handel)" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q212692" start="78302" end="78317" title="Arthur Sullivan" label="Arthur Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q348513" start="78337" end="78350" title="W. S. Gilbert" label="W. S. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260479" start="78371" end="78382" title="Savoy opera" label="Savoy opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="78385" end="78397" title="Edward Elgar" label="Edward Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="78563" end="78573" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q200867" start="78583" end="78595" title="Gustav Holst" label="Gustav Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="78597" end="78619" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="78625" end="78641" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q139223" start="78795" end="78815" title="Peter Maxwell Davies" label="Peter Maxwell Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q354335" start="78826" end="78845" title="Harrison Birtwistle" label="Harrison Birtwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q317350" start="78866" end="78878" title="John Tavener" label="John Tavener"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057829" start="78926" end="78935" title="Alfie Boe" label="Alfie Boe"/>
<link wikidata="Q322211" start="78937" end="78948" title="Bryn Terfel" label="Bryn Terfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q272581" start="78950" end="78967" title="Katherine Jenkins" label="Katherine Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q934543" start="78969" end="78981" title="Michael Ball" label="Michael Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356698" start="78983" end="79000" title="Roderick Williams" label="Roderick Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q608521" start="79002" end="79016" title="Russell Watson" label="Russell Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151814" start="79022" end="79037" title="Sarah Brightman" label="Sarah Brightman"/>
<link wikidata="Q462739" start="79045" end="79061" title="Nicola Benedetti" label="Nicola Benedetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q159978" start="79066" end="79079" title="Nigel Kennedy" label="Nigel Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="79139" end="79186" title="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians" label="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="79209" end="79218" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="79276" end="79289" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="79413" end="79424" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="79429" end="79447" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="79563" end="79574" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="79590" end="79603" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="79697" end="79707" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="79738" end="79747" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702909" start="79749" end="79758" title="raga rock" label="raga rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="79760" end="79771" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q236913" start="79773" end="79783" title="space rock" label="space rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="79785" end="79794" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="79796" end="79807" title="Gothic rock" label="Gothic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="79809" end="79825" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="79831" end="79840" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q268253" start="79870" end="79878" title="neo soul" label="neo soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="79891" end="79898" title="dubstep" label="dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055659" start="80015" end="80022" title="Stormzy" label="Stormzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q444224" start="80024" end="80028" title="Kano (rapper)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q42300439" start="80030" end="80039" title="Yxng Bane" label="Yxng Bane"/>
<link wikidata="Q47471827" start="80041" end="80045" title="Ramz (rapper)" label="Ramz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547427" start="80047" end="80058" title="Little Simz" label="Little Simz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164446" start="80064" end="80070" title="Skepta" label="Skepta"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="80146" end="80161" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="biggest-selling"/>
<link wikidata="Q64878691" start="80166" end="80219" title="Cultural impact of the Beatles" label="most influential band in the history of popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="80326" end="80336" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="80338" end="80343" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="80345" end="80357" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="80363" end="80371" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="80377" end="80387" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="80457" end="80468" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="80477" end="80480" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="BPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090324" start="80551" end="80584" title="Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music" label="Outstanding Contribution to Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="80599" end="80606" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="80608" end="80619" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="80621" end="80633" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="80635" end="80646" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="80648" end="80658" title="the Police" label="the Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="80664" end="80677" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="80783" end="80797" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="80799" end="80804" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="80806" end="80817" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="80819" end="80828" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="80830" end="80838" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q170599" start="80840" end="80854" title="Arctic Monkeys" label="Arctic Monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="80856" end="80871" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q15897" start="80873" end="80886" title="Amy Winehouse" label="Amy Winehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q83493" start="80888" end="80899" title="Susan Boyle" label="Susan Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="80901" end="80906" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q47447" start="80908" end="80918" title="Ed Sheeran" label="Ed Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q42315001" start="80920" end="80933" title="Lewis Capaldi" label="Lewis Capaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q146027" start="80935" end="80948" title="One Direction" label="One Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626966" start="80950" end="80962" title="Harry Styles" label="Harry Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q21914464" start="80968" end="80976" title="Dua Lipa" label="Dua Lipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="81209" end="81215" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275700" start="81216" end="81229" title="City of Music (UNESCO)" label="City of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="81293" end="81303" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q189045" start="81329" end="81336" title="Britpop" label="Britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="81400" end="81416" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="81436" end="81449" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q205560" start="81454" end="81462" title="trip hop" label="trip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q389435" start="81523" end="81543" title="Sound system (Jamaican)" label="Sound System Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q949318" start="81552" end="81569" title="New Age travellers" label="New Age Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="81627" end="81635" title="New Wave music" label="New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="81640" end="81649" title="Synth-pop" label="Synth-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="81669" end="81678" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="81683" end="81695" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="81729" end="81742" title="House music" label="Chicago House"/>
<link wikidata="Q526463" start="81747" end="81761" title="Detroit techno" label="Detroit Techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="81819" end="81823" title="Rave" label="Rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="81839" end="81849" title="Acid House" label="Acid House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455973" start="81929" end="81948" title="Sesame&amp;#x27;s Treet" label="Sesame&amp;#x27;s Treet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067509" start="81972" end="81978" title="Charly (song)" label="Charly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866725" start="81988" end="82002" title="Balearic beat" label="Balearic sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165777" start="82073" end="82082" title="UK Garage" label="UK Garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q780517" start="82084" end="82096" title="Speed Garage" label="Speed Garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="82098" end="82111" title="Drum and bass" label="Drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="82113" end="82119" title="Jungle music" label="Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170435" start="82121" end="82127" title="Trance music" label="Trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="82133" end="82140" title="Dubstep" label="Dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q271283" start="82193" end="82202" title="808 State" label="808 State"/>
<link wikidata="Q515942" start="82204" end="82211" title="Orbital (band)" label="Orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="82213" end="82224" title="the Prodigy" label="the Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q849429" start="82226" end="82236" title="Underworld (band)" label="Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q964002" start="82238" end="82247" title="Roni Size" label="Roni Size"/>
<link wikidata="Q277479" start="82249" end="82258" title="Leftfield" label="Leftfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q357418" start="82260" end="82274" title="Massive Attack" label="Massive Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q117522" start="82276" end="82289" title="Groove Armada" label="Groove Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q272619" start="82291" end="82302" title="Fatboy Slim" label="Fatboy Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q542071" start="82304" end="82313" title="Faithless" label="Faithless"/>
<link wikidata="Q544018" start="82315" end="82328" title="Basement Jaxx" label="Basement Jaxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q208507" start="82330" end="82347" title="Chemical Brothers" label="Chemical Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848854" start="82349" end="82358" title="Sub Focus" label="Sub Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067983" start="82360" end="82378" title="Chase &amp;amp; Status" label="Chase &amp;amp; Status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228440" start="82380" end="82390" title="Disclosure (band)" label="Disclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q81637" start="82392" end="82405" title="Calvin Harris" label="Calvin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q64009886" start="82411" end="82421" title="Fred Again" label="Fred Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710967" start="82456" end="82467" title="Judge Jules" label="Judge Jules"/>
<link wikidata="Q947180" start="82469" end="82478" title="Pete Tong" label="Pete Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q319719" start="82480" end="82488" title="Carl Cox" label="Carl Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q321339" start="82490" end="82504" title="Paul Oakenfold" label="Paul Oakenfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q303847" start="82506" end="82518" title="John Digweed" label="John Digweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q556024" start="82524" end="82529" title="Sasha (dj)" label="Sasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="82587" end="82596" title="Romanticism" label="Romantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="82597" end="82610" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="82612" end="82626" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q982251" start="82628" end="82641" title="Samuel Palmer" label="Samuel Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="82647" end="82662" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="82668" end="82676" title="portrait" label="portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q194402" start="82686" end="82705" title="Joshua Reynolds" label="Sir Joshua Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q154594" start="82710" end="82722" title="Lucian Freud" label="Lucian Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q192720" start="82746" end="82765" title="Thomas Gainsborough" label="Thomas Gainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354277" start="82770" end="82781" title="L. S. Lowry" label="L. S. Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="82802" end="82826" title="Arts and Crafts Movement" label="Arts and Crafts Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q182589" start="82827" end="82841" title="William Morris" label="William Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q154340" start="82866" end="82879" title="Francis Bacon (artist)" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="82885" end="82895" title="Pop artist" label="Pop artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q504611" start="82897" end="82908" title="Peter Blake (artist)" label="Peter Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q159465" start="82910" end="82926" title="Richard Hamilton (artist)" label="Richard Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q159907" start="82932" end="82945" title="David Hockney" label="David Hockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="82963" end="82977" title="Conceptual art" label="Conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q558276" start="82987" end="83005" title="Art &amp;amp; Language" label="Art &amp;amp; Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q684974" start="83029" end="83047" title="Gilbert and George" label="Gilbert and George"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="83053" end="83061" title="Abstract art" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q950746" start="83069" end="83083" title="Howard Hodgkin" label="Howard Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q360371" start="83103" end="83117" title="Antony Gormley" label="Antony Gormley"/>
<link wikidata="Q327293" start="83119" end="83131" title="Anish Kapoor" label="Anish Kapoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q151097" start="83137" end="83148" title="Henry Moore" label="Henry Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311497" start="83186" end="83201" title="Saatchi Gallery" label="Saatchi Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q516316" start="83315" end="83336" title="Young British Artists" label="Young British Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q294326" start="83344" end="83356" title="Damien Hirst" label="Damien Hirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077608" start="83358" end="83369" title="Chris Ofili" label="Chris Ofili"/>
<link wikidata="Q454041" start="83371" end="83387" title="Rachel Whiteread" label="Rachel Whiteread"/>
<link wikidata="Q241185" start="83389" end="83400" title="Tracey Emin" label="Tracey Emin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285270" start="83402" end="83416" title="Mark Wallinger" label="Mark Wallinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q706475" start="83418" end="83431" title="Steve McQueen (director)" label="Steve McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273122" start="83433" end="83448" title="Sam Taylor-Wood" label="Sam Taylor-Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q953124" start="83458" end="83474" title="Jake and Dinos Chapman" label="Chapman Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="83552" end="83565" title="Royal Academy" label="Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065666" start="83713" end="83742" title="University of the Arts London" label="University of the Arts London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053996" start="83763" end="83810" title="Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design" label="Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q860450" start="83815" end="83848" title="Chelsea College of Art and Design" label="Chelsea College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q528231" start="83850" end="83882" title="Goldsmiths, University of London" label="Goldsmiths, University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399299" start="83888" end="83912" title="Slade School of Fine Art" label="Slade School of Fine Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="83922" end="83947" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q748106" start="83954" end="83975" title="Glasgow School of Art" label="Glasgow School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753535" start="83981" end="84001" title="Royal College of Art" label="Royal College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761877" start="84007" end="84048" title="The Ruskin School of Drawing and Fine Art" label="The Ruskin School of Drawing and Fine Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q734266" start="84089" end="84115" title="Courtauld Institute of Art" label="Courtauld Institute of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q50641" start="84160" end="84174" title="history of art" label="history of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="84234" end="84250" title="National Gallery" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="84252" end="84277" title="National Portrait Gallery (London)" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q195436" start="84279" end="84291" title="Tate Britain" label="Tate Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="84297" end="84308" title="Tate Modern" label="Tate Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="84525" end="84541" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="84560" end="84567" title="Vertigo (film)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898121" start="84611" end="84632" title="List of films considered the best" label="best film of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q55260" start="84638" end="84648" title="David Lean" label="David Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q228186" start="84662" end="84680" title="Lawrence of Arabia (film)" label="Lawrence of Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="84771" end="84788" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q223233" start="84790" end="84800" title="Sam Mendes" label="Sam Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q706475" start="84802" end="84815" title="Steve McQueen (director)" label="Steve McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q355300" start="84817" end="84831" title="Richard Curtis" label="Richard Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134867" start="84833" end="84844" title="Danny Boyle" label="Danny Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193648" start="84846" end="84856" title="Tony Scott" label="Tony Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="84862" end="84874" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q392108" start="85061" end="85093" title="List of highest-grossing film series" label="highest-grossing film franchises"/>
<link wikidata="Q216930" start="85101" end="85113" title="Harry Potter (film series)" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q151472" start="85130" end="85140" title="James Bond (film series)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="85542" end="85559" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="BAFTA Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="85578" end="85621" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="British Academy of Film and Television Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850311" start="85938" end="85950" title="Sunday roast" label="Sunday roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865573" start="85979" end="85992" title="roasting" label="roasted joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755357" start="86041" end="86051" title="free range" label="free range"/>
<link wikidata="Q951669" start="86160" end="86177" title="Yorkshire pudding" label="Yorkshire pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q945934" start="86183" end="86188" title="gravy" label="gravy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367573" start="86222" end="86230" title="meat pie" label="meat pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="86236" end="86240" title="stew" label="stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q19316447" start="86454" end="86465" title="fine dining" label="fine dining"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="86510" end="86523" title="Michelin Star" label="Michelin Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008289" start="86668" end="86684" title="List of British desserts" label="British desserts"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="86910" end="86915" title="vegan" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="86929" end="86939" title="vegetarian" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583254" start="86961" end="86972" title="flexitarian" label="flexitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="87015" end="87029" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="87055" end="87069" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005196" start="87199" end="87217" title="Immigration to the United Kingdom since 1922" label="settled in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q654159" start="87252" end="87272" title="chicken tikka masala" label="chicken tikka masala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526883" start="87425" end="87434" title="gastropub" label="gastropub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271859" start="87518" end="87526" title="pale ale" label="pale ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543214" start="87528" end="87542" title="India pale ale" label="India pale ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q27201" start="87544" end="87550" title="bitter (beer)" label="bitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725773" start="87552" end="87561" title="brown ale" label="brown ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q954166" start="87563" end="87569" title="porter (beer)" label="porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="87575" end="87580" title="stout" label="stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="87596" end="87606" title="craft beer" label="craft beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q382947" start="87732" end="87745" title="Scotch whisky" label="Scotch whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467810" start="87747" end="87759" title="Wine from the United Kingdom" label="English wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q959362" start="87761" end="87764" title="gin" label="gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047030" start="87766" end="87771" title="perry" label="perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="87777" end="87782" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="87805" end="87808" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712877" start="88084" end="88102" title="Television licensing in the United Kingdom" label="television licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="88108" end="88125" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q779239" start="88132" end="88157" title="International broadcasting" label="international broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140604" start="88340" end="88343" title="ITV plc" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="88423" end="88434" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="88440" end="88443" title="Sky UK" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="88505" end="88515" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="88529" end="88541" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="88549" end="88574" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="&amp;quot;The Telegraph&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="88582" end="88591" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="88613" end="88628" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="88746" end="88759" title="The Spectator" label="The Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="88773" end="88786" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="88800" end="88813" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="88831" end="88842" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805379" start="88975" end="88986" title="MediaCityUK" label="MediaCityUK"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="89530" end="89540" title="Anglophone" label="Anglophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="89614" end="89632" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="highest proportion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515646" start="89713" end="89740" title="Video games in the United Kingdom" label="British video game industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q941594" start="89799" end="89824" title="List of video games markets by country" label="largest video game market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927926" start="89856" end="89863" title="Video games in Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927929" start="89932" end="89937" title="Video games in Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927939" start="89946" end="89959" title="Video games in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="89978" end="89998" title="Association football" label="Association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="90000" end="90006" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="90008" end="90020" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="90022" end="90031" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="90033" end="90044" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="90046" end="90058" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q270102" start="90060" end="90072" title="rugby sevens" label="rugby sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="90074" end="90078" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="90080" end="90086" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="90088" end="90095" title="netball" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="90097" end="90107" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="90109" end="90121" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324916" start="90123" end="90132" title="English billiards" label="billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q131471" start="90134" end="90139" title="darts" label="darts"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="90141" end="90147" title="Rowing (sport)" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="90149" end="90157" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="90163" end="90170" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="90315" end="90332" title="Victorian Britain" label="Victorian Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="90429" end="90433" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="90478" end="90498" title="Football Association" label="Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q506630" start="90535" end="90552" title="Laws of the Game (association football)" label="rules of football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425484" start="90578" end="90598" title="Ebenezer Cobb Morley" label="Ebenezer Cobb Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040745" start="90612" end="90624" title="Home Nations" label="Home Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756477" start="90726" end="90739" title="league system" label="league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q503218" start="90792" end="90832" title="International Football Association Board" label="International Football Association Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="90879" end="90893" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="91001" end="91008" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="91013" end="91021" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="91062" end="91067" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="91073" end="91089" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="91258" end="91270" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555312" start="91294" end="91319" title="1871 England versus Scotland rugby union match" label="first rugby international"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="91356" end="91363" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="91368" end="91376" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="91397" end="91402" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="91404" end="91411" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q518116" start="91413" end="91419" title="France national rugby union team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q113135" start="91425" end="91430" title="Italy national rugby union team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642" start="91446" end="91470" title="Six Nations Championship" label="Six Nations Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485448" start="91558" end="91581" title="Sports governing bodies" label="Sports governing bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582413" start="91585" end="91592" title="Rugby union in England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174899" start="91594" end="91602" title="Rugby union in Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361101" start="91604" end="91609" title="Rugby union in Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q654217" start="91615" end="91622" title="Rugby union in Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q733600" start="91735" end="91758" title="British and Irish Lions" label="British and Irish Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="91844" end="91864" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8111" start="91868" end="91872" title="1908 Summer Olympics" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q8403" start="91874" end="91878" title="1948 Summer Olympics" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="91884" end="91888" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630396" start="91972" end="91995" title="2022 Commonwealth Games" label="2022 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="92016" end="92045" title="Countries of the United Kingdom" label="country of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="92057" end="92075" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q83278" start="92183" end="92209" title="flag of the United Kingdom" label="flag of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="92217" end="92227" title="Union Flag" label="Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q171117" start="92319" end="92334" title="flag of England" label="flag of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="92349" end="92361" title="Saint George" label="Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q102392" start="92370" end="92386" title="flag of Scotland" label="flag of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="92401" end="92413" title="Saint Andrew" label="Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585890" start="92460" end="92485" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Flag" label="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="92736" end="92751" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="92783" end="92800" title="God Save the King" label="God Save the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q138396" start="92910" end="92919" title="Britannia" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142281" start="92925" end="92949" title="national personification" label="national personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="92990" end="93003" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065409" start="93012" end="93036" title="The Lion and the Unicorn" label="The Lion and the Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745280" start="93045" end="93051" title="Welsh Dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38383" start="93069" end="93076" title="bulldog" label="bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q742971" start="93214" end="93223" title="John Bull" label="John Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063565" start="93226" end="93233" title="National symbols of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q797680" start="93235" end="93240" title="National symbols of Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q975950" start="93246" end="93254" title="National symbols of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984333" start="93325" end="93341" title="National symbols of Ireland, the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="93394" end="93413" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112788" start="93433" end="93462" title="Outline of the United Kingdom" label="Outline of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112251" start="93466" end="93484" title="Outline of England" label="Outline of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112393" start="93488" end="93515" title="Outline of Northern Ireland" label="Outline of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112444" start="93519" end="93538" title="Outline of Scotland" label="Outline of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112513" start="93542" end="93558" title="Outline of Wales" label="Outline of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247838" start="93561" end="93601" title="Index of United Kingdom-related articles" label="Index of United Kingdom-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055118" start="93604" end="93648" title="International rankings of the United Kingdom" label="International rankings of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004498" start="93651" end="93687" title="Historiography of the United Kingdom" label="Historiography of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774533" start="93690" end="93726" title="Historiography of the British Empire" label="Historiography of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969762" start="93729" end="93776" title="United Kingdom–Crown Dependencies Customs Union" label="United Kingdom–Crown Dependencies Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="93851" end="93859" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="93884" end="93902" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="93910" end="93937" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="94078" end="94099" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31718" wikidata="Q131156" url="?curid=31718" title="Utopia">
<text>A utopia ( ) typically describes an imagined community or society that possesses highly desirable or near-perfect qualities for its members. It was coined by Sir Thomas More for his 1516 book &quot;Utopia&quot;, which describes a fictional island society in the New World.

Hypothetical utopias focus on, among other things, equality in categories such as economics, government and justice, with the method and structure of proposed implementation varying according to ideology. Lyman Tower Sargent argues that the nature of a utopia is inherently contradictory because societies are not homogeneous and have desires which conflict and therefore cannot simultaneously be satisfied. To quote:
The opposite of a utopia is a dystopia. Utopian and dystopian fiction has become a popular literary category. Despite being common parlance for something imaginary, utopianism inspired and was inspired by some reality-based fields and concepts such as architecture, file sharing, social networks, universal basic income, communes, open borders and even pirate bases.

==Etymology and history==
The word was coined in 1516 from Ancient Greek by the Englishman Sir Thomas More for his Latin text &quot;Utopia&quot;. It literally translates as &quot;no place&quot;, coming from the (&quot;not&quot;) and τόπος (&quot;place&quot;), and meant any non-existent society, when &#x27;described in considerable detail&#x27;. However, in standard usage, the word&#x27;s meaning has shifted and now usually describes a non-existent society that is intended to be viewed &quot;as considerably better&quot; than contemporary society.

In his original work, More carefully pointed out the similarity of the word to &quot;eutopia&quot;, meaning &quot;good place&quot;, from (&quot;good&quot; or &quot;well&quot;) and τόπος (&quot;place&quot;), which ostensibly would be the more appropriate term for the concept in modern English. The pronunciations of &quot;eutopia&quot; and &quot;utopia&quot; in English are identical, which may have given rise to the change in meaning. &quot;Dystopia&quot;, a term meaning &quot;bad place&quot; coined in 1868, draws on this latter meaning. The opposite of a utopia, &quot;dystopia&quot; is a concept which surpassed &quot;utopia&quot; in popularity in the fictional literature from the 1950s onwards, chiefly because of the impact of George Orwell&#x27;s &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;.

In 1876, writer Charles Renouvier published a novel called &quot;Uchronia&quot; (French &quot;Uchronie&quot;). The neologism, using &quot;chronos&quot; instead of &quot;topos&quot;, has since been used to refer to non-existent idealized times in fiction, such as Philip Roth&#x27;s &quot;The Plot Against America&quot; (2004)&quot;,&quot; and Philip K. Dick&#x27;s &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; (1962)&quot;.&quot;

According to the &quot;Philosophical Dictionary&quot;, proto-utopian ideas begin as early as the period of ancient Greece and Rome, medieval heretics, peasant revolts and establish themselves in the period of the early capitalism, reformation and Renaissance (Hus, Müntzer, More, Campanella), democratic revolutions (Meslier, Morelly, Mably, Winstanley, later Babeufists, Blanquists,) and in a period of turbulent development of capitalism that highlighted antagonisms of capitalist society (Saint-Simon, Fourier, Owen, Cabet, Lamennais, Proudhon and their followers).

==Definitions and interpretations==
Famous quotes from writers and characters about utopia:
* &quot;There is nothing like a dream to create the future. Utopia to-day, flesh and blood tomorrow.&quot; —Victor Hugo
* &quot;A map of the world that does not include Utopia is not worth even glancing at, for it leaves out the one country at which Humanity is always landing. And when Humanity lands there, it looks out, and, seeing a better country, sets sail. Progress is the realisation of Utopias.&quot; —Oscar Wilde
* &quot;Utopias are often only premature truths.&quot; —Alphonse de Lamartine
* &quot;None of the abstract concepts comes closer to fulfilled utopia than that of eternal peace.&quot; —Theodor W. Adorno
* &quot;I think that there is always a part of utopia in any romantic relationship.&quot; —Pedro Almodovar
* &quot;In ourselves alone the absolute light keeps shining, a sigillum falsi et sui, mortis et vitae aeternae [false signal and signal of eternal life and death itself], and the fantastic move to it begins: to the external interpretation of the daydream, the cosmic manipulation of a concept that is utopian in principle.&quot; —Ernst Bloch
* &quot;When I die, I want to die in a Utopia that I have helped to build.&quot; —Henry Kuttner
* &quot;A man must be far gone in Utopian speculations who can seriously doubt that if these [United] States should either be wholly disunited, or only united in partial confederacies, the subdivisions into which they might be thrown would have frequent and violent contests with each other.&quot; —Alexander Hamilton, &quot;Federalist&quot; No. 6.
* &quot;Most dictionaries associate utopia with ideal commonwealths, which they characterize as an empirical realization of an ideal life in an ideal society. Utopias, especially social utopias, are associated with the idea of social justice.&quot; – Lukáš Perný
*&quot;We are all utopians, so soon as we wish for something different.&quot; – Henri Lefebvre
*&quot;Every daring attempt to make a great change in existing conditions, every lofty vision of new possibilities for the human race, has been labeled Utopian.&quot; –Emma Goldman

Utopian socialist Étienne Cabet in his utopian book &quot;The Voyage to Icaria&quot; cited the definition from the contemporary &quot;Dictionary of ethical and political sciences&quot;:
Marx and Engels used the word &quot;utopia&quot; to denote unscientific social theories.

Philosopher Slavoj Žižek told about utopia:
Philosopher Milan Šimečka said:

Philosopher Richard Stahel said:

==Varieties==
Chronologically, the first recorded Utopian proposal is Plato&#x27;s &quot;Republic&quot;. Part conversation, part fictional depiction and part policy proposal, &quot;Republic&quot; would categorize citizens into a rigid class structure of &quot;golden,&quot; &quot;silver,&quot; &quot;bronze&quot; and &quot;iron&quot; socioeconomic classes. The golden citizens are trained in a rigorous 50-year-long educational program to be benign oligarchs, the &quot;philosopher-kings.&quot; Plato stressed this structure many times in statements, and in his published works, such as the &quot;Republic&quot;. The wisdom of these rulers will supposedly eliminate poverty and deprivation through fairly distributed resources, though the details on how to do this are unclear. The educational program for the rulers is the central notion of the proposal. It has few laws, no lawyers and rarely sends its citizens to war but hires mercenaries from among its war-prone neighbors. These mercenaries were deliberately sent into dangerous situations in the hope that the more warlike populations of all surrounding countries will be weeded out, leaving peaceful peoples to remain.

During the 16th century, Thomas More&#x27;s book &quot;Utopia&quot; proposed an ideal society of the same name. Readers, including Utopian socialists, have chosen to accept this imaginary society as the realistic blueprint for a working nation, while others have postulated that Thomas More intended nothing of the sort. It is believed that More&#x27;s &quot;Utopia&quot; functions only on the level of a satire, a work intended to reveal more about the England of his time than about an idealistic society. This interpretation is bolstered by the title of the book and nation and its apparent confusion between the Greek for &quot;no place&quot; and &quot;good place&quot;: &quot;utopia&quot; is a compound of the syllable ou-, meaning &quot;no&quot; and topos, meaning place. But the homophonic prefix eu-, meaning &quot;good,&quot; also resonates in the word, with the implication that the perfectly &quot;good place&quot; is really &quot;no place.&quot;

==Mythical and religious utopias==
In many cultures, societies, and religions, there is some myth or memory of a distant past when humankind lived in a primitive and simple state but at the same time one of perfect happiness and fulfillment. In those days, the various myths tell us, there was an instinctive harmony between humanity and nature. People&#x27;s needs were few and their desires limited. Both were easily satisfied by the abundance provided by nature. Accordingly, there were no motives whatsoever for war or oppression. Nor was there any need for hard and painful work. Humans were simple and pious and felt themselves close to their God or gods. According to one anthropological theory, hunter-gatherers were the original affluent society.

These mythical or religious archetypes are inscribed in many cultures and resurge with special vitality when people are in difficult and critical times. However, in utopias, the projection of the myth does not take place towards the remote past but either towards the future or towards distant and fictional places, imagining that at some time in the future, at some point in space, or beyond death, there must exist the possibility of living happily.

In the United States and Europe, during the Second Great Awakening (ca. 1790–1840) and thereafter, many radical religious groups formed utopian societies in which faith could govern all aspects of members&#x27; lives. These utopian societies included the Shakers, who originated in England in the 18th century and arrived in America in 1774. A number of religious utopian societies from Europe came to the United States in the 18th and 19th centuries, including the Society of the Woman in the Wilderness (led by Johannes Kelpius (1667–1708), the Ephrata Cloister (established in 1732) and the Harmony Society, among others. The Harmony Society was a Christian theosophy and pietist group founded in Iptingen, Germany, in 1785. Due to religious persecution by the Lutheran Church and the government in Württemberg, the society moved to the United States on October 7, 1803, settling in Pennsylvania. On February 15, 1805, about 400 followers formally organized the Harmony Society, placing all their goods in common. The group lasted until 1905, making it one of the longest-running financially successful communes in American history.

The Oneida Community, founded by John Humphrey Noyes in Oneida, New York, was a utopian religious commune that lasted from 1848 to 1881. Although this utopian experiment has become better known today for its manufacture of Oneida silverware, it was one of the longest-running communes in American history. The Amana Colonies were communal settlements in Iowa, started by radical German pietists, which lasted from 1855 to 1932. The Amana Corporation, manufacturer of refrigerators and household appliances, was originally started by the group. Other examples are Fountain Grove (founded in 1875), Riker&#x27;s Holy City and other Californian utopian colonies between 1855 and 1955 (Hine), as well as Sointula in British Columbia, Canada. The Amish and Hutterites can also be considered an attempt towards religious utopia. A wide variety of intentional communities with some type of faith-based ideas have also started across the world.

Anthropologist Richard Sosis examined 200 communes in the 19th-century United States, both religious and secular (mostly utopian socialist). 39 percent of the religious communes were still functioning 20 years after their founding while only 6 percent of the secular communes were. The number of costly sacrifices that a religious commune demanded from its members had a linear effect on its longevity, while in secular communes demands for costly sacrifices did not correlate with longevity and the majority of the secular communes failed within 8 years. Sosis cites anthropologist Roy Rappaport in arguing that rituals and laws are more effective when sacralized. Social psychologist Jonathan Haidt cites Sosis&#x27;s research in his 2012 book &quot;The Righteous Mind&quot; as the best evidence that religion is an adaptive solution to the free-rider problem by enabling cooperation without kinship. Evolutionary medicine researcher Randolph M. Nesse and theoretical biologist Mary Jane West-Eberhard have argued instead that because humans with altruistic tendencies are preferred as social partners they receive fitness advantages by social selection, with Nesse arguing further that social selection enabled humans as a species to become extraordinarily cooperative and capable of creating culture.

The Book of Revelation in the Christian Bible depicts an eschatological time with the defeat of Satan, of Evil and of Sin. The main difference compared to the Old Testament promises is that such a defeat also has an ontological value: &quot;Then I saw &#x27;a new heaven and a new earth,&#x27; for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and there was no longer any sea...&#x27;He will wipe every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death&#x27; or mourning or crying or pain, for the old order of things has passed away&quot; and no longer just gnosiological (Isaiah: &quot;See, I will create/new heavens and a new earth./The former things will not be remembered,/nor will they come to mind&quot;. Narrow interpretation of the text depicts Heaven on Earth or a Heaven brought to Earth without sin. Daily and mundane details of this new Earth, where God and Jesus rule, remain unclear, although it is implied to be similar to the biblical Garden of Eden. Some theological philosophers believe that heaven will not be a physical realm but instead an incorporeal place for souls.

===Golden Age===

The Greek poet Hesiod, around the 8th century BC, in his compilation of the mythological tradition (the poem &quot;Works and Days&quot;), explained that, prior to the present era, there were four other progressively less perfect ones, the oldest of which was the Golden Age.

===Scheria===

Perhaps the oldest Utopia of which we know, as pointed out many years ago by Moses Finley, is Homer&#x27;s Scheria, island of the Phaeacians. A mythical place, often equated with classical Corcyra, (modern Corfu/Kerkyra), where Odysseus was washed ashore after 10 years of storm-tossed wandering and escorted to the King&#x27;s palace by his daughter Nausicaa. With stout walls, a stone temple and good harbours, it is perhaps the &#x27;ideal&#x27; Greek colony, a model for those founded from the middle of the 8th Century onward. A land of plenty, home to expert mariners (with the self-navigating ships), and skilled craftswomen who live in peace under their king&#x27;s rule and fear no strangers.

Plutarch, the Greek historian and biographer of the 1st century, dealt with the blissful and mythic past of humanity.

===Arcadia===

From Sir Philip Sidney&#x27;s prose romance &quot;The Old Arcadia&quot; (1580), originally a region in the Peloponnesus, Arcadia became a synonym for any rural area that serves as a pastoral setting, a &quot;locus amoenus&quot; (&quot;delightful place&quot;).

===The Biblical Garden of Eden===

The Biblical Garden of Eden as depicted in the Old Testament Bible&#x27;s Book of Genesis 2 (Authorized Version of 1611):

According to the exegesis that the biblical theologian Herbert Haag proposes in the book &quot;Is original sin in Scripture?&quot;, published soon after the Second Vatican Council, Genesis 2:25 would indicate that Adam and Eve were created from the beginning naked of the divine grace, an originary grace that, then, they would never have had and even less would have lost due to the subsequent events narrated. On the other hand, while supporting a continuity in the Bible about the absence of preternatural gifts () with regard to the ophitic event, Haag never makes any reference to the discontinuity of the loss of access to the tree of life.

===The Land of Cockaigne===

The Land of Cockaigne (also Cockaygne, Cokaygne), was an imaginary land of idleness and luxury, famous in medieval stories and the subject of several poems, one of which, an early translation of a 13th-century French work, is given in George Ellis&#x27; &quot;Specimens of Early English Poets&quot;. In this, &quot;the houses were made of barley sugar and cakes, the streets were paved with pastry and the shops supplied goods for nothing.&quot; London has been so called (see Cockney) but Boileau applies the same to Paris. Schlaraffenland is an analogous German tradition. All these myths also express some hope that the idyllic state of affairs they describe is not irretrievably and irrevocably lost to mankind, that it can be regained in some way or other.

One way might be a quest for an &quot;earthly paradise&quot; – a place like Shangri-La, hidden in the Tibetan mountains and described by James Hilton in his utopian novel &quot;Lost Horizon&quot; (1933). Christopher Columbus followed directly in this tradition in his belief that he had found the Garden of Eden when, towards the end of the 15th century, he first encountered the New World and its indigenous inhabitants.

===The Peach Blossom Spring===
The &quot;Peach Blossom Spring&quot; (), a prose piece written by the Chinese poet Tao Yuanming, describes a utopian place. The narrative goes that a fisherman from Wuling sailed upstream a river and came across a beautiful blossoming peach grove and lush green fields covered with blossom petals. Entranced by the beauty, he continued upstream and stumbled onto a small grotto when he reached the end of the river. Though narrow at first, he was able to squeeze through the passage and discovered an ethereal utopia, where the people led an ideal existence in harmony with nature. He saw a vast expanse of fertile lands, clear ponds, mulberry trees, bamboo groves and the like with a community of people of all ages and houses in neat rows. The people explained that their ancestors escaped to this place during the civil unrest of the Qin dynasty and they themselves had not left since or had contact with anyone from the outside. They had not even heard of the later dynasties of bygone times or the then-current Jin dynasty. In the story, the community was secluded and unaffected by the troubles of the outside world.

The sense of timelessness was predominant in the story as a perfect utopian community remains unchanged, that is, it had no decline nor the need to improve. Eventually, the Chinese term &quot;Peach Blossom Spring&quot; came to be synonymous for the concept of utopia.

===Datong===

Datong() is a traditional Chinese Utopia. The main description of it is found in the Chinese Classic of Rites, in the chapter called &quot;Li Yun&quot;(). Later, Datong and its ideal of &#x27;The World Belongs to Everyone/The World is Held in Common&#x27; Tianxia weigong() influenced modern Chinese reformers and revolutionaries, such as Kang Youwei.

===Ketumati===

It is said, once Maitreya is reborn into the future kingdom of Ketumati, a utopian age will commence. The city is described in Buddhism as a domain filled with palaces made of gems and surrounded by Kalpavriksha trees producing goods. During its years, none of the inhabitants of Jambudvipa will need to take part in cultivation and hunger will no longer exist.

==Modern utopias==
In the 21st century, discussions around utopia for some authors include post-scarcity economics, late capitalism, and universal basic income; for example, the &quot;human capitalism&quot; utopia envisioned in &quot;Utopia for Realists&quot; (Rutger Bregman 2016) includes a universal basic income and a 15-hour workweek, along with open borders.

Scandinavian nations, which as of 2019 ranked at the top of the World Happiness Report, are sometimes cited as modern utopias, although British author Michael Booth has called that a myth and wrote a 2014 book about the Nordic countries.

===Economics===

Particularly in the early 19th century, several utopian ideas arose, often in response to the belief that social disruption was created and caused by the development of commercialism and capitalism. These ideas are often grouped in a greater &quot;utopian socialist&quot; movement, due to their shared characteristics. A once common characteristic is an egalitarian distribution of goods, frequently with the total abolition of money. Citizens only do work which they enjoy and which is for the common good, leaving them with ample time for the cultivation of the arts and sciences. One classic example of such a utopia appears in Edward Bellamy&#x27;s 1888 novel &quot;Looking Backward&quot;. William Morris depicts another socialist utopia in his 1890 novel &quot;News from Nowhere&quot;, written partially in response to the top-down (bureaucratic) nature of Bellamy&#x27;s utopia, which Morris criticized. However, as the socialist movement developed, it moved away from utopianism; Marx in particular became a harsh critic of earlier socialism which he described as &quot;utopian&quot;. (For more information, see the History of Socialism article.) In a materialist utopian society, the economy is perfect; there is no inflation and only perfect social and financial equality exists.

Edward Gibbon Wakefield&#x27;s utopian theorizing on systematic colonial settlement policy in the early-19th century also centred on economic considerations, but with a view to preserving class distinctions;
Wakefield influenced several colonies founded in New Zealand and Australia in the 1830s, 1840s and 1850s.

In 1905, H. G. Wells published &quot;A Modern Utopia&quot;, which was widely read and admired and provoked much discussion. Also consider Eric Frank Russell&#x27;s book &quot;The Great Explosion&quot; (1963), the last section of which details an economic and social utopia. This forms the first mention of the idea of Local Exchange Trading Systems (LETS).

During the &quot;Khrushchev Thaw&quot; period, the Soviet writer Ivan Efremov produced the science-fiction utopia &quot;Andromeda&quot; (1957) in which a major cultural thaw took place: humanity communicates with a galaxy-wide Great Circle and develops its technology and culture within a social framework characterized by vigorous competition between alternative philosophies.

The English political philosopher James Harrington (1611–1677), author of the utopian work &quot;The Commonwealth of Oceana&quot;, published in 1656, inspired English country-party republicanism (1680s to 1740s) and became influential in the design of three American colonies. His theories ultimately contributed to the idealistic principles of the American Founders. The colonies of Carolina (founded in 1670), Pennsylvania (founded in 1681), and Georgia (founded in 1733) were the only three English colonies in America that were planned as utopian societies with an integrated physical, economic and social design. At the heart of the plan for Georgia was a concept of &quot;agrarian equality&quot; in which land was allocated equally and additional land acquisition through purchase or inheritance was prohibited; the plan was an early step toward the yeoman republic later envisioned by Thomas Jefferson.

The communes of the 1960s in the United States often represented an attempt to greatly improve the way humans live together in communities. The back-to-the-land movements and hippies inspired many to try to live in peace and harmony on farms or in remote areas and to set up new types of governance. Communes like Kaliflower, which existed between 1967 and 1973, attempted to live outside of society&#x27;s norms and to create their own ideal communalist society.

People all over the world organized and built intentional communities with the hope of developing a better way of living together. Many of these intentional communities are relatively small. Many intentional communities have a population close to 100, with many possibly exceeding this number. While this may seem large, it is pretty small in comparison to the rest of society. From the small populations, it is apparent that people do not prefer this kind of living. While many of these new small communities failed, some continue to grow, such as the religion-based Twelve Tribes, which started in the United States in 1972. Since its inception, it has grown into many groups around the world. Similarly, a commune called Brook Farm established itself in 1841. Founded by Charles Fourier&#x27;s visions of Utopia, they attempted to recreate his idea of a central building in society called the Phalanx. Unfortunately, this commune could not sustain itself and failed after only six years of operation. They wanted to stay open for longer, but they could not afford it. Their goal, however, was very similar to that of Utopia: to lead a more wholesome and simpler life than the atmosphere of pressure surrounding society at the time. It is clear that despite ambition, it is difficult for communes to stay in operation for very long.

===Science and technology===
Though Francis Bacon&#x27;s &quot;New Atlantis&quot; is imbued with a scientific spirit, scientific and technological utopias tend to be based in the future, when it is believed that advanced science and technology will allow utopian living standards; for example, the absence of death and suffering; changes in human nature and the human condition. Technology has affected the way humans have lived to such an extent that normal functions, like sleep, eating or even reproduction, have been replaced by artificial means. Other examples include a society where humans have struck a balance with technology and it is merely used to enhance the human living condition (e.g. &quot;Star Trek&quot;). In place of the static perfection of a utopia, libertarian transhumanists envision an &quot;extropia&quot;, an open, evolving society allowing individuals and voluntary groupings to form the institutions and social forms they prefer.

Mariah Utsawa presented a theoretical basis for technological utopianism and set out to develop a variety of technologies ranging from maps to designs for cars and houses which might lead to the development of such a utopia. In his book &quot;Deep Utopia: Life and Meaning in a Solved World&quot;, philosopher Nick Bostrom explores what to do in a &quot;solved world&quot;, assuming that human civilization safely builds machine superintelligence and manages to solve its political, coordination and fairness problems. He outlines some technologies considered physically possible at technological maturity, such as cognitive enhancement, reversal of aging, self-replicating spacecrafts, arbitrary sensory inputs (taste, sound...), or the precise control of motivation, mood, well-being and personality.

One notable example of a technological and libertarian socialist utopia is Scottish author Iain Banks&#x27; Culture.

Opposing this optimistic perspective are scenarios where advanced science and technology will, through deliberate misuse or accident, cause environmental damage or even humanity&#x27;s extinction. Critics, such as Jacques Ellul and Timothy Mitchell advocate precautions against the premature embrace of new technologies. Both raise questions about changing responsibility and freedom brought by division of labour. Authors such as John Zerzan and Derrick Jensen consider that modern technology is progressively depriving humans of their autonomy and advocate the collapse of the industrial civilization, in favor of small-scale organization, as a necessary path to avoid the threat of technology on human freedom and sustainability.

There are many examples of techno-dystopias portrayed in mainstream culture, such as the classics &quot;Brave New World&quot; and &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four,&quot; often published as &quot;1984&quot;, which have explored some of these topics.

===Ecological===

Ecological utopian society describes new ways in which society should relate to nature. &quot;&quot; from 1975 by Ernest Callenbach was one of the first influential ecological utopian novels. Richard Grove&#x27;s book &quot;Green Imperialism: Colonial Expansion, Tropical Island Edens and the Origins of Environmentalism 1600–1860&quot; from 1995 suggested the roots of ecological utopian thinking. Grove&#x27;s book sees early environmentalism as a result of the impact of utopian tropical islands on European data-driven scientists. The works on ecological eutopia perceive a widening gap between the modern Western way of living that destroys nature and a more traditional way of living before industrialization. Ecological utopias may advocate a society that is more sustainable. According to the Dutch philosopher Marius de Geus, ecological utopias could be inspirational sources for movements involving green politics.

===Feminism===

Utopias have been used to explore the ramifications of genders being either a societal construct or a biologically &quot;hard-wired&quot; imperative or some mix of the two. Socialist and economic utopias have tended to take the &quot;woman question&quot; seriously and often to offer some form of equality between the sexes as part and parcel of their vision, whether this be by addressing misogyny, reorganizing society along separatist lines, creating a certain kind of androgynous equality that ignores gender or in some other manner. For example, Edward Bellamy&#x27;s &quot;Looking Backward&quot; (1887) responded, progressively for his day, to the contemporary women&#x27;s suffrage and women&#x27;s rights movements. Bellamy supported these movements by incorporating the equality of women and men into his utopian world&#x27;s structure, albeit by consigning women to a separate sphere of light industrial activity (due to women&#x27;s lesser physical strength) and making various exceptions for them in order to make room for (and to praise) motherhood. One of the earlier feminist utopias that imagines complete separatism is Charlotte Perkins Gilman&#x27;s &quot;Herland&quot; (1915).

In science fiction and technological speculation, gender can be challenged on the biological as well as the social level. Marge Piercy&#x27;s &quot;Woman on the Edge of Time&quot; portrays equality between the genders and complete equality in sexuality (regardless of the gender of the lovers). Birth-giving, often felt as the divider that cannot be avoided in discussions of women&#x27;s rights and roles, has been shifted onto elaborate biological machinery that functions to offer an enriched embryonic experience. When a child is born, it spends most of its time in the children&#x27;s ward with peers. Three &quot;mothers&quot; per child are the norm and they are chosen in a gender neutral way (men as well as women may become &quot;mothers&quot;) on the basis of their experience and ability. Technological advances also make possible the freeing of women from childbearing in Shulamith Firestone&#x27;s &quot;The Dialectic of Sex&quot;. The fictional aliens in Mary Gentle&#x27;s &quot;Golden Witchbreed&quot; start out as gender-neutral children and do not develop into men and women until puberty and gender has no bearing on social roles. In contrast, Doris Lessing&#x27;s &quot;The Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five&quot; (1980) suggests that men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s values are inherent to the sexes and cannot be changed, making a compromise between them essential. In &quot;My Own Utopia&quot; (1961) by Elizabeth Mann Borghese, gender exists but is dependent upon age rather than sex – genderless children mature into women, some of whom eventually become men. &quot;William Marston&#x27;s Wonder Woman comics of the 1940s featured Paradise Island, also known as Themyscira, a matriarchal all-female community of peace, loving submission, bondage and giant space kangaroos.&quot;

Utopian single-gender worlds or single-sex societies have long been one of the primary ways to explore implications of gender and gender-differences. In speculative fiction, female-only worlds have been imagined to come about by the action of disease that wipes out men, along with the development of technological or mystical method that allow female parthenogenic reproduction. Charlotte Perkins Gilman&#x27;s 1915 novel approaches this type of separate society. Many feminist utopias pondering separatism were written in the 1970s, as a response to the Lesbian separatist movement; examples include Joanna Russ&#x27;s &quot;The Female Man&quot; and Suzy McKee Charnas&#x27;s &quot;Walk to the End of the World&quot; and &quot;Motherlines&quot;. Utopias imagined by male authors have often included equality between sexes, rather than separation, although as noted Bellamy&#x27;s strategy includes a certain amount of &quot;separate but equal&quot;. The use of female-only worlds allows the exploration of female independence and freedom from patriarchy. The societies may be lesbian, such as &quot;Daughters of a Coral Dawn&quot; by Katherine V. Forrest or not, and may not be sexual at all – a famous early sexless example being &quot;Herland&quot; (1915) by Charlotte Perkins Gilman. Charlene Ball writes in &quot;Women&#x27;s Studies Encyclopedia&quot; that use of speculative fiction to explore gender roles in future societies has been more common in the United States compared to Europe and elsewhere, although such efforts as Gerd Brantenberg&#x27;s &quot;Egalia&#x27;s Daughters&quot; and Christa Wolf&#x27;s portrayal of the land of Colchis in her &quot;Medea: Voices &quot;are certainly as influential and famous as any of the American feminist utopias.

===Urban Design===
Walter Elias Disney&#x27;s original EPCOT (concept) (Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow), Paolo Soleri&#x27;s Arcosanti, and Saudi Prince Mohammed bin Salman&#x27;s Neom are examples of Utopian city design.

== Critical Utopia ==
Critical utopia is a theory conceptualised by literary theorist Tom Moylan. In contrast with utopianism, critical utopia rejects utopia. The idea is highly self-referential and uses the idea of utopia to advance society while critiquing it simultaneously. A problem with utopianism is identified: it has limitations since the imagined utopia is significantly distant from current society. Utopia also fails to acknowledge the differences between people that result in differences in experience. Moylan explains that &quot;[critical utopias] ultimately refer to something other than a predictable alternative paradigm, for at their core they identify self-critical utopian discourse itself as a process that can tear apart the dominant ideological web. Here, then, critical utopian discourse becomes a seditious expression of social change and popular sovereignty carried on in a permanently open process of envisioning what is not yet.&quot;

==See also==
*List of utopian literature
*New world order (Baháʼí)
*Nutopia
*Utopia (disambiguation)
*&quot;Utopia for Realists&quot;
*Utopian and dystopian fiction

==Notes==
; Bundled references
==References==
* Living in the Future: Utopianism and the Long Civil Rights Movement (2022) by Victoria Wolcott
* &quot;Utopia: Music album&quot; (2023), by Travis Scott.
* &quot;Utopia: The History of an Idea&quot; (2020), by Gregory Claeys. London: Thames &amp; Hudson.
*&quot;Two Kinds of Utopia&quot;, (1912) by Vladimir Lenin. 
*&quot;Development of Socialism from Utopia to Science&quot; (1870?) by Friedrich Engels.
*&quot;Ideology and Utopia: an Introduction to the Sociology of Knowledge&quot; (1936), by Karl Mannheim, translated by Louis Wirth and Edward Shils. New York, Harcourt, Brace. See original, &quot;Ideologie Und Utopie&quot;, Bonn: Cohen. 
* &quot;History and Utopia&quot; (1960), by Emil Cioran.
*&quot;Utopian Thought in the Western World&quot; (1979), by Frank E. Manuel &amp; Fritzie Manuel. Oxford: Blackwell. 
*&quot;California&#x27;s Utopian Colonies&quot; (1983), by Robert V. Hine. University of California Press. 
*&quot;The Principle of Hope&quot; (1986), by Ernst Bloch. See original, 1937–41, &quot;Das Prinzip Hoffnung&quot;
*&quot;Demand the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagination&quot; (1986) by Tom Moylan. London: Methuen, 1986.
*&quot;Utopia and Anti-utopia in Modern Times&quot; (1987), by Krishnan Kumar. Oxford: Blackwell. 
*&quot;The Concept of Utopia&quot; (1990), by Ruth Levitas. London: Allan.
*&quot;Utopianism&quot; (1991), by Krishnan Kumar. Milton Keynes: Open University Press. 
*&quot;La storia delle utopie&quot; (1996), by Massimo Baldini. Roma: Armando. 
*&quot;The Utopia Reader&quot; (1999), edited by Gregory Claeys and Lyman Tower Sargent. New York: New York University Press.
*&quot;Spirit of Utopia&quot; (2000), by Ernst Bloch. See original, &quot;Geist Der Utopie&quot;, 1923.
*&quot;Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions&quot; (2005) by Fredric Jameson. London: Verso.
*&quot;Utopianism: A Very Short Introduction&quot; (2010), by Lyman Tower Sargent. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
*&quot;Defined by a Hollow: Essays on Utopia, Science Fiction and Political Epistemology&quot; (2010) by Darko Suvin. Frankfurt am Main, Oxford and Bern: Peter Lang.
*&quot;Existential Utopia: New Perspectives on Utopian Thought&quot; (2011), edited by Patricia Vieira and Michael Marder. London &amp; New York: Continuum. 
*&quot;Galt&#x27;s Gulch: Ayn Rand&#x27;s Utopian Delusion&quot; (2012), by Alan Clardy. &quot;Utopian Studies&quot; 23, 238–262. 
*&quot;The Nationality of Utopia: H. G. Wells, England, and the World State&quot; (2020), by Maxim Shadurski. New York and London: Routledge. 
*&quot;Utopia as a World Model: The Boundaries and Borderlands of a Literary Phenomenon&quot; (2016), by Maxim Shadurski. Siedlce: IKR[i]BL. .
*&quot;An Ecotopian Lexicon&quot; (2019), edited by Matthew Schneider-Mayerson and Brent Ryan Bellamy. University of Minnesota Press. .

==External links==


* Utopia – The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition, 2001
* Intentional Communities Directory
* History of 15 Finnish utopian settlements in Africa, the Americas, Asia, Australia and Europe.
* Utopias – a learning resource from the British Library
* Review of Ehud Ben ZVI, Ed. (2006). Utopia and Dystopia in Prophetic Literature. Helsinki: The Finnish Exegetical Society. A collection of articles on the issue of utopia and dystopia.
* The story of Utopias Mumford, Lewis
* North America
* Europe
*&quot;Utopian Studies&quot; academic journal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="2" end="8" title="Utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="45" end="54" title="community" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="58" end="65" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="158" end="173" title="Sir Thomas More" label="Sir Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q404158" start="198" end="204" title="Utopia (book)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20900298" start="230" end="246" title="fictional island" label="fictional island"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="262" end="271" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="356" end="365" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="367" end="377" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="382" end="389" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280312" start="479" end="498" title="Lyman Tower Sargent" label="Lyman Tower Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933904" start="588" end="599" title="homogeneous" label="homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="722" end="730" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q358998" start="732" end="761" title="Utopian and dystopian fiction" label="Utopian and dystopian fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16292813" start="944" end="956" title="utopian architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661525" start="958" end="970" title="Cyber-utopianism" label="file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q123733" start="972" end="987" title="Hospitality exchange service" label="social networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="989" end="1011" title="universal basic income" label="universal basic income"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="1013" end="1020" title="intentional community" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163396" start="1023" end="1035" title="open borders" label="open borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197847" start="1045" end="1057" title="pirate utopia" label="pirate bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1119" end="1132" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="1151" end="1166" title="Sir Thomas More" label="Sir Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q404158" start="1192" end="1198" title="Utopia (More book)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939117" start="1463" end="1470" title="semantic change" label="shifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1975" end="1982" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="1987" end="1996" title="homophone" label="identical"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="2187" end="2195" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q358998" start="2271" end="2291" title="utopian and dystopian fiction" label="fictional literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="2376" end="2396" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q220856" start="2421" end="2438" title="Charles Renouvier" label="Charles Renouvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472893" start="2470" end="2478" title="Uchronia" label="Uchronia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2486" end="2492" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="2520" end="2529" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187019" start="2668" end="2679" title="Philip Roth" label="Philip Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758811" start="2693" end="2717" title="The Plot Against America" label="The Plot Against America"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="2748" end="2762" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q749783" start="2776" end="2802" title="The Man in the High Castle" label="The Man in the High Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="2937" end="2951" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="2962" end="2979" title="Heretics" label="medieval heretics"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="2981" end="2996" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="peasant revolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="3061" end="3072" title="reformation" label="reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="3077" end="3088" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43977" start="3090" end="3093" title="Jan Hus" label="Hus"/>
<link wikidata="Q153981" start="3095" end="3102" title="Müntzer" label="Müntzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="3104" end="3108" title="Thomas More" label="More"/>
<link wikidata="Q191850" start="3110" end="3120" title="Tommaso Campanella" label="Campanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255897" start="3123" end="3145" title="democratic revolutions" label="democratic revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q380492" start="3147" end="3154" title="Jean Meslier" label="Meslier"/>
<link wikidata="Q289139" start="3156" end="3163" title="Morelly" label="Morelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q202555" start="3165" end="3170" title="Gabriel Bonnot de Mably" label="Mably"/>
<link wikidata="Q964050" start="3172" end="3182" title="Gerrard Winstanley" label="Winstanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q189714" start="3190" end="3196" title="Babeuf" label="Babeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q881698" start="3202" end="3212" title="Blanquism" label="Blanquists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="3302" end="3320" title="capitalist society" label="capitalist society"/>
<link wikidata="Q82934" start="3322" end="3333" title="Henri de Saint-Simon" label="Saint-Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q181707" start="3335" end="3342" title="Charles Fourier" label="Fourier"/>
<link wikidata="Q179374" start="3344" end="3348" title="Robert Owen" label="Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q289478" start="3350" end="3355" title="Cabet" label="Cabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q334973" start="3357" end="3366" title="Lamennais" label="Lamennais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749" start="3368" end="3376" title="Proudhon" label="Proudhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="3600" end="3611" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="3903" end="3914" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q188697" start="3971" end="3992" title="Alphonse de Lamartine" label="Alphonse de Lamartine"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="4013" end="4021" title="abstraction" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="4099" end="4116" title="Theodor W. Adorno" label="Theodor W. Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q55171" start="4208" end="4223" title="Pedro Almodovar" label="Pedro Almodovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q57240" start="4554" end="4565" title="Ernst Bloch" label="Ernst Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q551710" start="4648" end="4661" title="Henry Kuttner" label="Henry Kuttner"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="4961" end="4979" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q162597" start="5354" end="5368" title="Henri Lefebvre" label="Henri Lefebvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q79969" start="5537" end="5549" title="Emma Goldman" label="Emma Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q192447" start="5551" end="5568" title="Utopian socialism" label="Utopian socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q289478" start="5569" end="5582" title="Étienne Cabet" label="Étienne Cabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773128" start="5609" end="5629" title="The Voyage to Icaria" label="The Voyage to Icaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="5737" end="5741" title="Karl Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="5746" end="5752" title="Engels, Friedrich, 1820-1895" label="Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q184750" start="5839" end="5851" title="Slavoj Žižek" label="Slavoj Žižek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5883" end="5896" title="Milan Šimečka" label="Milan Šimečka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5916" end="5930" title="Richard Stahel" label="Richard Stahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="6008" end="6013" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="6027" end="6035" title="Republic (Plato)" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="6869" end="6880" title="mercenary" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q404158" start="7171" end="7177" title="Utopia (More book)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="7570" end="7577" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="7902" end="7912" title="Homophone" label="homophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="8344" end="8348" title="mythology" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411871" start="8683" end="8688" title="piety" label="pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102594" start="8804" end="8829" title="original affluent society" label="original affluent society"/>
<link wikidata="Q285667" start="9329" end="9351" title="Second Great Awakening" label="Second Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="9448" end="9453" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370167" start="9540" end="9547" title="Shakers" label="Shakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q254071" start="9798" end="9814" title="Johannes Kelpius" label="Johannes Kelpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346863" start="9832" end="9848" title="Ephrata Cloister" label="Ephrata Cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659615" start="9879" end="9894" title="Harmony Society" label="Harmony Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635660" start="9936" end="9955" title="Christian theosophy" label="Christian theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="9960" end="9967" title="Pietism" label="pietist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80514" start="9985" end="9993" title="Iptingen" label="Iptingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="9995" end="10002" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="10049" end="10064" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159626" start="10087" end="10098" title="Württemberg" label="Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="10171" end="10183" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117368" start="10285" end="10300" title="Common ownership" label="goods in common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896863" start="10426" end="10442" title="Oneida Community" label="Oneida Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q544632" start="10455" end="10474" title="John Humphrey Noyes" label="John Humphrey Noyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380694" start="10478" end="10494" title="Oneida, New York" label="Oneida, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="10520" end="10527" title="Intentional community" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q453554" start="10732" end="10746" title="Amana Colonies" label="Amana Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="10776" end="10780" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="10808" end="10816" title="pietists" label="pietists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904929" start="10854" end="10871" title="Amana Corporation" label="Amana Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474721" start="10985" end="10999" title="Fountain Grove, California" label="Fountain Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488960" start="11122" end="11130" title="Sointula" label="Sointula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="11134" end="11150" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="11164" end="11169" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="11174" end="11184" title="Hutterites" label="Hutterites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="11263" end="11286" title="intentional communities" label="intentional communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q192447" start="11481" end="11498" title="Utopian socialism" label="utopian socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q711425" start="11943" end="11956" title="Roy Rappaport" label="Roy Rappaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="11973" end="11979" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="12014" end="12024" title="Sanctification" label="sacralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q845573" start="12046" end="12060" title="Jonathan Haidt" label="Jonathan Haidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126489" start="12112" end="12130" title="The Righteous Mind" label="The Righteous Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="12163" end="12171" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418717" start="12178" end="12195" title="Evolutionary psychology of religion" label="adaptive solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q499215" start="12203" end="12221" title="free-rider problem" label="free-rider problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q380962" start="12234" end="12245" title="cooperation" label="cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q741598" start="12254" end="12261" title="Kin selection" label="kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187990" start="12263" end="12284" title="Evolutionary medicine" label="Evolutionary medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117946" start="12296" end="12313" title="Randolph M. Nesse" label="Randolph M. Nesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779907" start="12340" end="12363" title="Mary Jane West-Eberhard" label="Mary Jane West-Eberhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559380" start="12409" end="12419" title="Altruism (biology)" label="altruistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005215" start="12477" end="12495" title="Inclusive fitness" label="fitness advantages"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134837" start="12499" end="12515" title="social selection" label="social selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q380962" start="12620" end="12631" title="Cooperation" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="12656" end="12663" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="12670" end="12688" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="12706" end="12711" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261111" start="12723" end="12737" title="Christian eschatology" label="eschatological"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="12762" end="12767" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15292" start="12772" end="12776" title="Evil" label="Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="12784" end="12787" title="Sin" label="Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="12825" end="12838" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915332" start="12839" end="12847" title="Mosaic covenant" label="promises"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="12882" end="12893" title="ontology" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261111" start="12926" end="12952" title="new Heaven and New Earth" label="new heaven and a new earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560959" start="13233" end="13246" title="gnosiology" label="gnosiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q131458" start="13248" end="13254" title="Book of Isaiah" label="Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="13481" end="13484" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="13545" end="13550" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385109" start="13736" end="13747" title="incorporeal" label="incorporeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="13758" end="13763" title="souls" label="souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="13788" end="13793" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="13799" end="13805" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="13899" end="13913" title="Works and Days" label="Works and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525748" start="13947" end="13962" title="Ages of Man" label="the present era"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="14047" end="14057" title="Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q553825" start="14152" end="14164" title="Moses Finley" label="Moses Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="14169" end="14174" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944882" start="14182" end="14189" title="Scheria" label="Scheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944882" start="14205" end="14215" title="Phaeacians" label="Phaeacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="14264" end="14271" title="Corcyra" label="Corcyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="14281" end="14286" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="14287" end="14294" title="Kerkyra" label="Kerkyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="14303" end="14311" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q135224" start="14426" end="14434" title="Nausicaa" label="Nausicaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="14524" end="14536" title="Greek colony" label="Greek colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="14778" end="14786" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q315509" start="14917" end="14934" title="Sir Philip Sidney" label="Sir Philip Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069405" start="14962" end="14977" title="Countess of Pembroke&amp;#x27;s Arcadia" label="The Old Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="15019" end="15031" title="Peloponnesus" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168786" start="15033" end="15040" title="Arcadia (utopia)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="15050" end="15057" title="synonym" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q390001" start="15094" end="15102" title="pastoral" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q739317" start="15120" end="15133" title="locus amoenus" label="locus amoenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="15212" end="15220" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="15221" end="15235" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="15255" end="15268" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="15269" end="15274" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="15282" end="15297" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="15301" end="15327" title="King James Version of the Bible" label="Authorized Version of 1611"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608394" start="15386" end="15398" title="Herbert Haag" label="Herbert Haag"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="15488" end="15510" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="15545" end="15557" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="15603" end="15615" title="divine grace" label="divine grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242130" start="15826" end="15839" title="preternatural" label="preternatural"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15868" end="15881" title="Serpents in the Bible#Eden" label="ophitic event"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645" start="16020" end="16029" title="Cockaigne" label="Cockaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538967" start="16243" end="16261" title="George Ellis (poet)" label="George Ellis&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16485" end="16492" title="Cockney#Cockaigne" label="Cockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645" start="16533" end="16548" title="Schlaraffenland" label="Schlaraffenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q742530" start="16631" end="16636" title="idyll" label="idyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q464520" start="16847" end="16857" title="Shangri-La" label="Shangri-La"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="16873" end="16878" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43227" start="16908" end="16920" title="James Hilton (novelist)" label="James Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199794" start="16948" end="16960" title="Lost Horizon (novel)" label="Lost Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="16975" end="16995" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="17151" end="17160" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q910739" start="17235" end="17255" title="Peach Blossom Spring" label="Peach Blossom Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q314210" start="17308" end="17320" title="Tao Yuanming" label="Tao Yuanming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="18062" end="18073" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="18241" end="18252" title="Jin dynasty (265–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057667" start="18632" end="18638" title="Great Unity" label="Datong"/>
<link wikidata="Q862758" start="18725" end="18741" title="Classic of Rites" label="Classic of Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q360135" start="18971" end="18982" title="Kang Youwei" label="Kang Youwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q193461" start="19018" end="19026" title="Maitreya" label="Maitreya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19030" end="19036" title="Reincarnation#Buddhism" label="reborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q96385695" start="19064" end="19072" title="Ketumati" label="Ketumati"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="19128" end="19136" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669314" start="19200" end="19212" title="Kalpavriksha" label="Kalpavriksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586228" start="19281" end="19291" title="Jambudvipa" label="Jambudvipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975790" start="19455" end="19478" title="Post-scarcity economy" label="post-scarcity economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423189" start="19480" end="19495" title="late capitalism" label="late capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="19501" end="19523" title="Basic income" label="universal basic income"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602388" start="19598" end="19617" title="Utopia for Realists" label="Utopia for Realists"/>
<link wikidata="Q19747970" start="19625" end="19639" title="Rutger Bregman" label="Rutger Bregman"/>
<link wikidata="Q30722989" start="19694" end="19702" title="workweek" label="workweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163396" start="19715" end="19726" title="open border" label="open border"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="19730" end="19749" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavian nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090395" start="19794" end="19816" title="World Happiness Report" label="World Happiness Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828728" start="19881" end="19894" title="Michael Booth" label="Michael Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512028" start="19930" end="19966" title="The Almost Nearly Perfect People" label="2014 book about the Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q565720" start="20155" end="20168" title="commercialism" label="commercialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="20173" end="20183" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="20340" end="20351" title="egalitarian" label="egalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="20414" end="20419" title="money" label="money"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="20438" end="20442" title="labour (economics)" label="work"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534337" start="20481" end="20492" title="common good" label="common good"/>
<link wikidata="Q455776" start="20617" end="20631" title="Edward Bellamy" label="Edward Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305106" start="20656" end="20672" title="Looking Backward" label="Looking Backward"/>
<link wikidata="Q182589" start="20680" end="20694" title="William Morris" label="William Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019506" start="20752" end="20769" title="News from Nowhere" label="News from Nowhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="20824" end="20836" title="bureaucratic" label="bureaucratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="20973" end="20977" title="Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522503" start="21109" end="21129" title="History of Socialism" label="History of Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q255492" start="21276" end="21299" title="Edward Gibbon Wakefield" label="Edward Gibbon Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="21340" end="21348" title="colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="21349" end="21359" title="settler" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="21533" end="21544" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="21549" end="21558" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="21600" end="21611" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249074" start="21628" end="21643" title="A Modern Utopia" label="A Modern Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q329999" start="21729" end="21747" title="Eric Frank Russell" label="Eric Frank Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757438" start="21766" end="21785" title="The Great Explosion" label="The Great Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q179941" start="21909" end="21939" title="Local Exchange Trading Systems" label="Local Exchange Trading Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164547" start="21966" end="21981" title="Khrushchev Thaw" label="Khrushchev Thaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q54828" start="22014" end="22026" title="Ivan Yefremov" label="Ivan Efremov"/>
<link wikidata="Q513228" start="22063" end="22084" title="Andromeda (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Andromeda&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q969183" start="22362" end="22378" title="James Harrington (author)" label="James Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727029" start="22425" end="22451" title="The Commonwealth of Oceana" label="The Commonwealth of Oceana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177382" start="22495" end="22508" title="Country Party (Britain)" label="country-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044394" start="22712" end="22720" title="Province of Carolina" label="Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475732" start="22740" end="22752" title="Province of Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q785035" start="22776" end="22783" title="Province of Georgia" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="23184" end="23190" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="23220" end="23236" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="23243" end="23250" title="Intentional community" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839019" start="23383" end="23399" title="back-to-the-land" label="back-to-the-land"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="23414" end="23420" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641248" start="23553" end="23563" title="Kaliflower Commune" label="Kaliflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q315910" start="23682" end="23693" title="Communalism (Bookchin)" label="communalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="23750" end="23773" title="intentional communities" label="intentional communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q245182" start="24272" end="24285" title="Twelve Tribes communities" label="Twelve Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q928662" start="24428" end="24438" title="Brook Farm" label="Brook Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="25076" end="25089" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="25261" end="25268" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="25273" end="25283" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="25303" end="25319" title="living standards" label="living standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="25349" end="25354" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780945" start="25359" end="25368" title="suffering" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q742609" start="25381" end="25393" title="human nature" label="human nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124515" start="25402" end="25417" title="human condition" label="human condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="25747" end="25756" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783429" start="25812" end="25837" title="libertarian transhumanist" label="libertarian transhumanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347693" start="25857" end="25865" title="extropianism" label="extropia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26000" end="26013" title="Mariah Utsawa" label="Mariah Utsawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892659" start="26048" end="26072" title="technological utopianism" label="technological utopianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q460475" start="26310" end="26322" title="Nick Bostrom" label="Nick Bostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566000" start="26421" end="26446" title="machine superintelligence" label="machine superintelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801475" start="26615" end="26636" title="cognitive enhancement" label="cognitive enhancement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297001" start="26638" end="26655" title="reversal of aging" label="reversal of aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q898178" start="26657" end="26684" title="self-replicating spacecraft" label="self-replicating spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852084" start="26847" end="26868" title="libertarian socialist" label="libertarian socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q312579" start="26895" end="26905" title="Iain Banks" label="Iain Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751339" start="26912" end="26919" title="The Culture" label="Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q485446" start="26936" end="26946" title="optimism" label="optimistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="27107" end="27117" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q322922" start="27136" end="27149" title="Jacques Ellul" label="Jacques Ellul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807402" start="27154" end="27170" title="Timothy Mitchell" label="Timothy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q515255" start="27180" end="27191" title="precautionary principle" label="precautions"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="27317" end="27335" title="division of labour" label="division of labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q454268" start="27353" end="27364" title="John Zerzan" label="John Zerzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199836" start="27369" end="27383" title="Derrick Jensen" label="Derrick Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="27639" end="27653" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="27760" end="27775" title="Brave New World" label="Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="27792" end="27812" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28142" end="28248" title="Green Imperialism: Colonial Expansion, Tropical Island Edens, and the Origins of Environmentalism" label="Green Imperialism: Colonial Expansion, Tropical Island Edens and the Origins of Environmentalism 1600–1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q124362710" start="28299" end="28315" title="utopian thinking" label="utopian thinking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28737" end="28751" title="Marius de Geus" label="Marius de Geus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="28827" end="28841" title="green politics" label="green politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q455776" start="29411" end="29425" title="Edward Bellamy" label="Edward Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305106" start="29439" end="29455" title="Looking Backward" label="Looking Backward"/>
<link wikidata="Q287752" start="29996" end="30020" title="Charlotte Perkins Gilman" label="Charlotte Perkins Gilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739278" start="30034" end="30041" title="Herland (novel)" label="Herland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530981" start="30060" end="30105" title="Gender in speculative fiction" label="science fiction and technological speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273385" start="30179" end="30191" title="Marge Piercy" label="Marge Piercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030746" start="30205" end="30230" title="Woman on the Edge of Time" label="Woman on the Edge of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q271551" start="30941" end="30960" title="Shulamith Firestone" label="Shulamith Firestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730063" start="30974" end="30994" title="The Dialectic of Sex" label="The Dialectic of Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q387693" start="31026" end="31037" title="Mary Gentle" label="Mary Gentle"/>
<link wikidata="Q97355160" start="31051" end="31068" title="Golden Witchbreed" label="Golden Witchbreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q40874" start="31220" end="31233" title="Doris Lessing" label="Doris Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750420" start="31247" end="31295" title="The Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five" label="The Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q71819" start="31490" end="31513" title="Elizabeth Mann Borghese" label="Elizabeth Mann Borghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388010" start="31654" end="31669" title="William Moulton Marston" label="William Marston"/>
<link wikidata="Q338430" start="31677" end="31689" title="Wonder Woman" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809472" start="31750" end="31760" title="Themyscira (DC Comics)" label="Themyscira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523725" start="31876" end="31896" title="single-gender worlds" label="single-gender worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="32220" end="32233" title="parthenogenic" label="parthenogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990" start="32234" end="32246" title="reproduction" label="reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q600591" start="32424" end="32451" title="Lesbian separatism" label="Lesbian separatist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q265270" start="32470" end="32481" title="Joanna Russ" label="Joanna Russ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202654" start="32495" end="32509" title="The Female Man" label="The Female Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q441603" start="32520" end="32538" title="Suzy McKee Charnas" label="Suzy McKee Charnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739928" start="32552" end="32580" title="Walk to the End of the World" label="Walk to the End of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739928" start="32597" end="32608" title="Motherlines" label="Motherlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="32913" end="32923" title="patriarchy" label="patriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32969" end="32994" title="Daughters of a Coral Dawn" label="Daughters of a Coral Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q547053" start="33004" end="33024" title="Katherine V. Forrest" label="Katherine V. Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739278" start="33107" end="33114" title="Herland (novel)" label="Herland"/>
<link wikidata="Q287752" start="33131" end="33155" title="Charlotte Perkins Gilman" label="Charlotte Perkins Gilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q448150" start="33404" end="33420" title="Gerd Brantenberg" label="Gerd Brantenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q57382" start="33468" end="33480" title="Christa Wolf" label="Christa Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="33655" end="33674" title="Walter Elias Disney" label="Walter Elias Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736048" start="33691" end="33706" title="EPCOT (concept)" label="EPCOT (concept)"/>
<link wikidata="Q447351" start="33755" end="33767" title="Paolo Soleri" label="Paolo Soleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q637869" start="33775" end="33784" title="Arcosanti" label="Arcosanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6892571" start="33803" end="33822" title="Mohammed bin Salman" label="Mohammed bin Salman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42310572" start="33830" end="33834" title="Neom" label="Neom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007065" start="33959" end="33969" title="Tom Moylan" label="Tom Moylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129622" start="34051" end="34067" title="self-referential" label="self-referential"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000494" start="34852" end="34878" title="List of utopian literature" label="List of utopian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016529" start="34880" end="34904" title="New world order (Baháʼí)" label="New world order (Baháʼí)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567337" start="34906" end="34913" title="Nutopia" label="Nutopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q226180" start="34915" end="34938" title="Utopia (disambiguation)" label="Utopia (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602388" start="34946" end="34965" title="Utopia for Realists" label="Utopia for Realists"/>
<link wikidata="Q358998" start="34973" end="35002" title="Utopian and dystopian fiction" label="Utopian and dystopian fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="35351" end="35365" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="35440" end="35456" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q76823" start="35549" end="35562" title="Karl Mannheim" label="Karl Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137972" start="35705" end="35723" title="History and Utopia" label="History and Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193405" start="35741" end="35752" title="Emil Cioran" label="Emil Cioran"/>
<link wikidata="Q21604910" start="35815" end="35830" title="Frank E. Manuel" label="Frank E. Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170107" start="35988" end="36009" title="The Principle of Hope" label="The Principle of Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q57240" start="36027" end="36038" title="Ernst Bloch" label="Ernst Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007065" start="36186" end="36196" title="Tom Moylan" label="Tom Moylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383082" start="36366" end="36378" title="Ruth Levitas" label="Ruth Levitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606854" start="36614" end="36628" title="Gregory Claeys" label="Gregory Claeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280312" start="36633" end="36652" title="Lyman Tower Sargent" label="Lyman Tower Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q57240" start="36732" end="36743" title="Ernst Bloch" label="Ernst Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q347362" start="36899" end="36914" title="Fredric Jameson" label="Fredric Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280312" start="36993" end="37012" title="Lyman Tower Sargent" label="Lyman Tower Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445122" start="37152" end="37163" title="Darko Suvin" label="Darko Suvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221045" start="37320" end="37334" title="Michael Marder" label="Michael Marder"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="38178" end="38193" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31723" wikidata="Q113162" url="?curid=31723" title="History of the United Kingdom">
<text>The history of the United Kingdom begins in 1707 with the Treaty of Union and Acts of Union. The core of the United Kingdom as a unified state came into being with the political union of the kingdoms of England and Scotland, into a new unitary state called Great Britain. Of this new state, the historian Simon Schama said:

The Acts of Union 1800 added the Kingdom of Ireland to create the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.

The first decades were marked by Jacobite risings which ended with defeat for the Stuart cause at the Battle of Culloden in 1746. In 1763, victory in the Seven Years&#x27; War led to the growth of the First British Empire. With defeat by the United States, France and Spain in the War of American Independence, Great Britain lost its 13 American colonies and rebuilt a Second British Empire based in Asia and Africa. As a result, British culture, and its technological, political, constitutional, and linguistic influence, became worldwide. Politically the central event was the French Revolution and its Napoleonic aftermath from 1793 to 1815, which British elites saw as a profound threat, and worked energetically to form multiple coalitions that finally defeated Napoleon in 1815. The Tories, who came to power in 1783, remained in power (with a short interruption) until 1830. Forces of reform, often emanating from the Evangelical religious elements, opened decades of political reform that broadened the ballot, and opened the economy to free trade. The outstanding political leaders of the 19th century included Palmerston, Disraeli, Gladstone, and Salisbury. Culturally, the Victorian era was a time of prosperity and dominant middle-class virtues when Britain dominated the world economy and maintained a generally peaceful century from 1815 to 1914. The First World War, with Britain in alliance with France, Russia and the United States, was a furious but ultimately successful total war with Germany. The resulting League of Nations was a favourite project in Interwar Britain. However, while the Empire remained strong, as did the London financial markets, the British industrial base began to slip behind Germany and, especially, the United States. Sentiments for peace were so strong that the nation supported appeasement of Hitler&#x27;s Germany in the late 1930s, until the Nazi invasion of Poland in 1939 started the Second World War. In the Second World War, the Soviet Union and the US joined the UK as the main Allied powers.

Britain was no longer a military or economic superpower, as seen in the Suez Crisis of 1956. Britain no longer had the wealth to maintain an empire, so it granted independence to almost all its possessions. The new states typically joined the Commonwealth of Nations. The postwar years saw great hardships, alleviated somewhat by large-scale financial aid from the United States, and some from Canada. Prosperity returned in the 1950s. Meanwhile, from 1945 to 1950, the Labour Party built a welfare state, nationalized many industries, and created the National Health Service. The UK took a strong stand against Communist expansion after 1945, playing a major role in the Cold War and the formation of NATO as an anti-Soviet military alliance with West Germany, France, the United States, Italy, Canada and smaller countries. NATO remains a powerful military coalition. The UK has been a leading member of the United Nations since its founding, as well as numerous other international organizations. In the 1990s, neoliberalism led to the privatisation of nationalised industries and significant deregulation of business affairs. London&#x27;s status as a world financial hub grew continuously. Since the 1990s, large-scale devolution movements in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales have decentralised political decision-making. Britain has moved back and forth on its economic relationships with Western Europe. It joined the European Economic Community in 1973, thereby weakening economic ties with its Commonwealth. However, the Brexit referendum in 2016 committed the UK to leave the European Union, which it did in 2020.

In 1922, 26 counties of Ireland seceded to become the Irish Free State; a day later, Northern Ireland seceded from the Free State and returned to the United Kingdom. In 1927, the United Kingdom changed its formal title to the &quot;United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,&quot; usually shortened to &quot;Britain&quot; and (after 1945) to the &quot;United Kingdom&quot; or &quot;UK&quot;.

==18th century==
===Birth of the Union===


The Kingdom of Great Britain came into being on 1 May 1707, as a result of the political union of the Kingdom of England (which included Wales) and the Kingdom of Scotland under the Treaty of Union. This combined the two kingdoms into a single kingdom and merged the two parliaments into a single parliament of Great Britain. Queen Anne became the first monarch of the new Great Britain. Although now a single kingdom, certain institutions of Scotland and England remained separate, such as Scottish and English law; and the Presbyterian Church of Scotland and the Anglican Church of England. England and Scotland each also continued to have their own system of education.

Meanwhile, the War of the Spanish Succession against France was underway. It see-sawed back and forth until a more peace-minded government came to power in London and the treaties of Utrecht and Rastadt ended the war. British historian G. M. Trevelyan argues: 

===Hanoverian kings===
The Stuart line died with Anne in 1714, although a die-hard faction with French support supported pretenders. The Elector of Hanover became king as George I. He paid more attention to Hanover and surrounded himself with Germans, making him an unpopular king. He did, however, build up the army and created a more stable political system in Britain and helped bring peace to northern Europe. Jacobite factions seeking a Stuart restoration remained strong; they instigated a revolt in 1715–1716. The son of James II planned to invade England, but before he could do so, John Erskine, Earl of Mar, launched an invasion from Scotland, which was easily defeated.

George II enhanced the stability of the constitutional system, with a government run by Robert Walpole during the period 1730–1742. He built up the First British Empire, strengthening the colonies in the Caribbean and North America. In coalition with the rising power Prussia, the United Kingdom defeated France in the Seven Years&#x27; War, and won full control of Canada.

George III never visited Hanover, and spoke English as his first language. Reviled by Americans as a tyrant and the instigator of the American War of Independence, he was insane off and on after 1788, and his eldest son served as regent. He was the last king to dominate government and politics, and his long reign is noted for losing the first British Empire in the American Revolutionary War (1783), as France sought revenge for its defeat in the Seven Years&#x27; War by aiding the Americans. The reign was notable for the building of a second empire based in India, Asia and Africa, the beginnings of the industrial revolution that made Britain an economic powerhouse, and above all the life and death struggle with the French, in the French Revolutionary Wars, which ended inconclusively with a short truce, and the epic Napoleonic Wars, which ended with the decisive defeat of Napoleon.

===South Sea Bubble===
Entrepreneurs gradually extended the range of their business around the globe. The South Sea Bubble was a business enterprise that exploded in scandal. The South Sea Company was a joint-stock company in London. Its ostensible object was to grant trade monopolies in South America; but its actual purpose was to renegotiate previous high-interest government loans amounting to £31 million through market manipulation and speculation. It raised money four times in 1720 by issuing stock, which was purchased by about 8,000 investors. The share price kept soaring every day, from £130 a share to £1,000, with insiders making huge paper profits. The Bubble collapsed overnight, ruining many speculators. Investigations showed bribes had reached into high places—even to the king. Robert Walpole managed to wind it down with minimal political and economic damage, although some losers fled to exile or committed suicide.

===Robert Walpole===
Robert Walpole is now generally regarded as the first Prime Minister, from, 1721–1742, and indeed he invented the role. The term was applied to him by friends and foes alike by 1727. Historian Clayton Roberts summarizes his new functions:

===Moralism, benevolence and hypocrisy===

Hypocrisy became a major topic in English political history in the early 18th century. The Toleration Act 1688 allowed for certain rights for religious minorities, but Protestant Nonconformists (such as Congregationalists and Baptists) were still deprived of important rights, such as the right to hold office. Nonconformists who wanted to hold office ostentatiously took the Anglican sacrament once a year in order to avoid the restrictions. High Church Anglicans were outraged. They outlawed what they called &quot;occasional conformity&quot; in 1711 with the Occasional Conformity Act 1711. In the political controversies using sermons, speeches, and pamphlet wars, both high churchmen and Nonconformists attacked their opponents as insincere and hypocritical, as well as dangerously zealous, in contrast to their own moderation. This campaign of moderation versus zealotry peaked in 1709 during the impeachment trial of high church preacher Henry Sacheverell. Historian Mark Knights argues that by its very ferocity, the debate may have led to more temperate and less hypercharged political discourse. &quot;Occasional conformity&quot; was restored by the Whigs when they returned to power in 1719.

English author Bernard Mandeville&#x27;s famous &quot;The Fable of the Bees&quot; explored the nature of hypocrisy in contemporary European society. On one hand, Mandeville was a &quot;moralist&quot; heir to the French Augustinianism of the previous century, viewing sociability as a mere mask for vanity and pride. On the other, he was a &quot;materialist&quot; who helped found modern economics. He tried to demonstrate the universality of human appetites for corporeal pleasures. He argued that the efforts of self-seeking entrepreneurs are the basis of emerging commercial and industrial society, a line of thought that influenced Adam Smith and 19th-century Utilitarianism. A tension arose between these two approaches concerning the relative power of norms and interests, the relationship between motives and behaviour, and the historical variability of human cultures.

From around 1750 to 1850, Whig aristocrats in England boasted of their special benevolence for the common people. They claimed to be guiding and counselling reform initiatives to prevent the outbreaks of popular discontent that caused instability and revolution across Europe. However Tory and radical critics accused the Whigs of hypocrisy—alleging they were deliberately using the slogans of reform and democracy to boost themselves into power while preserving their precious aristocratic exclusiveness. Historian L.G. Mitchell defends the Whigs, pointing out that thanks to them radicals always had friends at the centre of the political elite, and thus did not feel as marginalised as in most of Europe. He points out that the debates on the 1832 Reform Bill showed that reformers would indeed receive a hearing at parliamentary level with a good chance of success. Meanwhile, a steady stream of observers from the Continent commented on the English political culture. Liberal and radical observers noted the servility of the English lower classes in the early 19th century, the obsession everyone had with rank and title, the extravagance of the aristocracy, and a pervasive hypocrisy that extended into such areas as social reform. There were not so many conservative visitors. They praised the stability of English society, its ancient constitution, and reverence for the past; they ignored the negative effects of industrialisation.

Historians have explored crimes and vices of England&#x27;s upper classes, especially duelling, suicide, adultery and gambling. They were tolerated by the same courts that executed thousands of poor men and boys for lesser offenses. No aristocrat was punished for killing someone in a duel. However the emerging popular press specialized in sensationalistic stories about upper-class vice, which led the middle classes to focus their critiques on a decadent aristocracy that had much more money, but much less morality than the middle class.

===Warfare and finance===
From 1700 to 1850, Britain was involved in 137 wars or rebellions. It maintained a relatively large and expensive Royal Navy, along with a small standing army. When the need arose for soldiers it hired mercenaries or financed allies who fielded armies. The rising costs of warfare forced a shift in the sources of government financing, from the income from royal agricultural estates and special imposts and taxes to reliance on customs and excise taxes; and, after 1790, an income tax. Working with bankers in the city, the government raised large loans during wartime and paid them off in peacetime. The rise in taxes amounted to 20% of national income, but the private sector benefited from the increase in economic growth. The demand for war supplies stimulated the industrial sector, particularly naval supplies, munitions and textiles, which gave Britain an advantage in international trade during the postwar years.

The French Revolution polarised British political opinion in the 1790s, with conservatives outraged at the killing of the king, the expulsion of the nobles, and the Reign of Terror. Britain was at war against France almost continuously from 1793 until the final defeat of Napoleon in 1815. Conservatives castigated every radical opinion in Britain as &quot;Jacobin&quot; (in reference to the leaders of the Terror), warning that radicalism threatened an upheaval of British society. The Anti-Jacobin sentiment, well expressed by Edmund Burke and many popular writers was strongest among the landed gentry and the upper classes.

===British Empire===

The Seven Years&#x27; War, which began in 1756, was the first war waged on a global scale, fought in Europe, India, North America, the Caribbean, the Philippines and coastal Africa. Britain was the big winner as it enlarged its empire at the expense of France and others. France lost its role as a colonial power in North America. It ceded New France to Britain, putting a large, traditionalistic French-speaking Catholic element under British control. Spain ceded Florida to Britain, but it only had a few small outposts there. In India, the Carnatic war had left France still in control of its small enclaves but with military restrictions and an obligation to support British client states, effectively leaving the future of India to Britain. The British victory over France in the Seven Years&#x27; War therefore left Britain as the world&#x27;s dominant colonial power.
====American Revolution====
During the 1760s and 1770s, relations between the Thirteen Colonies and Britain became increasingly strained, primarily because of growing anger against Parliament&#x27;s repeated attempts to tax American colonists without their consent. The Americans readied their large militias, but were short of gunpowder and artillery. The British assumed falsely that they could easily suppress Patriot resistance. In 1775 the American Revolutionary War began. In 1776 the Patriots expelled all the royal officials and declared the independence of the United States of America. After capturing a British invasion army in 1777, the new nation formed an alliance with France (and in turn Spain aided France), equalizing the military and naval balance and putting Britain at risk of invasion from France. The British army controlled only a handful of coastal cities in the U.S. 1780–1781 was a low point for Britain. Taxes and deficits were high, government corruption was pervasive, and the war in America was entering its sixth year with no apparent end in sight. The Gordon Riots erupted in London during the spring of 1780, in response to increased concessions to Catholics by Parliament. In October 1781 Lord Cornwallis surrendered his army at Yorktown, Virginia. The Treaty of Paris was signed in 1783, formally terminating the war and recognising the independence of the United States. The peace terms were very generous to the new nation, which London hoped correctly would become a major trading partner.
====Second British Empire====
The loss of the Thirteen Colonies, at the time Britain&#x27;s most populous colonies, marked the transition between the &quot;first&quot; and &quot;second&quot; empires, in which Britain shifted its attention to Asia, the Pacific and later Africa. Adam Smith&#x27;s &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot;, published in 1776, had argued that colonies were redundant, and that free trade should replace the old mercantilist policies that had characterised the first period of colonial expansion, dating back to the protectionism of Spain and Portugal. The growth of trade between the newly independent United States and Britain after 1783 confirmed Smith&#x27;s view that political control was not necessary for economic success.

During its first 100 years of operation, the focus of the British East India Company had been trade, not the building of an empire in India. Company interests turned from trade to territory during the 18th century as the Mughal Empire declined in power and the British East India Company struggled with its French counterpart, the French East India Company, during the Carnatic wars of the 1740s and 1750s. The British, led by Robert Clive, defeated the French and their Indian allies in the Battle of Plassey, leaving the Company in control of Bengal and a major military and political power in India. In the following decades it gradually increased the size of the territories under its control, either ruling directly or indirectly via local puppet rulers under the threat of force of the Indian Army, 80% of which was composed of native Indian sepoys.
On 22 August 1770, James Cook discovered the eastern coast of Australia while on a scientific voyage to the South Pacific. In 1778, Joseph Banks, Cook&#x27;s botanist on the voyage, presented evidence to the government on the suitability of Botany Bay for the establishment of a penal settlement, and in 1787 the first shipment of convicts set sail, arriving in 1788.
===Wars with Revolutionary France===
The British government had somewhat mixed reactions to the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789, and when war broke out on the Continent in 1792, it initially remained neutral. But the following January, Louis XVI was beheaded. This combined with a threatened invasion of the Netherlands by France spurred Britain to declare war. For the next 23 years, the two nations were at war except for a short period in 1802–1803. Britain alone among the nations of Europe never submitted to or formed an alliance with France. Throughout the 1790s, the British repeatedly defeated the navies of France and its allies, but were unable to perform any significant land operations. An Anglo-Russian invasion of the Netherlands in 1799 accomplished little except the capture of the Dutch fleet.

==1800 to 1837==

===Union with Ireland===
On 1 January 1801, the first day of the 19th century, the Great Britain and Ireland joined to form the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.

The legislative union of Great Britain and Ireland was brought about by the Act of Union 1800, creating the &quot;United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland&quot;. The Act was passed in both the Parliament of Great Britain and the Parliament of Ireland, dominated by the Protestant Ascendancy and lacking representation of the country&#x27;s Catholic population. Substantial majorities were achieved, and according to contemporary documents this was assisted by bribery in the form of the awarding of peerages and honours to opponents to gain their votes.

Under the terms of the merger, the separate Parliaments of Great Britain and Ireland were abolished, and replaced by a united Parliament of the United Kingdom. Ireland thus became an integral part of the United Kingdom, sending around 100 MPs to the House of Commons at Westminster and 28 Irish representative peers to the House of Lords, elected from among their number by the Irish peers themselves, except that Roman Catholic peers were not permitted to take their seats in the Lords. Part of the trade-off for the Irish Catholics was to be the granting of Catholic emancipation, which had been fiercely resisted by the all-Anglican Irish Parliament. However, this was blocked by King George III, who argued that emancipating the Roman Catholics would breach his Coronation Oath. The Roman Catholic hierarchy had endorsed the Union. However the decision to block Catholic Emancipation fatally undermined the appeal of the Union.

===Napoleonic wars===

At the threshold to the 19th century, Britain was challenged again by France under Napoleon, in a struggle that, unlike previous wars, represented a contest of ideologies between the two nations: the constitutional monarchy of Great Britain versus the liberal principles of the French Revolution ostensibly championed by the Napoleonic empire. It was not only Britain&#x27;s position on the world stage that was threatened: Napoleon threatened invasion of Britain itself, and with it, a fate similar to the countries of continental Europe that his armies had overrun.

During the War of the Second Coalition, Britain occupied most of the French and Dutch colonies (the Netherlands had been a satellite of France since 1796), but tropical diseases claimed the lives of over 40,000 troops. When the Treaty of Amiens created a pause, Britain was forced to return most of the colonies. In May 1803, war was declared again. Napoleon&#x27;s plans to invade Britain failed due to the inferiority of his navy, and in 1805, Lord Nelson&#x27;s fleet decisively defeated the French and Spanish at Trafalgar, which was the last significant naval action of the Napoleonic Wars.

In 1806, Napoleon issued the series of Berlin Decrees, which brought into effect the Continental System. This policy aimed to weaken the British export economy closing French-controlled territory to its trade. Napoleon hoped that isolating Britain from the Continent would end its economic dominance. It never succeeded in its objective. Britain possessed the greatest industrial capacity in Europe, and its mastery of the seas allowed it to build up considerable economic strength through trade to its possessions from its rapidly expanding new Empire. Britain&#x27;s naval supremacy meant that France could never enjoy the peace necessary to consolidate its control over Europe, and it could threaten neither the home islands nor the main British colonies.

The Dos de Mayo Uprising at last permitted Britain to gain a foothold on the Continent. The Duke of Wellington and his army of British and Portuguese gradually pushed the French out of Spain and in early 1814, as Napoleon was being driven back in the east by the Prussians, Austrians, and Russians, Wellington invaded southern France. After Napoleon&#x27;s surrender and exile to the island of Elba, peace appeared to have returned, but when he escaped back into France in 1815, the British and their allies had to fight him again. The armies of Wellington and von Blücher defeated Napoleon once and for all at Waterloo.

====Financing the war====
A key element in British success was its ability to mobilize the nation&#x27;s industrial and financial resources and apply them to defeating France. With a population of 16 million Britain was barely half the size of France with 30 million. In terms of soldiers the French numerical advantage was offset by British subsidies that paid for a large proportion of the Austrian and Russian soldiers, peaking at about 450,000 in 1813. Most important, the British national output remained strong and the well-organized business sector channeled products into what the military needed. The system of smuggling finished products into the continent undermined French efforts to ruin the British economy by cutting off markets. The British budget in 1814 reached £66 million, including £10 million for the Navy, £40 million for the Army, £10 million for the Allies, and £38 million as interest on the national debt. The national debt soared to £679 million, more than double the GDP. It was willingly supported by hundreds of thousands of investors and tax payers, despite the higher taxes on land and a new income tax. The whole cost of the war came to £831 million. By contrast the French financial system was inadequate and Napoleon&#x27;s forces had to rely in part on requisitions from conquered lands.

Napoleon also attempted economic warfare against Britain, especially in the Berlin Decree of 1806. It forbade the import of British goods into European countries allied with or dependent upon France, and installed the Continental System in Europe. All connections were to be cut, even the mail. British merchants smuggled in many goods and the Continental System was not a powerful weapon of economic war. There was some damage to Britain, especially in 1808 and 1811, but its control of the oceans helped ameliorate the damage. Even more damage was done to the economies of France and its allies, which lost a useful trading partner. Angry governments gained an incentive to ignore the Continental System, which led to the weakening of Napoleon&#x27;s coalition.

====War of 1812 with United States====

Simultaneous with the Napoleonic Wars, trade disputes and British impressment of American sailors led to the War of 1812 with the United States. This was the &quot;Second War of Independence&quot; for the Americans, though in reality, it was never about British efforts to conquer the former colonies, but about the conquest of the Canadian colonies by the Americans. It was little noticed in Britain, where all attention was focused on the struggle with France. The British could devote few resources to the conflict until the fall of Napoleon in 1814. American frigates also inflicted a series of embarrassing defeats on the British navy, which was short on manpower due to the conflict in Europe. A stepped-up war effort that year brought about some successes such as the burning of Washington, but many influential voices such as the Duke of Wellington argued that an outright victory over the US was impossible.

Peace was agreed to at the end of 1814, but Andrew Jackson, unaware of this, won a great victory over the British at the Battle of New Orleans in January 1815 (news took several weeks to cross the Atlantic before the advent of steam ships). Ratification of the Treaty of Ghent ended the war in February 1815. The major result was the permanent defeat of the Indian allies the British had counted upon. The US-Canada border was demilitarised by both countries, and peaceful trade resumed, although worries of an American conquest of Canada persisted into the 1860s.

===Postwar reaction: 1815–1822===
====Repression by reactionary landed elites====
The postwar era was a time of economic depression, poor harvests, growing inflation, and high unemployment among returning soldiers. As industrialisation progressed, Britain was more urban and less rural, and power shifted accordingly. The dominant Tory leadership, based in the declining rural sector, was fearful, reactionary and repressive. Tories feared the possible emergence of radicals who might be conspiring to emulate the dreaded French Revolution. In reality the violent radical element was small and weak; there were a handful of small conspiracies involving men with few followers and careless security; they were quickly suppressed. Techniques of repression included the suspension of Habeas Corpus in 1817 (allowing the government to arrest and hold suspects without cause or trial). Sidmouth&#x27;s Gagging Acts of 1817 heavily muzzled the opposition newspapers; the reformers switched to pamphlets and sold 50,000 a week. In reaction to the Peterloo Massacre of 1819, the Liverpool government passed the &quot;Six Acts&quot; in 1819. They prohibited drills and military exercises; facilitated warrants for the search for weapons; outlawed public meetings of more than 50 people, including meetings to organize petitions; put heavy penalties on blasphemous and seditious publications; imposing a fourpenny stamp act on many pamphlets to cut down the flow on news and criticism. Offenders could be harshly punished including exile in Australia. In practice the laws were designed to deter troublemakers and reassure conservatives; they were not often used. By the end of the 1820s, along with a general economic recovery, many of these repressive laws were repealed and in 1828 new legislation guaranteed the civil rights of religious dissenters.
====Weak monarchs====
George IV was a weak ruler as regent (1811–1820) and king (1820–1830). He let his ministers take full charge of government affairs, playing a far lesser role than his father, George III. The principle now became established that the king accepts as prime minister the person who wins a majority in the House of Commons, whether the king personally favours him or not. His governments, with little help from the king, presided over victory in the Napoleonic Wars, negotiated the peace settlement, and attempted to deal with the social and economic malaise that followed. His brother William IV ruled 1830 to 1837, but was little involved in politics. His reign saw several reforms: the poor law was updated, child labour restricted, slavery abolished in nearly all the British Empire, and, most important, the Reform Act 1832 refashioned the British electoral system.
====Foreign affairs====
There were no major wars until the Crimean War of 1853–1856. While Prussia, Austria, and Russia, as absolute monarchies, tried to suppress liberalism wherever it might occur, the British came to terms with new ideas. Britain intervened in Portugal in 1826 to defend a constitutional government there and recognising the independence of Spain&#x27;s American colonies in 1824. British merchants and financiers, and later railway builders, played major roles in the economies of most Latin American nations. The British intervened in 1827 on the side of the Greeks, who had been waging the Greek War of Independence against the Ottoman Empire since 1821.

====Whig reforms of the 1830s====
The Whig Party recovered its strength and unity by supporting moral reforms, especially the reform of the electoral system, the abolition of slavery and emancipation of the Catholics. Catholic emancipation was secured in the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829, which removed the most substantial restrictions on Roman Catholics in Britain.

The Whigs became champions of Parliamentary reform. They made Lord Grey prime minister 1830–1834, and the Reform Act 1832 became their signature measure. It broadened the franchise slightly and ended the system of rotten and pocket boroughs (where elections were controlled by powerful families), and gave seats to new industrial centres. The aristocracy continued to dominate the government, the Army and Royal Navy, and high society. After parliamentary investigations demonstrated the horrors of child labour, limited reforms were passed in 1833.

Chartism emerged after the 1832 Reform Bill failed to give the vote to the working class. Activists denounced the &#x27;betrayal&#x27; of the working class and the &#x27;sacrificing&#x27; of their interests by the &#x27;misconduct&#x27; of the government. In 1838, Chartists issued the People&#x27;s Charter demanding manhood suffrage, equal sized election districts, voting by ballots, payment of MPs (so poor men could serve), annual Parliaments, and abolition of property requirements. Elites saw the movement as pathological, so the Chartists were unable to force serious constitutional debate. Historians see Chartism as both a continuation of the 18th-century fight against corruption and as a new stage in demands for democracy in an industrial society.

In 1832, Parliament abolished slavery in the Empire with the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. The government purchased the slaves for £20,000,000 (the money went to rich plantation owners who mostly lived in England), and freed the slaves, especially those in the Caribbean sugar islands.

====Leadership====
Prime Ministers of the period included: William Pitt the Younger, Lord Grenville, Duke of Portland, Spencer Perceval, Lord Liverpool, George Canning, Lord Goderich, Duke of Wellington, Lord Grey, Lord Melbourne, and Robert Peel.

==Victorian era==

Victoria ascended the throne in 1837 at age 18. Her long reign until 1901 saw Britain reach the zenith of its economic and political power. Exciting new technologies such as steam ships, railways, photography, and telegraphs appeared, making the world much faster-paced. Britain again remained mostly inactive in Continental politics, and it was not affected by the wave of revolutions in 1848. The Victorian era saw the fleshing out of the second British Empire. Scholars debate whether the Victorian period—as defined by a variety of sensibilities and political concerns that have come to be associated with the Victorians—actually begins with her coronation or the earlier passage of the Reform Act 1832. The era was preceded by the Georgian era and succeeded by the Edwardian era.

Historians like Bernard Porter have characterized the mid-Victorian era, (1850–1870) as Britain&#x27;s &#x27;Golden Years&#x27;. There was peace and prosperity, as the national income per person grew by half. Much of the prosperity was due to the increasing industrialization, especially in textiles and machinery, as well as to the worldwide network of trade and engineering that produce profits for British merchants and experts from across the globe. There was peace abroad (apart from the short Crimean war, 1854–1856), and social peace at home. Reforms in industrial conditions were set by Parliament. For example, in 1842, the nation was scandalized by the use of children in coal mines. The Mines and Collieries Act 1842 banned employment of girls and boys under ten years old from working underground in coal mines. Opposition to the new order melted away, says Porter. The Chartist movement, peaked as a democratic movement among the working class in 1848; its leaders moved to other pursuits, such as trade unions and cooperative societies. The working class ignored foreign agitators like Karl Marx in their midst, and joined in celebrating the new prosperity. Employers typically were paternalistic, and generally recognized the trade unions. Companies provided their employees with welfare services ranging from housing, schools and churches, to libraries, baths, and gymnasia. Middle-class reformers did their best to assist the working classes aspire to middle-class norms of &#x27;respectability.&#x27;

There was a spirit of libertarianism, says Porter, as people felt they were free. Taxes were very low, and government restrictions were minimal. There were still problem areas, such as occasional riots, especially those motivated by anti-Catholicism. Society was still ruled by the aristocracy and the gentry, which controlled high government offices, both houses of Parliament, the church, and the military. Becoming a rich businessman was not as prestigious as inheriting a title and owning a landed estate. Literature was doing well, but the fine arts languished as the Great Exhibition of 1851 showcased Britain&#x27;s industrial prowess rather than its sculpture, painting or music. The educational system was mediocre; the capstone universities (outside Scotland) were likewise mediocre. Historian Llewellyn Woodward has concluded:
According to historians David Brandon and Alan Brooke, the new system of railways after 1830 brought into being our modern world:

===Foreign policy===
====Free trade imperialism====
The Great London Exhibition of 1851 clearly demonstrated Britain&#x27;s dominance in engineering and industry; that lasted until the rise of the United States and Germany in the 1890s. Using the imperial tools of free trade and financial investment, it exerted major influence on many countries outside Europe, especially in Latin America and Asia. Thus Britain had both a formal Empire based on British rule and an informal one based on the British pound.

====Russia, France and the Ottoman Empire====

One nagging fear was the possible collapse of the Ottoman Empire. It was well understood that a collapse of that country would set off a scramble for its territory and possibly plunge Britain into war. To head that off Britain sought to keep the Russians from occupying Constantinople and taking over the Bosporous Straits, as well as from threatening India via Afghanistan. In 1853, Britain and France intervened in the Crimean War and defeated Russia at a very high cost in casualties. In the 1870s the Congress of Berlin blocked Russia from imposing the harsh Treaty of San Stefano on the Ottoman Empire. Despite its alliance with the French in the Crimean War, Britain viewed the Second Empire of Napoleon III with some distrust, especially as the emperor constructed ironclad warships and began returning France to a more active foreign policy.

====American Civil War====
During the American Civil War, British leaders personally disliked American republicanism and favoured the more aristocratic Confederacy, as it had been a major source of cotton for textile mills, but the country never recognized the Confederacy and neither signed a treaty with it. Prince Albert was effective in defusing a war scare in late 1861. The British people, who depended heavily on American food imports, generally favoured the United States. What little cotton was available came from New York, as the blockade by the US Navy shut down 95% of Southern exports to Britain. In September 1862, Britain (along with France) contemplated stepping in and negotiating a peace settlement, which could only mean war with the United States. But in the same month, US president Abraham Lincoln announced the Emancipation Proclamation would be issued in January 1863 making abolition of slavery in the Confederacy a war goal. Since support of the Confederacy now meant support for slavery, there was no longer any possibility of European intervention. However, the British working class were quite overwhelmingly pro-Union. In the end, although Britain could survive without Southern cotton, the North&#x27;s meat and grain was more important to feed the UK&#x27;s urban population, especially as a series of bad harvests had affected British agriculture in the late 1850s to early 1860s.

Meanwhile, the British sold arms to both sides, built blockade runners for a lucrative trade with the Confederacy, and surreptitiously allowed warships to be built for the Confederacy. The warships caused a major diplomatic row that was resolved in the Alabama Claims in 1872, in the Americans&#x27; favour.

====Empire expands====
In 1867, Britain united most of its North American colonies as Canada, giving it self-government and responsibility for its internal affairs. Britain handled foreign policy and defence. The second half of the 19th century saw a major expansion of Britain&#x27;s colonial empire in Asia and Africa as well as the Pacific. In the &quot;Scramble for Africa&quot;, the boast was having the Union Jack flying from &quot;Cairo to Cape Town.&quot; Britain defended its empire with the world&#x27;s dominant navy, and a small professional army. It was the only power in Europe to have no conscription.

The rise of the German Empire after 1871 posed a new challenge, for it (along with the United States) threatened to take Britain&#x27;s place as the world&#x27;s foremost industrial power. Germany acquired a number of colonies in Africa and the Pacific, but Chancellor Otto von Bismarck succeeded in achieving general peace through his balance of power strategy. When William II became emperor in 1888, he discarded Bismarck, began using bellicose language, and planned to build a navy to rival Britain&#x27;s.

===Boer War===
Ever since Britain had taken control of South Africa from the Netherlands in the Napoleonic Wars, it had run afoul of the Dutch settlers who further away and created two republics of their own. The British imperial vision called for control over the new countries and the Dutch-speaking &quot;Boers&quot; (or &quot;Afrikaners&quot;) fought back in the War in 1899. British historian Andrew Roberts argues that the Boers insisted on keeping full control of both their two small republics, allowing no role whatever for nonwhites, and distinctly limited roles for British and other European settlers. These &quot;Uitlanders&quot; were the base of the economy, paid 80% of the taxes, and had no vote. The Transvaal was in no sense a democracy, argues Roberts, for no black, Briton, Catholic, or Jew was allowed to vote or hold any office. Johannesburg was the business centre, with 50,000 primarily British residents, but was not permitted any local government. The English language was banned in official proceedings; no public meetings were permitted; newspapers were closed down arbitrarily; and full citizenship was technically possible but quite rare. Roberts says President Paul Kruger &quot;ran a tight, tough, quasi-police state from his state capital, Pretoria.&quot; The British government officially protested; while theoretically recognizing the Transvaal&#x27;s right to manage its internal affairs, cabinet member Joseph Chamberlain detailed the many ways how Uitlanders were mistreated as second-class non-citizens, despite their essential role in producing prosperity.

The Boer response to the British pressure was to declare war on 20 October 1899. The 410,000 Boers were massively outnumbered, but amazingly they waged a successful guerrilla war, which gave the British regulars a difficult fight. The Boers were landlocked and did not have access to outside help. The weight of numbers, superior equipment, and often brutal tactics eventually brought about a British victory. To defeat the guerrillas, the British rounded up their women and children into concentration camps, where many died of disease. World outrage focused on the camps, led by a large faction of the Liberal Party in Britain. However, the United States gave its support. The Boer republics were merged into Union of South Africa in 1910; it had internal self-government but its foreign policy was controlled by London and was an integral part of the British Empire.
The unexpectedly great difficulty in defeating the Boers forced a reevaluation of British policy. In military terms, it was clear that the Cardwell reforms had been inadequate. The call to establish a general staff to control military operations had been shelved by the Duke of Cambridge, himself a royal with enormous authority. It took a five more years to set up a general staff and other Army reforms, under the administration of Lord Haldane. The Royal Navy was now threatened by Germany. Britain responded by a massive building programme launched in 1904 by the highly controversial First Sea Lord, John Fisher. He launched in 1906. It was the first modern battleship, based on new armour, new propulsion, new guns and gunnery that made all other warships obsolete. The Boer War demonstrated that Britain was not loved around the world—it had more enemies than friends and its policy of &quot;splendid isolation&quot; was one of high risk. It needed new friends. It made a military alliance with Japan, and buried old controversies to forge a close relationship with the United States.

===Ireland and Home Rule===

Part of the agreement which led to the Acts of Union 1800 stipulated that the Penal Laws in Ireland were to be repealed and Catholic emancipation granted. However, King George III blocked emancipation. A campaign under Daniel O&#x27;Connell led to the concession of Catholic Emancipation in 1829, allowing Catholics to sit in Parliament.

When potato blight hit Ireland in 1846, much of the rural population was left without food. Relief efforts were inadequate and hundreds of thousands died in the Great Hunger. Millions more migrated to England, or to North America. Ireland became permanently smaller in terms of population.

In the 1870s new moderate nationalist movement was formed. As the Irish Parliamentary Party it became a major factor in parliament under Charles Stewart Parnell. Home Rule Bills introduced by Liberal Prime Minister Gladstone failed of passage, and split the Liberals. A significant unionist minority (largely based in Ulster), opposed Home Rule, fearing that a Catholic-Nationalist parliament in Dublin would discriminate against them and would also hurt its industry. Parliament passed laws in 1870, 1881, 1903 and 1909 that enabled most tenant farmers to purchase their lands, and lowered the rents of the others.

===Leadership===
Historically, the aristocracy was divided between Conservatives and Liberals. However, when Gladstone committed to home rule for Ireland, Britain&#x27;s upper classes largely abandoned the Liberal party, giving the Conservatives a large permanent majority in the House of Lords. High Society in London, following the Queen, largely ostracized home rulers, and Liberal clubs were badly split. Joseph Chamberlain took a major element of upper-class supporters out of the Party and into a third party, the Liberal Unionists, which collaborated with and eventually merged into the Conservative party. The Gladstonian liberals in 1891 adopted the Newcastle Programme that included home rule for Ireland, disestablishment of the Church of England in Wales and Scotland, tighter controls on the sale of liquor, major extension of factory regulation, and various democratic political reforms. The Programme had a strong appeal to the Nonconformist middle-class Liberal element, which felt liberated by the departure of the aristocracy.

====Queen Victoria====
Queen Victoria played a small role in politics, but became the iconic symbol of the nation, the empire, and proper, restrained behaviour. Her strength lay in good common sense and directness of character; she expressed the qualities of the British nation which at that time made it preeminent in the world. As a symbol of domesticity, endurance and Empire, and as a woman holding the highest public office during an age when middle- and upper-class women were expected to beautify the home while men dominated the public sphere, Queen Victoria&#x27;s influence has been enduring. Her success as ruler was due to the power of the self-images she successively portrayed of innocent young woman, devoted wife and mother, suffering and patient widow, and grandmotherly matriarch.

====Palmerston====
Lord Palmerston dominated foreign policy for decades, through a period when Britain was at the height of its power, serving terms as both Foreign Secretary and Prime Minister. He became controversial at the time, and remains so today, for his aggressive bullying and his &quot;liberal interventionist&quot; policies. He was intensely patriotic; he used the Royal Navy to undermine the Atlantic slave trade.

====Disraeli====
Disraeli and Gladstone dominated the politics of the late 19th century, Britain&#x27;s golden age of parliamentary government. They long were idolized, but historians in recent decades have become much more critical, especially regarding Disraeli.

Benjamin Disraeli (prime minister 1868 and 1874–1880) remains an iconic hero of the Conservative Party. He played a central role in the creation of the Party, defining its policies and its broad outreach. Disraeli is remembered for his influential voice in world affairs, his political battles with the Liberal leader William Gladstone, and his one-nation conservatism or &quot;Tory democracy&quot;. He made the Conservatives the party most identified with the glory and power of the British Empire. He was born into a Jewish family, which became Episcopalian when he was 12 years old.

Disraeli fought to protect established political, social, and religious values and elites; he emphasized the need for national leadership in response to radicalism, uncertainty, and materialism. He is especially known for his enthusiastic support for expanding and strengthening the British Empire in India and Africa as the foundation of British greatness, in contrast to Gladstone&#x27;s negative attitude toward imperialism. Gladstone denounced Disraeli&#x27;s policies of territorial aggrandizement, military pomp, and imperial symbolism (such as making the Queen Empress of India), saying it did not fit a modern commercial and Christian nation.

In foreign policy he is best known for battling and besting Russia. Disraeli&#x27;s second term was dominated by the Eastern question—the slow decay of the Ottoman Empire and the desire of Russia to gain at its expense. Disraeli arranged for the British to purchase a major interest in the Suez Canal Company (in Ottoman-controlled Egypt). In 1878, faced with Russian victories against the Ottomans, he worked at the Congress of Berlin to maintain peace in the Balkans and made terms favourable to Britain which weakened Russia, its longstanding enemy.

Disraeli&#x27;s old reputation as the &quot;Tory democrat&quot; and promoter of the welfare state has faded as historians argue that he had few proposals for social legislation in 1874–1880, and that the 1867 Reform Act did not reflect a vision for the unenfranchised working man. However he did work to reduce class antagonism, for as Perry notes, &quot;When confronted with specific problems, he sought to reduce tension between town and country, landlords and farmers, capital and labour, and warring religious sects in Britain and Ireland—in other words, to create a unifying synthesis.&quot;

====Gladstone====
William Ewart Gladstone was the Liberal counterpart to Disraeli, serving as prime minister four times (1868–1874, 1880–1885, 1886, and 1892–1894). He was the moral compass of the Liberal Party and is famous for his oratory, his religiosity, his liberalism, his rivalry with Disraeli, and for his poor relations with the Queen. Although he personally was not a Nonconformist, and rather disliked them in person, he formed a coalition with the Nonconformists that gave the Liberals a powerful base of support.

Gladstone&#x27;s first ministry saw many reforms including Disestablishment of the Protestant Church of Ireland and the introduction of secret voting. His party was defeated in 1874, but made a comeback based on opposition to the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s Bulgarian atrocities against Christians. Gladstone&#x27;s Midlothian campaign of 1879–1880 was a pathbreaking introduction of many modern political campaigning techniques. His Liberal party was increasingly pulled apart on the Irish issue. He proposed Irish home rule in 1886; It failed to pass and the resulting split in the Liberal Party kept it out of office for most of the next 20 years.

Gladstone&#x27;s financial policies, based on the notion of balanced budgets, low taxes and laissez-faire, were suited to a developing capitalist society but could not respond effectively as economic and social conditions changed. Called the &quot;Grand Old Man&quot; later in life, he was always a dynamic popular orator who appealed strongly to British workers and lower middle class. The deeply religious Gladstone brought a new moral tone to politics with his evangelical sensibility and opposition to aristocracy. His moralism often angered his upper-class opponents (including Queen Victoria, who strongly favoured Disraeli), and his heavy-handed control split the Liberal party. His foreign policy goal was to create a European order based on cooperation rather than conflict and mutual trust instead of rivalry and suspicion; the rule of law was to supplant the reign of force and self-interest. This Gladstonian concept of a harmonious Concert of Europe was opposed to and ultimately defeated by the Germans with a Bismarckian system of manipulated alliances and antagonisms.

Regarding Ireland, the major Liberal efforts focused on land reform with the Land Acts, and the disestablishment of the (Anglican) Church of Ireland through the Irish Church Act 1869. Gladstone became a champion of Home Rule, but it caused a deep split in the Liberal Party. Joseph Chamberlain formed the breakaway Liberal Unionist Party that refused to consider Home Rule for Ireland and became allied with the Conservatives.

In terms of historic reforms, Gladstone&#x27;s first ministry 1868–1874 was his most successful. He was an idealist who insisted that government should take the lead in making society more efficient, more fair, and that the government should expand its role in society in order to extend liberty and toleration. The Education Act of 1870 made universal schooling a major national policy. The justice system was made up of multiple overlapping and conflicting courts dating back centuries. The Judicature Act of 1873 merged them into one central court. In local government the challenges of sanitation and clean water in fast-growing cities were met with new powers in the realm of public health. Local government was streamlined in a later Gladstone ministry, and made more powerful and standardized. Patronage and favouritism were replaced by civil service examinations, downplaying the role of family and aristocracy and emphasizing the role of talent and ability. The secret ballot was enacted in 1872 to prevent the buying of votes—politicians would not pay out the money if they were not sure how the person voted. The Trade Union Act 1871 lessened the intimidation of employers, made unions legal, and protected their funding from lawsuits. The Protestant Church of Ireland was disestablished. Catholics no longer had to pay taxes to it. While the Navy was in fine shape, the Army was not. Its organization was confused, its policies unfair, and its punishments were based chiefly on flogging. At the county level, politicians named the officers of the county militia units, preferring connections in class over capacity. The regular army called for enlistments for 21 years, but with reforms initiated by Edward Cardwell, Gladstone&#x27;s War Secretary, enlistments were reduced to six years, plus six years in the reserves. Regiments were organized by territorial districts, and advanced with modern rifles. The complex chain of command was simplified, and in wartime the county militias were under the control of the central war office. The purchase of officers&#x27; commissions was abolished, as was flogging in peacetime. The reforms were not quite complete, the Duke of Cambridge, as Commander-in-Chief of the Forces, still had great authority, despite his mediocre abilities. Historians have given Gladstone high marks on his successful reform programme.

====Salisbury====
Historians agree that Lord Salisbury as foreign minister and prime minister in the late 19th century was a strong and effective leader in foreign affairs. He had a superb grasp of the issues, and proved:

Conservative Prime Minister Lord Salisbury was a &quot;talented leader who was an icon of traditional, aristocratic conservatism&quot;. Salisbury was &quot;a great foreign minister, [but] essentially negative, indeed reactionary in home affairs&quot;. Another historian&#x27;s estimate is more favourable; he portrays Salisbury as a leader who &quot;held back the popular tide for twenty years.&quot; &quot;[I]nto the &#x27;progressive&#x27; strain of modern Conservatism he simply will not fit.&quot; One historian pointed to &quot;the narrow cynicism of Salisbury&quot;. One admirer of Salisbury agrees that Salisbury found the democracy born of the 1867 and 1884 Reform Acts as &quot;perhaps less objectionable than he had expected—succeeding, through his public persona, in mitigating some part of its nastiness.&quot;

==Early 20th century (1901–1918)==

Prime Ministers from 1900 to 1945: Marquess of Salisbury, Arthur Balfour, Henry Campbell-Bannerman, H. H. Asquith, David Lloyd George, Bonar Law, Stanley Baldwin, Ramsay MacDonald, Stanley Baldwin, Ramsay MacDonald, Stanley Baldwin, Neville Chamberlain and Winston Churchill.

The Liberal Party was in power from 1906 to 1915, when it formed a wartime coalition. It passed the welfare reforms that created a basic British welfare state. It weakened the veto power of Lords, blocked woman suffrage. In 1914 it apparently &quot;solved&quot; the problem of Irish Home Rule but when the war broke out the solution was shelved. H. H. Asquith was Liberal Prime Minister between 1908 and 1916, followed by David Lloyd George, 1916–1922. Although Asquith was the Party leader, the dominant Liberal was Lloyd George. Asquith was overwhelmed by the wartime role of coalition prime minister, and Lloyd George replaced him as the coalition prime minister in late 1916 but Asquith remained Liberal party leader. The two fought for years over control of the party, badly weakening it in the process. Historian Martin Pugh in &quot;The Oxford Companion to British History&quot; argues that Lloyd George:

===Edwardian era 1901–1914===
Queen Victoria died in 1901 and her son Edward VII became king, inaugurating the Edwardian Era, which was characterised by great and ostentatious displays of wealth in contrast to the sombre Victorian Era. With the advent of the 20th century, things such as motion pictures, automobiles, and aeroplanes were coming into use. The new century was characterised by a feeling of great optimism. The social reforms of the last century continued into the 20th with the Labour Party being formed in 1900. Edward died in 1910, to be succeeded by George V, who reigned 1910–1936. Scandal-free, hard working and popular, George V was the British monarch who, with Queen Mary, established the modern pattern of exemplary conduct for British royalty, based on middle-class values and virtues. He understood the overseas Empire better than any of his prime ministers and used his exceptional memory for figures and details, whether of uniforms, politics, or relations, to good effect in reaching out in conversation with his subjects.

The era was prosperous but political crises were escalating out of control. George Dangerfield (1935) identified the &quot;strange death of liberal England&quot; as the multiple crisis that hit simultaneously in 1910–1914 with serious social and political instability arising from the Irish crisis, labour unrest, the women&#x27;s suffrage movements, and partisan and constitutional struggles in Parliament. At one point it even seemed the Army might refuse orders dealing with Northern Ireland. No solution appeared in sight when the unexpected outbreak of the Great War in 1914 put domestic issues on hold.

Ross McKibbin argues that the political party system of the Edwardian era was in delicate balance on the eve of the war in 1914. The Liberals were in power with a progressive alliance of Labour and, off and on, Irish Nationalists. The coalition was committed to free trade (as opposed to the high tariffs the Conservatives sought), free collective bargaining for trades unions (which Conservatives opposed), an active social policy that was forging the welfare state, and constitutional reform to reduce the power of the House of Lords. The coalition lacked a long-term plan, because it was cobbled together from leftovers from the 1890s. The sociological basis was non-Anglican religion and non-English ethnicity rather than the emerging class conflict emphasized by Labour.

===First World War===

On 4 August 1914, the King declared war on Germany and Austria, following the advice of Prime Minister H. H. Asquith of the Liberal Party. The rest of the Empire automatically followed. The cabinet&#x27;s basic reasons for declaring war focused on a deep commitment to France and avoidance of splitting the Liberal Party. Top Liberals led by Asquith and Foreign Secretary Edward Grey threatened to resign if the cabinet refused to support France. That would deeply split the party and mean loss of control of the government to a coalition or to the Unionist (i.e. Conservative) opposition. However, the large antiwar element among Liberals, with David Lloyd George as spokesperson, would support the war to honour the 1839 treaty that guaranteed Belgian neutrality. So Belgium rather than France was the public reason given. Posters took the line that Britain was required to go to war to safeguard Belgium&#x27;s neutrality under the 1839 Treaty of London.
Britain actually entered the war to support France, which had entered to support Russia, which in turn had entered to support Serbia. Britain became part of the Triple Entente with France and Russia, which (with smaller allies) fought the Central Powers of Germany, Austria and the Ottoman Empire. After a few weeks the Western Front turned into a killing ground in which millions of men died but no army made a large advance. The main British contribution was financial—loans and grants helped Russia, Italy and smaller allies afford the war.

The stalemate required an endless supply of men and munitions. By 1916, volunteering fell off, the government imposed conscription in Britain (but not in Ireland) to keep up the strength of the Army. With his slow start and mobilization of national resources, H. H. Asquith had proven inadequate: he was more of a committee chairman, and he started to drink so heavily after midday that only his morning hours were effective. Asquith was replaced in December 1916 with the much more effective David Lloyd George. He had strong support from Unionists and considerable backing of Labour, as well as a majority of his own Liberal Party, although Asquith turned hostile. Lloyd George answered the loud demands for a much more decisive government by setting up a new small war cabinet, a cabinet secretariat under Maurice Hankey, and a secretariat of private advisors in the &#x27;Garden Suburb&#x27;; he moved towards prime ministerial control.

Britain eagerly supported the war, but Irish Nationalist opinion was divided: some served in the British Army, but the Irish Republican Brotherhood plotted an Easter Rising in 1916. It quickly failed but the brutal repression that followed turned that element against Britain, as did failed British plans to introduce conscription in Ireland in 1917.

The nation now successfully mobilised its manpower, womanpower, industry, finances, Empire and diplomacy, in league with France and the U.S. to defeat the enemy. The British Army had traditionally never been a large employer in the nation, with the regular army standing at 250,000 at the start of the war. By 1918, there were about five million people in the army and the fledgling Royal Air Force, newly formed from the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS) and the Royal Flying Corps (RFC), was about the same size of the pre-war army. The economy grew about 14% from 1914 to 1918 despite the absence of so many men in the services; by contrast the German economy shrank 27%. The War saw a decline of civilian consumption, with a major reallocation to munitions. The government share of GDP soared from 8% in 1913 to 38% in 1918 (compared to 50% in 1943). The war forced Britain to use up its financial reserves and borrow large sums from New York banks. After the U.S. entered in April 1917, the Treasury borrowed directly from the U.S. government.

The Royal Navy dominated the seas, defeating the smaller German fleet in the only major naval battle of the war, the Battle of Jutland in 1916. Germany was blockaded, leading to an increasing shortage of food. Germany&#x27;s naval strategy increasingly turned towards use of U-boats to strike back against the British, despite the risk of triggering war with the powerful neutral power, the United States. Berlin declared the water routes to Britain were war zones where any ship, neutral or otherwise, was a target. Nevertheless, international route law required giving the crew and passengers an opportunity to get into their lifeboats. In May 1915, a U-boat, without warning, torpedoed the British passenger liner Lusitania; it sank in 18 minutes, drowning over 1000 civilians including over 100 Americans. Vigorous protests by American President Woodrow Wilson forced Berlin to abandon unrestricted submarine warfare. With victory over Russia in 1917, the German high command now calculated it could finally have numerical superiority on the Western Front. Planning for a massive spring offensive in 1918, it resumed the sinking of all merchant ships without warning, even if they were flying the American flag. The US entered the war alongside the Allies (without officially joining them), and provided the needed money and supplies to sustain the Allies&#x27; war efforts. The U-boat threat was ultimately defeated by a convoy system across the Atlantic.

On other fronts, the British, French, New Zealanders, Australians, and Japanese seized Germany&#x27;s colonies. Britain fought the Ottoman Empire, suffering defeats in the Gallipoli campaign and in Mesopotamia (Iraq), while arousing the Arabs who helped expel the Turks from their lands. Exhaustion and war-weariness were growing worse in 1917, as the fighting in France continued with no end in sight. After defeating Russia, the Germans tried to win in the spring of 1918 before the millions of American soldiers arrived. They failed, and they were overwhelmed by August and finally accepted an Armistice on 11 November 1918, that amounted to a surrender.

British society and government were radically transformed by the repeated calls for manpower, the employment of women, the dramatic increase in industrial production and munitions, price controls and rationing, and the wide and deep emotional patriotism dedicated to winning the war. Parliament took a backseat, as new departments bureaus committees and operations were created every week, experts were consulted, and the prime minister&#x27;s Orders in Council replaced the slow legislative process. Even after peace arrived, the new size and dynamism had permanently transformed the effectiveness of British government. David Lloyd George, also a Liberal, was the high-powered Minister of Munitions who replaced Asquith in late 1916. He gave energy and dynamism to the war effort with his remarkable ability to convince people to do what he wanted and thus get ideas put into actual useful high-speed motion. His top aide Winston Churchill said of Lloyd George: &quot;He was the greatest master of the art of getting things done and of putting things through that I ever knew; in fact no British politician my day has possessed half his competence as a mover of men and affairs.&quot;

Victorian attitudes and ideals that had continued into the first years of the 20th century changed during the First World War. The almost three million casualties were known as the &quot;Lost Generation&quot;, and such numbers inevitably left society scarred. The lost generation felt its sacrifice was little regarded in Britain, with poems like Siegfried Sassoon&#x27;s &quot;Blighters&quot; criticising the ill-informed jingoism of the home front. The lost generation was politically inert, and never had its chance to make a generational change in political power. The young men who governed Britain in 1914 were the same old men who governed Britain in 1939.

===Postwar settlement===
The war had been won by Britain and its allies, but at a terrible human and financial cost, creating a sentiment that wars should never be fought again. The League of Nations was founded with the idea that nations could resolve their differences peacefully, but these hopes were unfulfilled. The harsh peace settlement imposed on Germany would leave it embittered and seeking revenge.

At the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, Lloyd George, American President Woodrow Wilson and French premier Georges Clemenceau made all the major decisions. They formed the League of Nations as a mechanism to prevent future wars. They sliced up the losers to form new nations in Europe, and divided up the German colonies and Ottoman holdings outside Turkey. They imposed what appeared to be heavy financial reparations (but in the event were of modest size). They humiliated Germany by forcing it to declare its guilt for starting the war, a policy that caused deep resentment in Germany and helped fuel reactions such as Nazism. Britain gained the German colony of Tanganyika and part of Togoland in Africa, while its dominions added other colonies. Britain gained League of Nations mandates over Palestine, which had been partly promised as a homeland for Jewish settlers, and Iraq. Iraq became fully independent in 1932. Egypt, which had been a British protectorate since 1882, became independent in 1922, although the British remained there until 1952.

===Irish independence and partition===

In 1912 the House of Commons passed a new Home Rule bill. Under the Parliament Act 1911 the House of Lords retained the power to delay legislation by up to two years, so it was eventually enacted as the Government of Ireland Act 1914, but suspended for the duration of the war. Civil war threatened when the Protestant-Unionists of Northern Ireland refused to be placed under Catholic-Nationalist control. Semi-military units were formed ready to fight—the Unionist Ulster Volunteers opposed to the Act and their Nationalist counterparts, the Irish Volunteers supporting the Act. The outbreak of the World War in 1914 put the crisis on political hold. A disorganized Easter Rising in 1916 was brutally suppressed by the British, which had the effect of galvanizing Nationalist demands for independence. Prime Minister Lloyd George failed to introduce Home Rule in 1918 and in the December 1918 General Election Sinn Féin won a majority of Irish seats. Its MPs refused to take their seats at Westminster, instead choosing to sit in the First Dáil parliament in Dublin. A declaration of independence was ratified by Dáil Éireann, the self-declared Republic&#x27;s parliament in January 1919. An Anglo-Irish War was fought between Crown forces and the Irish Republican Army between January 1919 and June 1921. The war ended with the Anglo-Irish Treaty of December 1921 that established the Irish Free State. Six northern, predominantly Protestant counties became Northern Ireland and have remained part of the United Kingdom ever since, despite demands of the Catholic minority to unite with the Republic of Ireland. Britain officially adopted the name &quot;United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland&quot; by the Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927.

==Interwar era 1918–1939==

Historian Arthur Marwick sees a radical transformation of British society resulting from the Great War, a deluge that swept away many old attitudes and brought in a more equalitarian society. He sees the famous literary pessimism of the 1920s as misplaced, arguing there were major positive long-term consequences of the war to British society. He points to an energized self-consciousness among workers that quickly built up the Labour Party, the coming of partial woman suffrage, and an acceleration of social reform and state control of the economy. He sees a decline of deference toward the aristocracy and established authority in general, and the weakening among youth of traditional restraints on individual moral behavior. The chaperone faded away; village druggists sold contraceptives. Marwick says that class distinctions softened, national cohesion increased, and British society became more equal.

===Popular culture===
As a leisure, literacy, wealth, ease of travel, and a broadened sense of community grew in Britain from the late 19th century onward, there was more time and interest in leisure activities of all sorts, on the part of all classes. The annual vacation became common. Tourists flocked to seaside resorts; Blackpool hosted 7 million visitors a year in the 1930s. Organized leisure was primarily a male activity, with middle-class women allowed in at the margins. There were class differences with upper-class clubs, and working-class and middle-class pubs. Heavy drinking declined; there were more competitions that attracted heavy betting. Participation in sports and all sorts of leisure activities increased for the average Englishman, and his interest in spectator sports increased dramatically. By the 1920s the cinema and radio attracted all classes, ages and genders in very large numbers, with young women taking the lead. Working-class men wearing flat caps and eating fish and chips were boisterous football spectators. They sang along at the music hall, fancied their pigeons, gambled on horse racing, and took the family to Blackpool in summer. The cartoon realization of this life style &quot;Andy Capp&quot; began in 1957. Political activists complained that working-class leisure diverted men away from revolutionary agitation.

====Cinema and radio====

The British film industry emerged in the 1890s when cinemas in general broke through in the western world, and built heavily on the strong reputation of the London legitimate theatre for actors, directors and producers. The problem was that the American market was so much larger and richer. It bought up the top talent, especially when Hollywood came to the fore in the 1920s and produced over 80 per cent of the total world output. Efforts to fight back were futile—the government set a quota for British made films, but it failed. Hollywood furthermore dominated the lucrative Canadian and Australian markets. Bollywood (based in Bombay) dominated the huge Indian market. The most prominent directors remaining in London were Alexander Korda, an expatriate Hungarian, and Alfred Hitchcock. There was a revival of creativity in the 1933–1945 era, especially with the arrival of Jewish filmmakers and actors fleeing the Nazis. Meanwhile, giant palaces were built for the huge audiences that wanted to see Hollywood films. In Liverpool 40 per cent of the population attended one of the 69 cinemas once a week; 25 per cent went twice. Traditionalists grumbled about the American cultural invasion, but the permanent impact was minor.

In radio, British audiences had no choice apart from the upscale programming of the BBC, a government agency which had a monopoly on broadcasting. John Reith, an intensely moralistic engineer, was in full charge. His goal was to broadcast, &quot;All that is best in every department of human knowledge, endeavour and achievement... The preservation of a high moral tone is obviously of paramount importance.&quot;

====Sports====

The British showed a more profound interest in sports, and in greater variety, than any rival. They gave pride of place to such moral issues as sportsmanship and fair play. Football proved highly attractive to the urban working classes, which introduced the rowdy spectator to the sports world. New games became popular almost overnight, including golf, lawn tennis, cycling and hockey. Women were much more likely to enter these sports than the old established ones. The aristocracy and landed gentry, with their ironclad control over land rights, dominated hunting, shooting, fishing and horse racing. Cricket reflected the Imperial spirit throughout the Empire (except Canada). Test matches began by the 1870s; the most famous are those between Australia and England for The Ashes.

====Reading====
As literacy and leisure time expanded after 1900, reading became a popular pastime. New additions to adult fiction doubled during the 1920s, reaching 2800 new books a year by 1935. Libraries tripled their stock, and saw heavy demand for new fiction. A dramatic innovation was the inexpensive paperback, pioneered by Allen Lane at Penguin Books in 1935. The first titles included novels by Ernest Hemingway and Agatha Christie. They were sold cheap (usually sixpence) in a wide variety of inexpensive stores such as Woolworth&#x27;s. Penguin aimed at an educated middle class &quot;middlebrow&quot; audience. It avoided the downmarket image of American paperbacks. The line signalled cultural self-improvement and political education. However the war years caused a shortage of staff for publishers and book stores, and a severe shortage of rationed paper, worsened by the air raid on Paternoster Square in 1940 that burned 5 million books in warehouses.

Romantic fiction was especially popular, with Mills &amp; Boon the leading publisher. Romantic encounters were embodied in a principle of sexual purity that demonstrated not only social conservatism, but also how heroines could control their personal autonomy. Adventure magazines became quite popular, especially those published by DC Thomson; the publisher sent observers around the country to talk to boys and learn what they wanted to read about. The story line in magazines and cinema that most appealed to boys was the glamorous heroism of British soldiers fighting wars that were exciting and just.

===Politics and economics of the 1920s===

====Expanding the welfare state====
Two major programmes that permanently expanded the welfare state passed in 1919 and 1920 with surprisingly little debate, even as the Conservatives dominated parliament. The Housing, Town Planning, &amp;c. Act 1919 set up a system of government housing that followed the 1918 campaign promises of &quot;homes fit for heroes.&quot; This &quot;Addison Act&quot;, named after the first Minister of Health, Christopher Addison, required local authorities to survey their housing needs and start building houses to replace slums. The Treasury subsidized the low rents. In England and Wales 214,000 houses were built, and the Ministry of Health became largely a ministry of housing.

The Unemployment Insurance Act 1920 passed at a time of very little unemployment. It set up the dole system that provided 39 weeks of unemployment benefits to practically the entire civilian working population except domestic service, farm workers, and civil servants. Funded in part by weekly contributions from both employers and employed, it provided weekly payments of 15s for unemployed men and 12s for unemployed women. Historian C. L. Mowat calls these two laws &quot;Socialism by the back door&quot;, and notes how surprised politicians were when the costs to the Treasury soared during the high unemployment of 1921.

===Conservative control===
The Lloyd George ministry fell apart in 1922. Stanley Baldwin, as leader of the Conservative Party (1923–1937) and as Prime Minister (in 1923–1924, 1924–1929 and 1935–1937), dominated British politics. His mixture of strong social reforms and steady government proved a powerful election combination, with the result that the Conservatives governed Britain either by themselves or as the leading component of the National Government. He was the last party leader to win over 50% of the vote (in the general election of 1931). Baldwin&#x27;s political strategy was to polarize the electorate so that voters would choose between the Conservatives on the right and the Labour Party on the left, squeezing out the Liberals in the middle. The polarization did take place and while the Liberals remained active under Lloyd George, they won few seats and were a minor factor until they joined a coalition with the Conservatives in 2010. Baldwin&#x27;s reputation soared in the 1920s and 1930s, but crashed after 1945 as he was blamed for the appeasement policies toward Germany, and as admirers of Churchill made him the Conservative icon. Since the 1970s Baldwin&#x27;s reputation has recovered somewhat.

Labour won the 1923 election, but in 1924 Baldwin and the Conservatives returned with a large majority.

McKibbin finds that the political culture of the interwar period was built around an anti-socialist middle class, supported by the Conservative leaders, especially Baldwin.

===Economics===
Taxes rose sharply during the war and never returned to their old levels. A rich man paid 8% of his income in taxes before the war, and about a third afterwards. Much of the money went for the dole, the weekly unemployment benefits. About 5% of the national income every year was transferred from the rich to the poor. A. J. P. Taylor argues most people &quot;were enjoying a richer life than any previously known in the history of the world: longer holidays, shorter hours, higher real wages.&quot;

The British economy was lackluster in the 1920s, with sharp declines and high unemployment in heavy industry and coal, especially in Scotland and Wales. Exports of coal and steel fell in half by 1939 and the business community was slow to adopt the new labour and management principles coming from the US, such as Fordism, consumer credit, eliminating surplus capacity, designing a more structured management, and using greater economies of scale. For over a century the shipping industry had dominated world trade, but it remained in the doldrums despite various stimulus efforts by the government. With the very sharp decline in world trade after 1929, its condition became critical.

Chancellor of the Exchequer Winston Churchill put Britain back on the gold standard in 1925, which many economists blame for the mediocre performance of the economy. Others point to a variety of factors, including the inflationary effects of the World War and supply-side shocks caused by reduced working hours after the war.

By the late 1920s, economic performance had stabilised, but the overall situation was disappointing, for Britain had fallen behind the United States as the leading industrial power. There also remained a strong economic divide between the north and south of England during this period, with the south of England and the Midlands fairly prosperous by the Thirties, while parts of south Wales and the industrial north of England became known as &quot;distressed areas&quot; due to particularly high rates of unemployment and poverty. Despite this, the standard of living continued to improve as local councils built new houses to let to families rehoused from outdated slums, with up to date facilities including indoor toilets, bathrooms and electric lighting now being included in the new properties. The private sector enjoyed a housebuilding boom during the 1930s.

====Labour====
During the war, trade unions were encouraged and their membership grew from 4.1 million in 1914 to 6.5 million in 1918. They peaked at 8.3 million in 1920 before relapsing to 5.4 million in 1923.

Coal was a sick industry; the best seams were being exhausted, raising the cost. Demand fell as oil began replacing coal for fuel. The 1926 general strike was a nine-day nationwide walkout of 1.3 million railwaymen, transport workers, printers, dockers, iron workers and steelworkers supporting the 1.2 million coal miners who had been locked out by the owners. The miners had rejected the owners&#x27; demands for longer hours and reduced pay in the face of falling prices. The Conservative government had provided a nine-month subsidy in 1925 but that was not enough to turn around a sick industry. To support the miners the Trades Union Congress (TUC), an umbrella organization of all trades unions, called out certain critical unions. The hope was the government would intervene to reorganize and rationalize the industry, and raise the subsidy. The Conservative government had stockpiled supplies and essential services continued with middle class volunteers. All three major parties opposed the strike. The Labour Party leaders did not approve and feared it would tar the party with the image of radicalism, for the Comintern in Moscow had sent instructions for Communists to aggressively promote the strike. The general strike itself was largely non-violent, but the miners&#x27; lockout continued and there was violence in Scotland. It was the only general strike in British history, for TUC leaders such as Ernest Bevin considered it a mistake. Most historians treat it as a singular event with few long-term consequences, but Martin Pugh says it accelerated the movement of working-class voters to the Labour Party, which led to future gains. The Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act 1927 made general strikes illegal and ended the automatic payment of union members to the Labour Party. That act was largely repealed in 1946. The coal industry used up the more accessible coal and as costs rose output fell from 2567 million tons in 1924 to 183 million in 1945. The Labour government nationalised the mines in 1947.

===Great Depression===

The Great Depression originated in the United States in late 1929 and quickly spread to the world. Britain had never experienced the boom that had characterized the US, Germany, Canada and Australia in the 1920s, so its bust appeared less severe. Britain&#x27;s world trade fell in half (1929–1933), the output of heavy industry fell by a third, employment profits plunged in nearly all sectors. At the depth in summer 1932, registered unemployed numbered 3.5 million, and many more had only part-time employment. Experts tried to remain optimistic. John Maynard Keynes, who had not predicted the slump, said, &quot;&#x27;There will be no serious direct consequences in London. We find the look ahead decidedly encouraging.&quot;

On the left figures such as Sidney and Beatrice Webb, J. A. Hobson, and G. D. H. Cole repeated the warnings they had been making for years about the imminent death of capitalism, only now far more people paid attention. Starting in 1935 the Left Book Club provided a new warning every month, and built up the credibility of Soviet-style socialism as an alternative.

Particularly hardest hit by economic problems were the north of England, Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales; unemployment reached 70% in some areas at the start of the 1930s (with more than 3 million out of work nationally) and many families depended entirely on the dole.

In 1936, by which time unemployment was lower, 200 unemployed men made a highly publicized march from Jarrow to London in a bid to show the plight of the industrial poor. Although much romanticized by the Left, the Jarrow Crusade marked a deep split in the Labour Party and resulted in no government action. Unemployment remained high until the war absorbed all the job seekers. George Orwell&#x27;s book &quot;The Road to Wigan Pier&quot; gives a bleak overview of the hardships of the time.

===Appeasement===


Vivid memories of the horrors and deaths of the World War made Britain and its leaders strongly inclined to pacifism in the interwar era. The challenge came from dictators, first Benito Mussolini of Italy, then Adolf Hitler of a much more powerful Nazi Germany. The League of Nations proved disappointing to its supporters; it was unable to resolve any of the threats posed by the dictators. British policy was to &quot;appease&quot; them in the hopes they would be satiated. By 1938 it was clear that war was looming, and that Germany had the world&#x27;s most powerful military. The final act of appeasement came when Britain and France sacrificed Czechoslovakia to Hitler&#x27;s demands at the Munich Agreement of 1938. Instead of satiation Hitler menaced Poland, and at last Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain dropped appeasement and stood firm in promising to defend Poland. Hitler however cut a deal with Joseph Stalin to divide Eastern Europe; when Germany did invade Poland in September 1939, Britain and France declared war; the British Commonwealth followed London&#x27;s lead.

== World War II (1939–1945)==


The King declared war on Nazi Germany in September 1939, after the German invasion of Poland. During the quiet period of &quot;Phoney War&quot;, the British sent to France the most highly mechanized army in the world; together with France they had more tanks than Germany, but fewer warplanes. The smashing German victory in Spring 1940 was due entirely to &quot;superior combat doctrine. Realistic training, imaginative battlefield leadership, and unparalleled initiative from generals down to sergeants.&quot; The British with the thinnest of margins rescued its main army from Dunkirk (as well as many French soldiers), leaving all their equipment and war supplies behind. Winston Churchill came to power, promising to fight the Germans to the very end. The Germans threatened an invasion—which the Royal Navy was prepared to repel. First the Germans tried to achieve air supremacy but were defeated by the Royal Air Force in the Battle of Britain in late summer 1940. Japan declared war in December 1941, and quickly seized Hong Kong, Malaya, Singapore, and Burma, and threatened Australia and India. Britain formed an alliance with the Soviet Union (starting in 1941) and very close ties to the United States (starting in 1940). The war was very expensive. It was paid for by high taxes, by selling off assets, and by accepting large amounts of Lend-Lease from the U.S. and Canada. The U.S. gave $30 billion in munitions; Canada also gave aid. (The American and Canadian aid did not have to be repaid, but there were also American loans that were repaid.)

Britain&#x27;s total mobilisation during this period proved to be successful in winning the war, by maintaining strong support from public opinion. The war was a &quot;people&#x27;s war&quot; that enlarged democratic aspirations and produced promises of a postwar welfare state.

The media called it a &quot;people&#x27;s war&quot;—a term that caught on and signified the popular demand for planning and an expanded welfare state. The Royal family played major symbolic roles in the war. They refused to leave London during the Blitz and were indefatigable in visiting troops, munition factories, dockyards, and hospitals all over the country. All social classes appreciated how the royals shared the hopes, fears and hardships of the people.

===Mobilisation of women===

Historians credit Britain with a highly successful record of mobilising the home front for the war effort, in terms of mobilising the greatest proportion of potential workers, maximising output, assigning the right skills to the right task, and maintaining the morale and spirit of the people.

Much of this success was due to the systematic planned mobilisation of women, as workers, soldiers and housewives, enforced after December 1941 by conscription. Women supported the war effort, and made the rationing of consumer goods a success. In some ways the government over-responded, evacuating too many children in the first days of the war, closing cinemas as frivolous then reopening them when the need for cheap entertainment became clear, sacrificing cats and dogs to save a little space on shipping pet food, only to discover an urgent need to keep rats and mice under control.

The British relied successfully on voluntarism. Munitions production rose dramatically, and the quality remained high. Food production was emphasised, in large part to free shipping for munitions. Farmers increased the area under cultivation from 12,000,000 to 18,000,000 acres (from about 50,000 to 75,000 km2), and the farm labour force was expanded by a fifth, thanks especially to the Women&#x27;s Land Army.

===Welfare state===

The success of the government in providing new services, such as hospitals and school lunches, as well as egalitarian spirit, contributed to widespread support for an enlarged welfare state. It was supported by the coalition government and all major parties. Welfare conditions, especially regarding food, improved during the war as the government imposed rationing and subsidized food prices. Conditions for housing, however, worsened with the bombing, and clothing was in short supply.

Equality increased dramatically, as incomes declined sharply for the wealthy and for white collar workers, as their taxes soared, while blue collar workers benefited from rationing and price controls.

People demanded an expansion of the welfare state as a reward to the people for their wartime sacrifices. The goal was operationalized in a famous report by William Beveridge. It recommended that the various income maintenance services that had grown-up piecemeal since 1911 be systematized and made universal. Unemployment benefits and sickness benefits were to be universal. There would be new benefits for maternity. The old-age pension system would be revised and expanded, and require that a person retired. A full-scale National Health Service would provide free medical care for everyone. All the major parties endorsed the principles and they were largely put into effect when peace returned.

==Postwar==
Britain had won the war, but it lost India in 1947 and nearly all the rest of the Empire by the 1960s. It debated its role in world affairs and joined the United Nations in 1945, NATO in 1949, and became a close ally of the United States. Prosperity returned in the 1950s, and London remained a world centre of finance and culture, but the nation was no longer a major world power. In 1973, after a long debate and initial rejection, it joined the Common Market.

===Austerity, 1945–1950===
The end of the war saw a landslide victory for Clement Attlee and the Labour Party. They were elected on a manifesto of greater social justice with left-wing policies such as the creation of a National Health Service, more council housing and nationalisation of several major industries. Britain faced a severe financial crisis, and responded by reducing her international responsibilities and by sharing the hardships of an &quot;age of austerity&quot;. Large loans from the United States and Marshall Plan grants helped rebuild and modernise its infrastructure and business practices. Rationing and conscription dragged on well into the post war years, and the country suffered one of the worst winters on record. Nevertheless, morale was boosted by events such as the marriage of Princess Elizabeth in 1947 and the Festival of Britain in 1951.

====Nationalisation====
Labour Party experts went into the files to find the detailed plans for nationalisation. To their surprise, there were no plans. The leaders decided to act fast to keep up the momentum of the 1945 electoral landslide. They started with the Bank of England, civil aviation, coal, and Cable &amp; Wireless. Then came railways, canals, road haulage and trucking, electricity, and gas. Finally came iron and steel, which was a special case because it was a manufacturing industry. Altogether, about one fifth of the economy was nationalised. Labour dropped its plans to nationalise farmlands. The procedure used was developed by Herbert Morrison, who as Lord President of the Council chaired the Committee on the Socialization of Industries. He followed the model that had already been used to establish public corporations such as the BBC (1927). In exchange for the shares, the owners of the companies were given government bonds paying low rates of interest, and the government took full ownership of each affected company, consolidating it into a national monopoly. The management remained the same, but they were now effectively civil servants working for the government.

For the Labour Party leadership, nationalisation was a way to consolidate economic planning in their own hands. It was not designed to modernise old industries, make them efficient, or transform their organisational structure. There was no money for modernisation, although the Marshall Plan, operated separately by American planners, did force many British businesses to adopt modern managerial techniques. Hardline socialists were disappointed, as the nationalised industries seemed identical to the old private corporations, and national planning was made virtually impossible by the government&#x27;s financial constraints. Socialism was in place, but it did not seem to make a major difference. Rank-and-file workers had long been motivated to support Labour by tales of the mistreatment of workers by foremen and the management. The foremen and the managers were the same people as before, with much the same power over the workplace. There was no worker control of industry. The unions resisted government efforts to set wages. By the time of the general elections in 1950 and 1951, Labour seldom boasted about nationalisation of industry. Instead it was the Conservatives who decried the inefficiency and mismanagement, and promised to reverse the takeover of steel and trucking.

===Prosperity of the postwar years===
As the country headed into the 1950s, rebuilding continued and a number of immigrants from the remaining British Empire, mostly the Caribbean and the Indian subcontinent, were invited to help the rebuilding effort. As the 1950s wore on, Britain lost its place as a superpower and could no longer maintain its large Empire. This led to decolonisation, and a withdrawal from almost all of its colonies by 1970. Events such as the Suez Crisis showed that the UK&#x27;s status had fallen in the world. The 1950s and 1960s were, however, relatively prosperous times after the Second World War, and saw the beginning of a modernisation of the UK, with the construction of its first motorways for example, and also during the 1960s a great cultural movement began which expanded across the world. Unemployment was relatively low during this period and the standard of living continued to rise with more new private and council housing developments taking place and the number of slum properties diminishing.

The postwar period also witnessed a dramatic rise in the average standard of living, as characterised by a 40% rise in average real wages from 1950 to 1965. Earnings for men in industry rose by 95% between 1951 and 1964, while during that same period the official workweek was reduced and five reductions in income tax were made. Those in traditionally poorly paid semi-skilled and unskilled occupations saw a particularly marked improvement in their wages and living standards. As summed up by R. J. Unstead,

In 1950, the UK standard of living was higher than in any EEC country apart from Belgium. It was 50% higher than the West German standard of living, and twice as high as the Italian standard of living. By the earlier Seventies, however, the UK standard of living was lower than all EEC countries apart from Italy (which, according to one calculation, was roughly equal to Britain). In 1951, the average weekly earnings of men over the age of 21 stood at £8 6s 0d, and nearly doubled a decade later to £15 7s 0d. By 1966, average weekly earnings stood at £20 6s 0d. Between 1964 and 1968, the percentage of households with a television set rose from 80.5% to 85.5%, a washing machine from 54% to 63%, a refrigerator from 35% to 55%, a car from 38% to 49%, a telephone from 21.5% to 28%, and central heating from 13% to 23%.

Between 1951 and 1963, wages rose by 72% while prices rose by 45%, enabling people to afford more consumer goods than ever before. Between 1955 and 1967, the average earnings of weekly-paid workers increased by 96% and those of salaried workers by 95%, while prices rose by about 45% in the same period. The rising affluence of the Fifties and Sixties was underpinned by sustained full employment and a dramatic rise in workers&#x27; wages. In 1950, the average weekly wage stood at £6.8s, compared with £11.2s.6d in 1959. As a result of wage rises, consumer spending also increased by about 20% during this same period, while economic growth remained at about 3%. In addition, food rations were lifted in 1954 while hire-purchase controls were relaxed in the same year. As a result of these changes, large numbers of the working classes were able to participate in the consumer market for the first time.

As noted by Harriet Wilson,

The significant real wage increases in the 1950s and 1960s contributed to a rapid increase in working-class consumerism, with British consumer spending rising by 45% between 1952 and 1964. In addition, entitlement to various fringe benefits was improved. In 1955, 96% of manual labourers were entitled to two weeks&#x27; holiday with pay, compared with 61% in 1951. By the end of the 1950s, Britain had become one of the world&#x27;s most affluent countries, and by the early Sixties, most Britons enjoyed a level of prosperity that had previously been known only to a small minority of the population. For the young and unattached, there was, for the first time in decades, spare cash for leisure, clothes, and luxuries. In 1959, &quot;Queen&quot; magazine declared that &quot;Britain has launched into an age of unparalleled lavish living.&quot; Average wages were high while jobs were plentiful, and people saw their personal prosperity climb even higher. Prime Minister Harold Macmillan claimed that &quot;the luxuries of the rich have become the necessities of the poor.&quot; Levels of disposable income rose steadily, with the spending power of the average family rising by 50% between 1951 and 1979, and by the end of the Seventies, 6 out of 10 families had come to own a car.

As noted by Martin Pugh,

By 1963, 82% of all private households had a television, 72% a vacuum cleaner, 45% a washing machine, and 30% a refrigerator. In addition, as noted by John Burnett,

A study of a slum area in Leeds (which was due for demolition) found that 74% of the households had a television, 41% a vacuum, and 38% a washing machine. In another slum area, St Mary&#x27;s in Oldham (where in 1970 few of the houses had fixed baths or a hot water supply and half shared outside toilets), 67% of the houses were rated as comfortably furnished and a further 24% furnished luxuriously, with smart modern furniture, deep pile carpeting, and decorations. 
The provision of household amenities steadily improved during the second half of the twentieth century. From 1971 to 1983, households having the sole use of a fixed bath or shower rose from 88% to 97%, and those with an internal WC from 87% to 97%. In addition, the number of households with central heating almost doubled during that same period, from 34% to 64%. By 1983, 94% of all households had a refrigerator, 81% a colour television, 80% a washing machine, 57% a deep freezer, and 28% a tumble-drier.

Between 1950 and 1970, however, Britain was overtaken by most of the countries of the European Common Market in terms of the number of telephones, refrigerators, television sets, cars, and washing machines per 100 of the population (although Britain remained high in terms of bathrooms and lavatories per 100 people). Although the British standard of living was increasing, the standard of living in other countries increased faster. According to a 1968 study by Anthony Sampson, British workers:

In 1976, UK wages were amongst the lowest in Western Europe, being half of West German rates and two-thirds of Italian rates. In addition, while educational opportunities for working-class people had widened significantly since the end of the Second World War, a number of developed countries came to overtake Britain in some educational indicators. By the early 1980s, some 80% to 90% of school leavers in France and West Germany received vocational training, compared with 40% in the United Kingdom. By the mid-1980s, over 80% of pupils in the United States and West Germany and over 90% in Japan stayed in education until the age of eighteen, compared with barely 33% of British pupils. In 1987, only 35% of 16- to 18-year-olds were in full-time education or training, compared with 80% in the United States, 77% in Japan, 69% in France, and 49% in the United Kingdom. There also remained gaps between manual and non-manual workers in areas such as fringe benefits and wage levels. In April 1978, for instance, male full-time manual workers aged 21 and above averaged a gross weekly wage of £80.70, while the equivalent for male white collar workers stood at £100.70.

===Empire to Commonwealth===

Britain&#x27;s control over its Empire loosened during the interwar period. Nationalism strengthened in other parts of the empire, particularly in India and in Egypt.

Between 1867 and 1910, the UK had granted Australia, Canada, and New Zealand &quot;Dominion&quot; status (near complete autonomy within the Empire). They became charter members of the British Commonwealth of Nations (known as the Commonwealth of Nations since 1949), an informal but close-knit association that succeeded the British Empire. Beginning with the independence of India and Pakistan in 1947, the remainder of the British Empire was almost completely dismantled. Today, most of Britain&#x27;s former colonies belong to the Commonwealth, almost all of them as independent members. There are, however, 13 former British colonies, including Bermuda, Gibraltar, the Falkland Islands, and others, which have elected to continue rule by London and are known as British Overseas Territories.

===From the Troubles to the Belfast Agreement===
In the 1960s, moderate unionist Prime Minister of Northern Ireland Terence O&#x27;Neill tried to reform the system and give a greater voice to Catholics who comprised 40% of the population of Northern Ireland. His goals were blocked by militant Protestants led by the Rev. Ian Paisley. The increasing pressures from nationalists for reform and from unionists to resist reform led to the appearance of the civil rights movement under figures like John Hume, Austin Currie and others. Clashes escalated out of control as the army could barely contain the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) and the Ulster Defence Association. British leaders feared their withdrawal would give a &quot;Doomsday Scenario&quot;, with widespread communal strife, followed by the mass exodus of hundreds of thousands of refugees. London shut down Northern Ireland&#x27;s parliament and began direct rule. By the 1990s, the failure of the IRA campaign to win mass public support or achieve its aim of a British withdrawal led to negotiations that in 1998 produced the &#x27;Good Friday Agreement&#x27;. It won popular support and largely ended the Troubles.

===The economy in the late 20th century===

After the relative prosperity of the 1950s and 1960s, the UK experienced industrial strife and stagflation through the 1970s following a global economic downturn; Labour had returned to government in 1964 under Harold Wilson to end 13 years of Conservative rule. The Conservatives were restored to government in 1970 under Edward Heath, who failed to halt the country&#x27;s economic decline and was ousted in 1974 as Labour returned to power under Harold Wilson. The economic crisis deepened following Wilson&#x27;s return and things fared little better under his successor James Callaghan.

A strict modernisation of its economy began under the controversial Conservative leader Margaret Thatcher following her election as prime minister in 1979, which saw a time of record unemployment as deindustrialisation saw the end of much of the country&#x27;s manufacturing industries, but also a time of economic boom as stock markets became liberalised and state-owned industries were privatised. Her rise to power was seen as the symbolic end of the time in which the British economy had become the &quot;sick man&quot; of western Europe. Inflation also fell during this period and trade union power was reduced.
However the miners&#x27; strike of 1984–1985 prefigured the end of most of the UK&#x27;s coal mining. The exploitation of North Sea gas and oil brought in substantial tax and export revenues to aid the new economic boom. This was also the time that the IRA took the issue of Northern Ireland to Great Britain, maintaining a prolonged bombing campaign on the British mainland.

After the economic boom of the 1980s a brief but severe recession occurred between 1990 and 1992 following the economic chaos of Black Wednesday under government of John Major, who had succeeded Margaret Thatcher in 1990. However the rest of the 1990s saw the beginning of a period of continuous economic growth that lasted over 16 years. It was expanded under the so-called New Labour government of Tony Blair following his landslide election victory in 1997. The rejuvenated Labour party abandoned its commitment to policies including nuclear disarmament and nationalisation of key industries, and no reversal of the Thatcher-led union reforms. It emphasized an appeal to the better-educated voter.

From 1964 up until 1996, income per head had doubled, while ownership of various household goods had significantly increased. By 1996, two-thirds of households owned cars, 82% had central heating, most people owned a VCR, and one in five houses had a home computer. In 1971, 9% of households had no access to a shower or bathroom, compared with only 1% in 1990; largely due to demolition or modernisation of older properties which lacked such facilities. In 1971, only 35% had central heating, while 78% enjoyed this amenity in 1990. By 1990, 93% of households had colour television, 87% had telephones, 86% had washing machines, 80% had deep-freezers, 60% had video-recorders, and 47% had microwave ovens. Holiday entitlements had also become more generous. In 1990, nine out of ten full-time manual workers were entitled to more than four weeks of paid holiday a year, while twenty years previously only two-thirds had been allowed three weeks or more.

The postwar period also witnessed significant improvements in housing conditions. In 1960, 14% of British households had no inside toilet, while in 1967 22% of all homes had no basic hot water supply. By the 1990s, most homes had these amenities together with central heating. From 1996–1997 to 2006–2007, real median household income increased by 20% while real mean household incomes increased by 23%. There has also been a shift towards a service-based economy in the years following the end of the Second World War, with 11% of working people employed in manufacturing in 2006, compared with 25% in 1971.

===Common Market (EEC), then EU, membership===

Britain&#x27;s wish to join the Common Market (as the European Economic Community was known in Britain) was first expressed in July 1961 by the Macmillan government. It was vetoed in 1963 by French President Charles de Gaulle. After initially hesitating over the issue, Harold Wilson&#x27;s Labour Government lodged the UK&#x27;s second application (in May 1967) to join the Community. Like the first, though, it was vetoed by de Gaulle.

In 1973, with de Gaulle gone, Conservative Prime Minister Heath negotiated terms for admission and Britain finally joined the Community. In opposition the Labour Party was deeply divided, though its Leader, Harold Wilson, remained in favour. In the 1974 General Election the Labour Party manifesto included a pledge to renegotiate terms for Britain&#x27;s membership and then hold a referendum on whether to stay in the EC on the new terms. This was a constitutional procedure without precedent in British history. In the subsequent referendum campaign, rather than the normal British tradition of &quot;collective responsibility&quot;, under which the government takes a policy position which all cabinet members are required to support publicly, members of the Government (and the Conservative opposition) were free to present their views on either side of the question. A referendum was duly held on 5 June 1975, and the proposition to continue membership was passed with a substantial majority.

The Single European Act (SEA) was the first major revision of the 1957 Treaty of Rome. In 1987, the Conservative government under Margaret Thatcher enacted it into UK law.

The Maastricht Treaty transformed the European Community into the European Union. In 1992, the Conservative government under John Major ratified it, against the opposition of his backbench Maastricht Rebels.

The Lisbon Treaty introduced many changes to the treaties of the Union. Prominent changes included more qualified majority voting in the Council of Ministers, increased involvement of the European Parliament in the legislative process through extended codecision with the Council of Ministers, eliminating the pillar system and the creation of a President of the European Council with a term of two and a half years and a High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to present a united position on EU policies. The Treaty of Lisbon made the Union&#x27;s human rights charter, the Charter of Fundamental Rights, legally binding. The Lisbon Treaty led to an increase in the voting weight of the UK in the Council of the European Union from 8.4% to 12.4%. In July 2008, the Labour government under Gordon Brown approved the treaty and the Queen ratified it.

===Devolution for Scotland and Wales===

On 11 September 1997, the 700th anniversary of the Scottish victory over the English at the Battle of Stirling Bridge, a referendum was held on establishing a devolved Scottish Parliament. This resulted in an overwhelming &#x27;yes&#x27; vote both to establishing the parliament and granting it limited tax varying powers. One week later, a referendum in Wales on establishing a Welsh Assembly was also approved but with a very narrow majority. The first elections were held, and these bodies began to operate in 1999. The creation of these bodies has widened the differences between the countries of the United Kingdom, especially in areas like healthcare. It has also brought to the fore the so-called West Lothian question which is a complaint that devolution for Scotland and Wales but not England has created a situation where Scottish and Welsh MPs in the UK Parliament can, in principle, vote on internal matters affecting England alone whereas English MPs have no say in similar matters affecting Scotland and Wales.

==21st century==

===War in Afghanistan and the Iraq War===

In the 2001 General Election, the Labour Party won a second successive victory, though voter turnout dropped to the lowest level for more than 80 years. Later that year, the September 11 attacks in the United States led to American President George W. Bush launching the War on terror, beginning with the invasion of Afghanistan aided by British troops in October 2001. Thereafter, with the US focus shifting to Iraq, Tony Blair convinced the Labour and Conservative MPs to vote in favour of supporting the 2003 invasion of Iraq, despite huge anti-war marches held in London and Glasgow. Forty-six thousand British troops, one-third of the total strength of the Army&#x27;s land forces, were deployed to assist with the invasion of Iraq and thereafter British armed forces were responsible for security in southern Iraq. All British forces were withdrawn in 2010.

The Labour Party Prime Minister Tony Blair won the 2005 British general election and a third consecutive term. On 7 July 2005, a series of four suicide bombings struck London, killing 52 commuters along with the four bombers, and injuring hundreds of others.

===Nationalist governments in Scotland===
Following the 2007 Scottish Parliament election, the pro-independence Scottish National Party (SNP) won their first ever victory. They formed a minority government with plans to hold a referendum before 2011 to seek a mandate &quot;to negotiate with the Government of the United Kingdom to achieve independence for Scotland.&quot; Unionist parties responded by establishing the Calman Commission to examine further devolution of powers, a position that had the support of the Prime Minister. Responding to the findings of the review, the UK government issued a white paper in November 2009, on new powers that would be devolved to the Scottish Government, notably on how it can raise tax and carry out capital borrowing, and the running of Scottish Parliament elections. The proposal was criticised by the UK parliament opposition parties for not proposing to implement any changes before the next general election. Scottish Constitution Minister Michael Russell criticised the white paper, calling it &quot;flimsy&quot; and stating that their proposed Referendum (Scotland) Bill, 2010, whose own white paper was to be published five days later, would be &quot;more substantial&quot;. According to &quot;The Independent&quot;, the Calman Review white paper proposals fall short of what would normally be seen as requiring a referendum. These proposals would ultimately form the basis of the Scotland Act 2012.

The 2011 election saw a decisive victory for the SNP which was able to form a majority government intent on delivering a referendum on independence. Within hours of the victory, Prime Minister David Cameron guaranteed that the UK government would not put any legal or political obstacles in the way of such a referendum.

==== 2014 Scottish Independence referendum ====
On 18 September 2014, a referendum was held in Scotland on whether to leave the United Kingdom and become an independent country. The three UK-wide political parties—Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrats—campaigned together as part of the Better Together campaign while the pro-independence Scottish National Party was the main force in the Yes Scotland campaign, together with the Scottish Greens and the Scottish Socialist Party. Days before the vote, with the opinion polls closing, the three Better Together party leaders issued &#x27;The Vow&#x27;, a promise of more powers for Scotland in the event of a No vote. The referendum resulted in Scotland voting by 55% to 45% to remain part of the United Kingdom.

First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmond resigned shortly after the defeat, succeeded by Nicola Sturgeon. Advocating for a second referendum, she would lead the SNP to victory in the 2016 and 2021 elections.

===2008 economic crisis===
In the wake of the Great Recession, the United Kingdom economy contracted, experiencing negative economic growth throughout 2009. The announcement in November 2008 that the economy had shrunk for the first time since late 1992 brought an end to 16 years of continuous economic growth. Causes included an end to the easy credit of the preceding years, reduction in consumption and substantial depreciation of sterling (which fell 25% against the euro between January 2008 and January 2009), leading to increased import costs, notably of oil.

On 8 October 2008, the British Government announced a bank rescue package of around £500 billion ($850 billion at the time). The plan comprised three parts: £200 billion to be made available to the banks in the Bank of England&#x27;s Special Liquidity Scheme; the Government was to increase the banks&#x27; market capitalization, through the Bank Recapitalization Fund, with an initial £25 billion and another £25 billion to be provided if needed; and the Government was to temporarily underwrite any eligible lending between British banks up to around £250 billion. With the UK officially coming out of recession in the fourth quarter of 2009—ending six consecutive quarters of economic decline—the Bank of England decided against further quantitative easing.

===2010 coalition government===
The 2010 general election resulted in the first hung parliament since 1974, with the Conservative Party winning the largest number of seats, but falling short of the 326 seats required for an overall majority. Following this, the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats agreed to form the first coalition government for the UK since the end of the Second World War, with David Cameron becoming Prime Minister and Nick Clegg Deputy Prime Minister.

Under the coalition government, British military aircraft participated in the UN-mandated intervention in the 2011 Libyan civil war, flying a total of 3,000 air sorties against forces loyal to the Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi between March and October 2011. 2011 also saw England suffer unprecedented rioting in its major cities in early August, killing five people and causing over £200 million worth of property damage.

In late October 2011, the prime ministers of the Commonwealth realms voted to grant gender equality in the royal succession, ending the male-preference primogeniture that was mandated by the Act of Settlement 1701. The amendment, once enacted, also ended the ban on the monarch marrying a Catholic.

===2015 election===
The 2015 election was held on 7 May 2015 with pre-election polls all predicting a close race and a hung parliament. The surprising result on the night was a clear victory by the Conservative Party: with 37% of the popular vote, they won a narrow overall majority in parliament with 331 of the 650 seats.

The other most significant result of the election was the Scottish National Party winning all but three of the 59 seats in Scotland, a gain of 50. This had been widely forecast as opinion polls had recorded a surge in support for the SNP following the 2014 independence referendum, and SNP party membership had more than quadrupled from 25,000 to over 100,000, meaning that 1 in every 50 of the population of Scotland was a party member.

Labour suffered its worst defeat since 1987, taking only 31% of the votes and losing 40 of its 41 seats in Scotland. The Liberal Democrats lost 49 of their 57 seats, as they were punished for their decision to form a coalition with the conservatives in 2010. The UK Independence Party (UKIP), rallying voters against the European Union and against uncontrolled immigration, secured 13% of the vote and came second in over 115 races, but won only one seat in parliament. Cameron had a mandate for his austerity policies to shrink the size of government, and a challenge in dealing with Scotland. Likewise the Green Party of England and Wales saw a rise in support but retained just its one seat.

===2016 EU membership referendum===
On 20 February 2016, Prime Minister Cameron announced that a referendum on the UK&#x27;s membership of the European Union would be held on 23 June 2016, following years of campaigning by eurosceptics. Debates and campaigns by parties supporting both &quot;Remain&quot; (Britain Stronger in Europe) and &quot;Leave&quot; (Vote Leave) focused on concerns regarding trade and the European single market, security, migration and sovereignty. The result of the referendum was in favour of the country leaving the EU with 51.9% of voters wanting to leave. David Cameron resigned from Parliament on 13 July, which led to Theresa May succeeding him as Prime Minister.

The UK remained a member of the EU for the time being, but invoked Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty on 29 March 2017. This started negotiations on a withdrawal agreement that will last no more than two years (unless the Council and the UK agree to extend the negotiation period), before an exit from the European Union (Brexit) intended on 29 March 2019 but later extended to 31 October 2019, then again to early 2020.

The debate on Brexit grew heated. During the 2016 campaign on the referendum, Boris Johnson became a leading proponent of Vote Leave, stating, &quot;The EU is, I&#x27;m afraid a job-destroying engine. You can see it all across southern Europe, you can see it, alas, in our country&quot;. A victory for Brexit, he argued, would be &quot;independence day&quot; for Britain if it leaves the European Union. By 2019, Johnson was Prime Minister and pushed hard for an exit on 31 October 2019. The opponents warned of bedlam. Political commentator Jonathan Freedland argued in late summer 2019 that the Britain of 2019 is, &quot;in the grip of a populism that is trampling on the norms and constraints of liberal democracy, that is contemplating a collective act of self-harm without precedent, that is bracing itself for disruption, shortages, even civil unrest unknown in peacetime. This is not the consequence of unavoidable war or an unforeseen natural disaster, but is entirely of the country&#x27;s own making.&quot;

===COVID-19 pandemic===

Though later reporting indicated that there may have been some cases dating from late 2019, COVID-19 was confirmed to be spreading in the UK by the end of January 2020 with the first confirmed deaths in March. The country was initially relatively slow in implementing restrictions. Subsequent epidemiological analysis showed that over 1000 lineages of SARS-CoV-2 entered the UK in early 2020 from international travellers, mostly from outbreaks elsewhere in Europe, leading to numerous clusters that overwhelmed contact tracing efforts. A legally enforced Stay at Home Order, or lockdown, was introduced on 23 March. Restrictions were steadily eased across the UK in late spring and early summer that year. The UK&#x27;s epidemic in early 2020 was at the time one of the largest and deadliest worldwide.

By the Autumn, COVID-19 cases were again rising. This led to the creation of new regulations along with the introduction of the concept of a local lockdown, a variance in restrictions in a more specific geographic location than the four nations of the UK. Lockdowns took place in Wales, England and Northern Ireland later that season. A new variant of the virus is thought to have originated in Kent around September 2020. Once restrictions were lifted, the novel variant rapidly spread across the UK. Its increased transmissibility contributed to a continued increase in daily infections. The NHS had come under severe strain by late December. This led to a tightening of restrictions across the UK.

The first COVID-19 vaccine was approved and began its rollout in the UK in early December 2020. 15 million vaccine doses had been given to predominantly those most vulnerable to the virus by mid-February. 6 months later more than 75% of adults in the UK were fully vaccinated against COVID-19. Restrictions began to ease from late February onwards and almost all had ended in Great Britain by August. A third wave of daily infections began in July 2021 due to the arrival and rapid spread of the highly transmissible SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant. However, mass vaccination continued to keep deaths and hospitalisations at much lower levels than in previous waves. During the third COVID wave, in the light of highly transmissible Omicron variant, the U.K. was also the acclaim of a new hybrid strain, Deltacron variant, which pre-dominated the country until April 2022 ahead of the endemic phase alongside Ireland, Finland, Cyprus, Slovenia, Croatia, and others.

=== 2022 government crises ===

In 2022, the UK government faced multiple crises. The Partygate scandal, involving lockdown rule breaches by government officials, led to 126 fixed penalty notices, including for Prime Minister Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak. Johnson faced mounting calls to resign, and after further scandals like the Chris Pincher scandal, he stepped down in July 2022.

Liz Truss succeeded Johnson but her government quickly faced turmoil. Her September mini-budget triggered market instability, leading to the dismissal of Kwasi Kwarteng and eventually Truss&#x27;s resignation in October. Rishi Sunak became Prime Minister on 25 October.

=== Sunak Ministry (2022–2024) ===
Rishi Sunak became the first Asian prime minister in British history. While Sunak promised stability after the previous crises, his premiership saw historically low approval ratings for the Conservative Party, consistently polling below the Labour Party under new leader Keir Starmer, who was seen as a moderate compared to his socialist predecessor Jeremy Corbyn. The Conservatives also lost votes to Reform UK, a populist right-wing party hard on immigration, contributing to their worst election performance in history.

===Labour government (2024–present)===

On 4 July 2024, the Labour Party won a landslide victory in general election after 14 years of Conservative rule, meaning Labour Party leader Keir Starmer became Britain&#x27;s new prime minister. Following the fatal stabbing of three girls in Southport, misinformation spread online falsely accusing the perpetrator as being a Muslim, sparking the 2024 United Kingdom riots as a backlash against immigration to the UK in general, especially from Islamic countries.

==See also==
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* , short scholarly biographies of all the major people
* University textbook
* 
* 
* 
* Broadberry, Stephen et al. &quot;British Economic Growth, 1270–1870&quot; (2015)
** Review by Jeffrey G. Williamson online
* Brown, David, Robert Crowcroft, and Gordon Pentland, eds. &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Modern British Political History, 1800–2000&quot; (2018)
* historical encyclopedia; 4000 entries
* Childs, David. &quot;Britain since 1945: A Political History&quot; (2012)
* Cook, Chris. &quot;The Longman Companion to Britain in the Nineteenth Century 1815–1914&quot; (1999)
* Cook, Chris and John Stevenson, eds. &quot;Longman Companion to Britain Since 1945&quot; (1995)
* Colley, Linda. &quot;Britons: Forging the Nation, 1707–1837&quot; (Yale University Press 1992)
* Daunton, M. J. &quot;Progress and Poverty: An Economic and Social History of Britain 1700–1850&quot; (1995); &quot;Wealth and Welfare: An Economic and Social History of Britain 1851–1951&quot; (2007)
* &quot;The Encyclopedia of Britain&quot; (Helicon, 1999) ; also published as &quot;Hutchinson Encyclopedia of Britain&quot;
* Floud, Roderick, and Donald McCloskey, eds. &quot;The Economic History of Britain since 1700&quot; (1st ed. 1981; 2nd edition 1994).
* Floud, Roderick, Jane Humphries, and Paul Johnson, eds. &quot;The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain&quot; (2014); advanced economic history, heavy on econometrics and statistics;
* Gardiner, Juliet. &quot;Wartime: Britain 1939–1945&quot; (2004); social history
* Gilley, Sheridan, and W. J. Sheils. &quot;A History of Religion in Britain: Practice and Belief from Pre-Roman Times to the Present&quot; (1994)
* Gregg, Pauline. &quot;A Social and Economic History of Britain: 1760–1950&quot; (1950) online
* Harrison, Brian. &quot;Seeking a Role: The United Kingdom, 1951–1970&quot; (New Oxford History of England) (2011); online
** Harrison, Brian. &quot;Finding a Role?: The United Kingdom 1970–1990&quot; (New Oxford History of England) (2011); online
* Hastings, Adrian. &quot;A History of English Christianity: 1920–1985&quot; (1986)
* Havighurst, Alfred F. &quot;Modern England, 1901–1984&quot; (2nd ed. 1987) online free to borrow
* synthesis
* Holland, R. F. &quot;The pursuit of greatness: Britain and the world role, 1900–1970&quot; (Fontana history of England) (1991)
* 
* Hylson-Smith, Kenneth. &quot;The churches in England from Elizabeth I to Elizabeth II&quot; (1996).
* Jones, J. R. &quot;Britain and the World, 1649–1815&quot; (1980); emphasizing rivalry with France
* Kearney, Hugh. &quot;The British Isles: a history of four nations&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 1989)
* Langford, Paul. &quot;A Polite and Commercial People: England 1727–1783&quot; (New Oxford History of England) (1994)
* Leventhal, F. M. &quot;Twentieth-Century Britain: An Encyclopedia&quot; (2nd ed. 2002); short articles by scholars
* Lunn, Jon, Vaughne Miller, Ben Smith. &quot;British foreign policy since 1997 – Commons Library Research Paper RP08/56&quot; (UK House of Commons, 2008) online
* university textbook
* Marr, Andrew. &quot;A History of Modern Britain&quot; (2009); also published as &quot;The Making of Modern Britain&quot; (2010), popular history covers 1945–2005
* Marshall, Dorothy. &quot;Eighteenth-Century England&quot; (2nd ed. 1974), political and diplomatic history 1714–1784
* Marshall, Dorothy. &quot;English People in the Eighteenth Century&quot; (1956), social and economic history
* 
* Mokyr, Joel. &quot;The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain 1700–1850&quot; (2010)
* Morgan, Kenneth O. &quot;The Oxford History of Britain&quot; (2010)
* online review
* O&#x27;Gorman, Frank. &quot;The Long Eighteenth Century: British Political and Social History 1688–1832&quot; (1997)
* Owen, John B. &quot;The Eighteenth Century: 1714–1815&quot; (1976)
* Otte, T. G. &quot;The Makers of British Foreign Policy: From Pitt to Thatcher&quot; (2002)
* Pearce, Malcolm, and Geoffrey Stewart. &quot;British political history, 1867–2001: democracy and decline&quot; (Routledge, 2013).
* Plumb, J. H. &quot;England in the Eighteenth Century&quot; (1950)
* Pollard, Sidney. &quot;The Development of the British Economy, 1914–1990&quot; (4th ed. 1991).
* Pugh, Martin. &quot;Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party&quot; (2011)
* Ramsden, John, ed. &quot;The Oxford Companion to Twentieth-Century British Politics&quot; (2005)
* Reynolds, David. &quot; Britannia Overruled: British Policy and World Power in the Twentieth Century&quot; (2nd ed. 2000)
* university textbook
* Royle, Edward. &quot;Modern Britain: A Social History 1750–2010&quot; (2012)
* Rule, John. &quot;Albion&#x27;s People: English Society 1714–1815&quot; (1992)
* Searle, G. R. &quot;A New England?: Peace and War 1886–1918&quot; (New Oxford History of England) (2005)
* Schama, Simon. &quot;A History of Britain, Vol. 2: The Wars of the British, 1603–1776&quot; (2001); &quot;A History of Britain: The Fate of Empire 1776–2000&quot; (2002)
* Simms, Brendan. &quot;Three Victories and a Defeat: The Rise and Fall of the First British Empire, 1714–1783&quot; (2008). online
* Somervell, D. C. &quot;The Reign of King George V&quot;, (1936); wide-ranging political, social and economic coverage, 1910–35; online free
* Thomson, David. &quot;England in the 19th Century 1815–1914&quot; (1951) online
* 
* Ward, A. W. and G. P. Gooch, eds. &quot;The Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, 1783–1919&quot; (1921–1923); vol 1, 1783–1815; vol 2, 1815–1866; vol 3. 1866–1919
* Webb, R. K. &quot;Modern England: from the 18th century to the present&quot; (1968) online
* Welsh, Frank. &quot;The Four nations: a history of the United Kingdom&quot; (Yale University Press, 2003)
* Willson, David Harris. &quot;A history of England&quot; (4th ed. 1991) online 1972 edition, university textbook


===Historiography===
* 
* brief university textbook
* essays by 38 experts;
* annotated guide to 1000 history books on every major topic, plus book reviews and articles
* 
* 
* 33 topical essays


===Primary sources===

* &quot;English historical documents&quot; London: Methuen; 12 vol covering Middle Ages to 1957; reprinted 2011; the most comprehensive collection on political, constitutional, economic and social topics
* Beard, Charles, ed. &quot;An introduction to the English historians&quot; (1906) excerpts
* Cheyney, Edward P. &quot; Readings in English History Drawn from the Original Sources Intended to Illustrate a Short History of England&quot; (1935), 850 pp, strongest on political &amp; constitutional topics
* Stephenson, Carl and Frederick G. Marcham, eds. &quot;Sources of English Constitutional History&quot; (2nd ed. 1990)
* Weiner, Joel H. ed. &quot;Great Britain Foreign Policy &amp; Span of Empire, 1689–1971&quot; (1983)
* Wiener, Joel H. ed. &quot;Great Britain: the lion at home; a documentary history of domestic policy, 1689–1973&quot; (4 vol 1974), 1396 pp
* &quot;Finding primary resources for modern British history&quot;
==External links==
* &quot;Contemporary British History&quot;
* &quot;First World War Studies&quot; 
* &quot;Twentieth Century British History&quot;
* &quot;History of Education: Journal of the History of Education Society&quot;
* Timelines: Sources from history – British Library interactive
* Info Britain.co.uk
* History of the United Kingdom: Primary Documents
* British History online
* Text of 1800 Act of Union
* Act of Union virtual library 
* Vision of Britain</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q113162" start="4" end="33" title="History of the United Kingdom" label="history of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="58" end="73" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="78" end="91" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="109" end="123" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="203" end="210" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="215" end="223" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="257" end="270" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q472272" start="305" end="317" title="Simon Schama" label="Simon Schama"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="329" end="347" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="358" end="376" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="391" end="434" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="470" end="486" title="Jacobite risings" label="Jacobite risings"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="539" end="557" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828922" start="576" end="612" title="Great Britain in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="victory in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="638" end="658" title="First British Empire" label="First British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="679" end="692" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="694" end="700" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="705" end="710" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="718" end="746" title="War of American Independence" label="War of American Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="806" end="827" title="Second British Empire" label="Second British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32501" start="867" end="882" title="British culture" label="British culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1016" end="1033" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="1226" end="1232" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="1557" end="1567" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="1569" end="1577" title="Disraeli" label="Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="1579" end="1588" title="Gladstone" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="1594" end="1603" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="1621" end="1634" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q545701" start="1739" end="1778" title="Pax Britannica" label="maintained a generally peaceful century"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1802" end="1817" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1857" end="1863" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1942" end="1949" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="1965" end="1982" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224721" start="2010" end="2026" title="Interwar Britain" label="Interwar Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="2082" end="2106" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London financial markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2278" end="2284" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2346" end="2352" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2373" end="2389" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2461" end="2483" title="Allies of World War II" label="the main Allied powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="2558" end="2569" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2729" end="2752" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2880" end="2886" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2956" end="2968" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="3038" end="3061" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="3098" end="3107" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3158" end="3166" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3188" end="3192" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3312" end="3316" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3396" end="3410" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="3500" end="3513" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q744894" start="3710" end="3770" title="Devolution in the United Kingdom" label="devolution movements in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="3915" end="3942" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="4020" end="4026" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4076" end="4090" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="4169" end="4185" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="4200" end="4216" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984457" start="4434" end="4441" title="Terminology of the British Isles" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="4567" end="4591" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140229" start="4642" end="4657" title="political union" label="political union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="4665" end="4683" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="4700" end="4705" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="4715" end="4734" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="4745" end="4760" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="4860" end="4887" title="parliament of Great Britain" label="parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="4889" end="4899" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="5054" end="5062" title="Scots law" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="5067" end="5078" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="5088" end="5100" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="5101" end="5119" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="5128" end="5136" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="5137" end="5154" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="5252" end="5281" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="5420" end="5427" title="Peace of Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q163236" start="5432" end="5439" title="Treaty of Rastatt" label="Rastadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373357" start="5473" end="5488" title="G. M. Trevelyan" label="G. M. Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="5670" end="5678" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12130474" start="5993" end="6014" title="Jacobite rising of 1715" label="a revolt in 1715–1716"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="6027" end="6035" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q936913" start="6090" end="6115" title="John Erskine, Earl of Mar (1675–1732)" label="John Erskine, Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="6181" end="6190" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="6269" end="6283" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="6329" end="6349" title="First British Empire" label="First British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="6500" end="6521" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="6556" end="6566" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="6923" end="6949" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="7295" end="7320" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="7382" end="7397" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="7439" end="7447" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210696" start="7556" end="7572" title="South Sea Bubble" label="South Sea Bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q400707" start="7869" end="7888" title="market manipulation" label="market manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="8249" end="8263" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585906" start="8785" end="8804" title="Toleration Act 1688" label="Toleration Act 1688"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="8873" end="8887" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075674" start="9211" end="9232" title="occasional conformity" label="occasional conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075674" start="9256" end="9286" title="Occasional Conformity Act 1711" label="Occasional Conformity Act 1711"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625371" start="9639" end="9656" title="Henry Sacheverell" label="Henry Sacheverell"/>
<link wikidata="Q379912" start="9913" end="9931" title="Bernard Mandeville" label="Bernard Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171104" start="9952" end="9973" title="The Fable of the Bees" label="The Fable of the Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="10533" end="10543" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="10561" end="10575" title="Utilitarianism" label="Utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12900" end="12910" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="13714" end="13731" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="13875" end="13890" title="Reign of Terror" label="Reign of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q179885" start="14102" end="14123" title="Jacobins" label="leaders of the Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="14239" end="14251" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519796" start="14256" end="14276" title="Anti-Jacobin" label="many popular writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="14365" end="14386" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="14701" end="14711" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="14826" end="14833" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14904" end="14916" title="Carnatic wars#Third Carnatic War (1757–1763)" label="Carnatic war"/>
<link wikidata="Q646374" start="14957" end="14971" title="French India" label="small enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828922" start="15107" end="15138" title="Great Britain in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="The British victory over France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="15314" end="15331" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="15681" end="15707" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="15773" end="15830" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="declared the independence of the United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538124" start="16321" end="16333" title="Gordon Riots" label="Gordon Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q164723" start="16460" end="16475" title="Lord Cornwallis" label="Lord Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="16500" end="16518" title="Siege of Yorktown" label="Yorktown, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="16524" end="16539" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="17043" end="17053" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="17067" end="17088" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="17165" end="17175" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="17199" end="17211" title="mercantilist" label="mercantilist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="17577" end="17603" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17850" end="17875" title="French Indies Company" label="French East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q976827" start="17888" end="17901" title="Carnatic wars" label="Carnatic wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q162296" start="17946" end="17958" title="Robert Clive" label="Robert Clive"/>
<link wikidata="Q203233" start="18011" end="18028" title="Battle of Plassey" label="Battle of Plassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="18064" end="18070" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="18311" end="18322" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q697185" start="18367" end="18373" title="sepoys" label="sepoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="18394" end="18404" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178839" start="18469" end="18475" title="First voyage of James Cook" label="voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="18507" end="18519" title="Joseph Banks" label="Joseph Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q894682" start="18616" end="18626" title="Botany Bay" label="Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q913919" start="18706" end="18714" title="Convicts in Australia" label="convicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="18989" end="18998" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="19667" end="19680" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="19685" end="19692" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="19712" end="19755" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="19872" end="19915" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="19990" end="20011" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Parliament of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777934" start="20030" end="20051" title="Protestant Ascendancy" label="Protestant Ascendancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="20260" end="20267" title="peerage" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="20273" end="20280" title="British honours system" label="honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="20442" end="20474" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574582" start="20605" end="20630" title="Irish representative peer" label="Irish representative peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="20876" end="20897" title="Catholic emancipation" label="Catholic emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="20999" end="21014" title="King George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q774482" start="21082" end="21097" title="Coronation Oath" label="Coronation Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="21355" end="21363" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26749" start="21852" end="21879" title="War of the Second Coalition" label="War of the Second Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="22069" end="22085" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="22358" end="22367" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q461251" start="22477" end="22490" title="Berlin Decree" label="Berlin Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q258081" start="22523" end="22541" title="Continental System" label="Continental System"/>
<link wikidata="Q181146" start="23202" end="23222" title="Dos de Mayo Uprising" label="Dos de Mayo Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="23290" end="23308" title="Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q153522" start="23759" end="23770" title="von Blücher" label="von Blücher"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="23809" end="23817" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q461251" start="25222" end="25235" title="Berlin Decree" label="Berlin Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q258081" start="25364" end="25382" title="Continental System" label="Continental System"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="26060" end="26071" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="26514" end="26521" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q897786" start="26726" end="26747" title="burning of Washington" label="burning of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="26913" end="26927" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="26990" end="27011" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324198" start="27130" end="27145" title="Treaty of Ghent" label="Treaty of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="27957" end="27974" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516862" start="28332" end="28344" title="Gagging Acts" label="Gagging Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q876357" start="28475" end="28492" title="Peterloo Massacre" label="Peterloo Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532637" start="28544" end="28552" title="Six Acts" label="Six Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="29301" end="29310" title="George IV" label="George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="29883" end="29893" title="William IV" label="William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q686264" start="29986" end="29994" title="poor law" label="poor law"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="30008" end="30020" title="child labour" label="child labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q487420" start="30033" end="30050" title="Slavery Abolition Act 1833" label="slavery abolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="30069" end="30083" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="30110" end="30125" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="30227" end="30238" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="30780" end="30805" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="30884" end="30894" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="31064" end="31085" title="Catholic emancipation" label="Catholic emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602689" start="31105" end="31135" title="Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829" label="Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q294662" start="31279" end="31288" title="Charles Grey, 2nd Earl Grey" label="Lord Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="31323" end="31338" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q573455" start="31431" end="31457" title="rotten and pocket boroughs" label="rotten and pocket boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193974" start="31768" end="31776" title="Chartism" label="Chartism"/>
<link wikidata="Q487420" start="32591" end="32617" title="Slavery Abolition Act 1833" label="Slavery Abolition Act 1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="32874" end="32898" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q312596" start="32900" end="32914" title="Lord Grenville" label="Lord Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q128214" start="32916" end="32932" title="Duke of Portland" label="Duke of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q233992" start="32934" end="32950" title="Spencer Perceval" label="Spencer Perceval"/>
<link wikidata="Q312569" start="32952" end="32966" title="Lord Liverpool" label="Lord Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q219731" start="32968" end="32982" title="George Canning" label="George Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q312591" start="32984" end="32997" title="Lord Goderich" label="Lord Goderich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="32999" end="33017" title="Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q294662" start="33019" end="33028" title="Charles Grey, 2nd Earl Grey" label="Lord Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q312567" start="33030" end="33044" title="Lord Melbourne" label="Lord Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="33050" end="33061" title="Robert Peel" label="Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="33083" end="33091" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="33531" end="33545" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="33774" end="33789" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="33819" end="33831" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q185852" start="33853" end="33866" title="Edwardian era" label="Edwardian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864530" start="34567" end="34596" title="Mines and Collieries Act 1842" label="Mines and Collieries Act 1842"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="35962" end="35978" title="Great Exhibition" label="Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021436" start="36193" end="36211" title="Llewellyn Woodward" label="Llewellyn Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868498" start="36286" end="36319" title="History of rail transport in Great Britain 1830–1922" label="new system of railways after 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="37336" end="37347" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151423" start="37420" end="37438" title="Congress of Berlin" label="Congress of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194113" start="37478" end="37499" title="Treaty of San Stefano" label="Treaty of San Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="37616" end="37628" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="37804" end="37822" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="37918" end="37929" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="38076" end="38089" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166330" start="38118" end="38140" title="Trent Affair" label="war scare in late 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="38571" end="38586" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="38601" end="38626" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q884687" start="39236" end="39251" title="blockade runner" label="blockade runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q591829" start="39435" end="39449" title="Alabama Claims" label="Alabama Claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="39577" end="39583" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="39848" end="39867" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="40125" end="40138" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="40378" end="40395" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="40477" end="40487" title="Wilhelm II" label="William II"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="40717" end="40732" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="40951" end="40961" title="Afrikaners" label="Afrikaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="40988" end="40999" title="Second Boer War" label="War in 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758403" start="41019" end="41033" title="Andrew Roberts, Baron Roberts of Belgravia" label="Andrew Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424243" start="41247" end="41256" title="Uitlander" label="Uitlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q244407" start="41813" end="41824" title="Paul Kruger" label="Paul Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="42061" end="42079" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="42930" end="42951" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q435182" start="43359" end="43376" title="Prince George, Duke of Cambridge" label="Duke of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q334078" start="43523" end="43535" title="Lord Haldane" label="Lord Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q334999" start="43678" end="43705" title="John Fisher, 1st Baron Fisher" label="First Sea Lord, John Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505242" start="43988" end="44006" title="splendid isolation" label="splendid isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="44250" end="44268" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="44335" end="44356" title="Catholic emancipation" label="Catholic emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q314917" start="44430" end="44451" title="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q149072" start="44555" end="44568" title="potato blight" label="potato blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="44711" end="44723" title="Great Hunger" label="Great Hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311653" start="44907" end="44932" title="Irish Parliamentary Party" label="Irish Parliamentary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q317436" start="44978" end="45001" title="Charles Stewart Parnell" label="Charles Stewart Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="45123" end="45140" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="unionist minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="45159" end="45165" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363003" start="45202" end="45222" title="Rome Rule" label="Catholic-Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="45867" end="45885" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="45978" end="45994" title="Liberal Unionist" label="Liberal Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753868" start="46117" end="46136" title="Newcastle Programme" label="Newcastle Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="46527" end="46541" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="47323" end="47338" title="Lord Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="47708" end="47728" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="47997" end="48014" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240393" start="48016" end="48049" title="Premierships of Benjamin Disraeli" label="prime minister 1868 and 1874–1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869155" start="48081" end="48099" title="History of the Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728959" start="48342" end="48365" title="one-nation conservatism" label="one-nation conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="48481" end="48495" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="48867" end="48881" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q735165" start="49353" end="49369" title="Eastern question" label="Eastern question"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="49392" end="49406" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q959814" start="49526" end="49544" title="Suez Canal Company" label="Suez Canal Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q151423" start="49653" end="49671" title="Congress of Berlin" label="Congress of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318051" start="49994" end="50009" title="1867 Reform Act" label="1867 Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="50406" end="50429" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240403" start="50482" end="50551" title="Premierships of William Ewart Gladstone" label="prime minister four times (1868–1874, 1880–1885, 1886, and 1892–1894)"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="51009" end="51026" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851889" start="51051" end="51064" title="Ballot Act 1872" label="secret voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q622059" start="51167" end="51187" title="Bulgarian atrocities" label="Bulgarian atrocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842599" start="51225" end="51244" title="Midlothian campaign" label="Midlothian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="51425" end="51434" title="home rule" label="home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="51653" end="51666" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="52506" end="52523" title="Concert of Europe" label="Concert of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="52585" end="52596" title="Bismarckian" label="Bismarckian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070896" start="52724" end="52733" title="Land Acts (Ireland)" label="Land Acts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52743" end="52759" title="State religion#Disestablishment" label="disestablishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="52778" end="52795" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070614" start="52808" end="52829" title="Irish Church Act 1869" label="Irish Church Act 1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="52862" end="52871" title="Irish Home Rule movement" label="Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="52922" end="52940" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="52962" end="52984" title="Liberal Unionist Party" label="Liberal Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358882" start="53391" end="53412" title="Education Act of 1870" label="Education Act of 1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644929" start="53568" end="53590" title="Judicature Act of 1873" label="Judicature Act of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831978" start="54199" end="54219" title="Trade Union Act 1871" label="Trade Union Act 1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="54337" end="54354" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q334381" start="54787" end="54802" title="Edward Cardwell, 1st Viscount Cardwell" label="Edward Cardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q622568" start="54821" end="54834" title="War Secretary" label="War Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q435182" start="55250" end="55267" title="Prince George, Duke of Cambridge" label="Duke of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713569" start="55272" end="55304" title="Commander-in-Chief of the Forces" label="Commander-in-Chief of the Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="55485" end="55499" title="Lord Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="55696" end="55710" title="Lord Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307387" start="56334" end="56345" title="Reform Acts" label="Reform Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="56563" end="56584" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Marquess of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="56586" end="56600" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Arthur Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q106618" start="56602" end="56626" title="Henry Campbell-Bannerman" label="Henry Campbell-Bannerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="56628" end="56641" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="56643" end="56661" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q166663" start="56663" end="56672" title="Bonar Law" label="Bonar Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="56674" end="56689" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="56691" end="56707" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="56709" end="56724" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="56726" end="56742" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="56744" end="56759" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="56761" end="56780" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="56785" end="56802" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="56809" end="56822" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q59554918" start="56905" end="56920" title="Liberal welfare reforms" label="welfare reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="57151" end="57164" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="57227" end="57245" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q39078678" start="57624" end="57635" title="Martin Pugh (historian)" label="Martin Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="57788" end="57798" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="58211" end="58223" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="58286" end="58294" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507199" start="58847" end="58865" title="George Dangerfield" label="George Dangerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q88998701" start="59070" end="59083" title="Great Unrest" label="labour unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q28325090" start="59381" end="59394" title="Ross McKibbin" label="Ross McKibbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="60284" end="60297" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="60305" end="60318" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q335187" start="60553" end="60564" title="Edward Grey, 1st Viscount Grey of Fallodon" label="Edward Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160895" start="61121" end="61137" title="Treaty of London (1839)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="61300" end="61314" title="Triple Entente" label="Triple Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="61378" end="61392" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="61459" end="61472" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969484" start="61878" end="61882" title="British Army during the First World War" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="62177" end="62195" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q335480" start="62493" end="62507" title="Maurice Hankey" label="Maurice Hankey"/>
<link wikidata="Q117075266" start="62560" end="62573" title="The Garden Suburb" label="Garden Suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062580" start="62745" end="62773" title="Irish Republican Brotherhood" label="Irish Republican Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="62785" end="62798" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="63144" end="63156" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="63361" end="63376" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="63400" end="63423" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="63439" end="63457" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q156554" start="64142" end="64159" title="Battle of Jutland" label="Battle of Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="64300" end="64306" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q187425" start="64742" end="64751" title="RMS Lusitania" label="Lusitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="65659" end="65677" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="65685" end="65696" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917424" start="65790" end="65803" title="war-weariness" label="war-weariness"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="66590" end="66607" title="Orders in Council" label="Orders in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q234105" start="67521" end="67536" title="Lost Generation" label="Lost Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q363729" start="67681" end="67698" title="Siegfried Sassoon" label="Siegfried Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689591" start="67757" end="67765" title="jingoism" label="jingoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="68181" end="68198" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="68417" end="68447" title="Paris Peace Conference of 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="68581" end="68598" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q158725" start="69075" end="69085" title="Tanganyika Territory" label="Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q161062" start="69098" end="69106" title="Togoland" label="Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080258" start="69575" end="69594" title="Parliament Act 1911" label="Parliament Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279790" start="69710" end="69740" title="Government of Ireland Act 1914" label="Government of Ireland Act 1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="69964" end="69972" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q935581" start="69973" end="69990" title="Ulster Volunteers" label="Ulster Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074958" start="70050" end="70066" title="Irish Volunteers" label="Irish Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="70174" end="70187" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="70418" end="70427" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356572" start="70542" end="70552" title="First Dáil" label="First Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269552" start="70621" end="70633" title="Dáil Éireann (Irish Republic)" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="70700" end="70715" title="Anglo-Irish War" label="Anglo-Irish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="70756" end="70777" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="70837" end="70855" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="70894" end="70910" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468953" start="70967" end="70983" title="History of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375047" start="71229" end="71268" title="Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927" label="Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799660" start="71309" end="71323" title="Arthur Marwick" label="Arthur Marwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="72536" end="72545" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631406" start="73436" end="73445" title="Andy Capp" label="Andy Capp"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="74213" end="74222" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q55221" start="74329" end="74344" title="Alexander Korda" label="Alexander Korda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="74375" end="74391" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q320851" start="74981" end="74991" title="John Reith, 1st Baron Reith" label="John Reith"/>
<link wikidata="Q725151" start="76039" end="76048" title="The Ashes" label="The Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263483" start="76383" end="76393" title="Allen Lane" label="Allen Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="76397" end="76410" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="76456" end="76472" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="76477" end="76492" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056775" start="76951" end="76969" title="Paternoster Square" label="Paternoster Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q756420" start="77068" end="77084" title="Mills &amp;amp; Boon" label="Mills &amp;amp; Boon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="77201" end="77220" title="social conservatism" label="social conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="77355" end="77365" title="DC Thomson" label="DC Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916045" start="77882" end="77922" title="Housing, Town Planning, &amp;amp;c. Act 1919" label="Housing, Town Planning, &amp;amp;c. Act 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q334088" start="78111" end="78130" title="Christopher Addison" label="Christopher Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884191" start="78390" end="78421" title="Unemployment Insurance Act 1920" label="Unemployment Insurance Act 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006647" start="78822" end="78833" title="C. L. Mowat" label="C. L. Mowat"/>
<link wikidata="Q926031" start="79044" end="79065" title="Lloyd George ministry" label="Lloyd George ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="79086" end="79101" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926884" start="79453" end="79472" title="National Government (United Kingdom)" label="National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q918375" start="79539" end="79563" title="1931 United Kingdom general election" label="general election of 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="79919" end="79960" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="joined a coalition with the Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q706931" start="80854" end="80869" title="A. J. P. Taylor" label="A. J. P. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q466969" start="81350" end="81357" title="Fordism" label="Fordism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="81751" end="81768" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="82600" end="82618" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306184" start="82664" end="82674" title="Council house" label="new houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="82717" end="82721" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q104591398" start="82949" end="82961" title="Trade unions in the United Kingdom" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="83265" end="83284" title="1926 general strike" label="1926 general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="83757" end="83778" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="84252" end="84261" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q332365" start="84546" end="84558" title="Ernest Bevin" label="Ernest Bevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831940" start="84787" end="84827" title="Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act 1927" label="Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="85185" end="85201" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="85731" end="85750" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q332442" start="85940" end="85946" title="Sidney Webb, 1st Baron Passfield" label="Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q242666" start="85951" end="85964" title="Beatrice Webb" label="Beatrice Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q962155" start="85966" end="85978" title="J. A. Hobson" label="J. A. Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044933" start="85984" end="85997" title="G. D. H. Cole" label="G. D. H. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050628" start="86153" end="86167" title="Left Book Club" label="Left Book Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729231" start="86770" end="86784" title="Jarrow Crusade" label="Jarrow Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="86934" end="86947" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197966" start="86966" end="86988" title="The Road to Wigan Pier" label="The Road to Wigan Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="87248" end="87264" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="87280" end="87292" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="87317" end="87329" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="87335" end="87352" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="87766" end="87782" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="87863" end="87882" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="87980" end="87993" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="88215" end="88227" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="88264" end="88282" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q190882" start="88317" end="88327" title="Phoney War" label="Phoney War"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="88743" end="88769" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="rescued its main army from"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="88866" end="88883" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="89123" end="89140" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="89162" end="89167" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="89540" end="89550" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="90276" end="90285" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020032" start="91269" end="91294" title="British pet massacre" label="sacrificing cats and dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q85816028" start="91799" end="91821" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Land Army" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Land Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q335049" start="92693" end="92710" title="William Beveridge" label="William Beveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="93405" end="93419" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="93429" end="93433" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="93698" end="93711" title="Common Market" label="Common Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q642590" start="93766" end="93783" title="landslide victory" label="landslide victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="93788" end="93802" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="93811" end="93823" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="93869" end="93883" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="93934" end="93957" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="93964" end="93979" title="council housing" label="council housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="93984" end="93999" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="94235" end="94248" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94328" end="94337" title="Rationing in the United Kingdom#Post-Second World War 1945–1954" label="Rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089965" start="94342" end="94354" title="National service" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137667" start="94421" end="94455" title="Winter of 1946–47 in the United Kingdom" label="one of the worst winters on record"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="94524" end="94542" title="Elizabeth II" label="Princess Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663784" start="94559" end="94578" title="Festival of Britain" label="Festival of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="94805" end="94819" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 electoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="94853" end="94868" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="94896" end="94916" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q335791" start="95238" end="95254" title="Herbert Morrison" label="Herbert Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="95263" end="95292" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="95445" end="95448" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="96065" end="96078" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="96862" end="96866" title="1950 United Kingdom general election" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="96871" end="96875" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="97219" end="97233" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="97379" end="97389" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="97429" end="97435" title="British Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="97542" end="97553" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="97790" end="97799" title="motorways" label="motorways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273728" start="98611" end="98624" title="R. J. Unstead" label="R. J. Unstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164722" start="100001" end="100018" title="consumer spending" label="consumer spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748150" start="101124" end="101129" title="Queen (magazine)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="101361" end="101377" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776415" start="101685" end="101696" title="Martin Pugh" label="Martin Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="104620" end="104631" title="Nationalism" label="Nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="104704" end="104709" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="104942" end="104965" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="105361" end="105368" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="105370" end="105379" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="105385" end="105401" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="105478" end="105506" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q336512" start="105625" end="105645" title="Terence O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Terence O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q296597" start="105831" end="105842" title="Ian Paisley" label="Ian Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193630" start="106004" end="106013" title="John Hume" label="John Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545632" start="106015" end="106028" title="Austin Currie" label="Austin Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="106111" end="106144" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330968" start="106159" end="106185" title="Ulster Defence Association" label="Ulster Defence Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="106613" end="106634" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="106837" end="106848" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="106942" end="106946" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="106953" end="106966" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="107028" end="107050" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="restored to government"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="107065" end="107077" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="107152" end="107156" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="107317" end="107332" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="107423" end="107440" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="107455" end="107481" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="election as prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="107518" end="107530" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="107534" end="107553" title="deindustrialisation" label="deindustrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="107596" end="107609" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634334" start="107631" end="107654" title="Post–World–War–II economic expansion" label="a time of economic boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="107723" end="107733" title="privatised" label="privatised"/>
<link wikidata="Q918544" start="107964" end="107996" title="miners&amp;#x27; strike of 1984–1985" label="miners&amp;#x27; strike of 1984–1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="108041" end="108045" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="108074" end="108095" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea gas and oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="108227" end="108243" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q400500" start="108458" end="108473" title="Black Wednesday" label="Black Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="108494" end="108504" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="108524" end="108541" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="108704" end="108714" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="108729" end="108739" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="110699" end="110726" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="110836" end="110852" title="French President" label="French President"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="110853" end="110870" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="110915" end="110928" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="111291" end="111304" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931610" start="111959" end="111969" title="1975 United Kingdom European Communities membership referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q622649" start="112088" end="112107" title="Single European Act" label="Single European Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="112155" end="112169" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="112214" end="112231" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412413" start="112232" end="112242" title="European Communities (Amendment) Act 1986" label="enacted it"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="112261" end="112278" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="112323" end="112337" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="112382" end="112392" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721256" start="112446" end="112463" title="Maastricht Rebels" label="Maastricht Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="112470" end="112483" title="Lisbon Treaty" label="Lisbon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194384" start="112570" end="112595" title="qualified majority voting" label="qualified majority voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="112603" end="112623" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="112654" end="112673" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q944550" start="112718" end="112728" title="Codecision procedure" label="codecision"/>
<link wikidata="Q737405" start="112776" end="112789" title="Three pillars of the European Union" label="pillar system"/>
<link wikidata="Q735587" start="112812" end="112845" title="President of the European Council" label="President of the European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q634291" start="112888" end="112960" title="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy" label="High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="113075" end="113104" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113198" end="113227" title="Treaty of Lisbon#Council of Ministers" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="113290" end="113302" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q499626" start="113484" end="113509" title="Battle of Stirling Bridge" label="Battle of Stirling Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690249" start="113513" end="113523" title="1997 Scottish devolution referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="113560" end="113579" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689863" start="113733" end="113743" title="1997 Welsh devolution referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="113771" end="113785" title="Welsh Assembly" label="Welsh Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="113980" end="114011" title="countries of the United Kingdom" label="countries of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764529" start="114038" end="114048" title="Healthcare in the United Kingdom" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q130936" start="114096" end="114117" title="West Lothian question" label="West Lothian question"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="114486" end="114507" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="114653" end="114673" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="114721" end="114735" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="114750" end="114763" title="War on terror" label="War on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="114784" end="114807" title="invasion of Afghanistan" label="invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="114986" end="115007" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="115376" end="115386" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="115395" end="115424" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005 British general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10818" start="115471" end="115504" title="7 July 2005 London bombings" label="a series of four suicide bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="115660" end="115693" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="2007 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="115716" end="115739" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="115790" end="115809" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="115944" end="115969" title="independence for Scotland" label="independence for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152739" start="116024" end="116041" title="Calman Commission" label="Calman Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="116061" end="116071" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="116281" end="116300" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354822" start="116386" end="116415" title="Scottish Parliament elections" label="Scottish Parliament elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="116539" end="116560" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="next general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929110" start="116593" end="116608" title="Michael Russell (Scottish politician)" label="Michael Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="116699" end="116731" title="Referendum (Scotland) Bill, 2010" label="Referendum (Scotland) Bill, 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="116850" end="116865" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435631" start="117037" end="117054" title="Scotland Act 2012" label="Scotland Act 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862416" start="117061" end="117074" title="2011 Scottish Parliament election" label="2011 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898557" start="117671" end="117686" title="Better Together (campaign)" label="Better Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052763" start="117773" end="117785" title="Yes Scotland" label="Yes Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="117814" end="117829" title="Scottish Greens" label="Scottish Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q891900" start="117838" end="117862" title="Scottish Socialist Party" label="Scottish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206069" start="117965" end="117984" title="Smith Commission" label="&amp;#x27;The Vow&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="118147" end="118173" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="118174" end="118186" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q467112" start="118235" end="118250" title="Nicola Sturgeon" label="Nicola Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24762224" start="118267" end="118286" title="Proposed second Scottish independence referendum" label="a second referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437890" start="118329" end="118333" title="2016 Scottish Parliament election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969168" start="118338" end="118342" title="2021 Scottish Parliament election" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="118401" end="118416" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="118947" end="118965" title="British Government" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391288" start="118978" end="118997" title="2008 United Kingdom bank rescue package" label="bank rescue package"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="119135" end="119150" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q874727" start="119664" end="119683" title="quantitative easing" label="quantitative easing"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="119722" end="119743" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="119766" end="119781" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="119970" end="119987" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="120013" end="120033" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="120089" end="120102" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q189947" start="120131" end="120141" title="Nick Clegg" label="Nick Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="120198" end="120223" title="Royal Air Force" label="British military aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q210714" start="120256" end="120268" title="2011 military intervention in Libya" label="intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="120276" end="120297" title="2011 Libyan civil war" label="2011 Libyan civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633520" start="120327" end="120333" title="sortie" label="sortie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="120379" end="120394" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29065" start="120456" end="120477" title="2011 England riots" label="unprecedented rioting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153783" start="120618" end="120633" title="2011 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting" label="prime ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="120641" end="120659" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="120699" end="120715" title="Succession to the British throne#Current line of succession" label="royal succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="120744" end="120757" title="primogeniture" label="primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="120783" end="120805" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="120916" end="120929" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="121275" end="121298" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="121777" end="121794" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="121919" end="121940" title="UK Independence Party" label="UK Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="122575" end="122587" title="eurosceptics" label="eurosceptics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21091849" start="122658" end="122684" title="Britain Stronger in Europe" label="Britain Stronger in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079776" start="122709" end="122719" title="Vote Leave" label="Vote Leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="122765" end="122787" title="European single market" label="European single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="123002" end="123013" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="123134" end="123147" title="Lisbon Treaty" label="Lisbon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="123368" end="123374" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="123546" end="123559" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079776" start="123590" end="123600" title="Vote Leave" label="Vote Leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q973500" start="124010" end="124028" title="Jonathan Freedland" label="Jonathan Freedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q86458103" start="124946" end="124975" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Europe" label="outbreaks elsewhere in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104376647" start="125653" end="125677" title="SARS-CoV-2 Alpha variant" label="new variant of the virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="125711" end="125715" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q107055182" start="126535" end="126559" title="SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant" label="SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q109739412" start="126744" end="126759" title="Omicron variant" label="Omicron variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q112797451" start="126896" end="126909" title="Endemic COVID-19" label="endemic phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="126920" end="126927" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="126929" end="126936" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="126938" end="126944" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="126946" end="126954" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="126956" end="126963" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110128765" start="127064" end="127073" title="Partygate" label="Partygate"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="127204" end="127217" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055561" start="127222" end="127233" title="Rishi Sunak" label="Rishi Sunak"/>
<link wikidata="Q112920479" start="127311" end="127332" title="Chris Pincher scandal" label="Chris Pincher scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q272201" start="127365" end="127374" title="Liz Truss" label="Liz Truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q114688857" start="127439" end="127460" title="September 2022 United Kingdom mini-budget" label="September mini-budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q750204" start="127519" end="127533" title="Kwasi Kwarteng" label="Kwasi Kwarteng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722871" start="127700" end="127705" title="British Asians" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="127942" end="127954" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="128021" end="128034" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="128073" end="128082" title="Reform UK" label="Reform UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="128295" end="128311" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="128377" end="128389" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128034940" start="128446" end="128488" title="2024 Southport stabbing" label="fatal stabbing of three girls in Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q128281666" start="128584" end="128609" title="2024 United Kingdom riots" label="2024 United Kingdom riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005196" start="128632" end="128653" title="immigration to the UK" label="immigration to the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155026" start="130417" end="130431" title="Gregg, Pauline" label="Gregg, Pauline"/>
<link wikidata="Q93657" start="132316" end="132334" title="Morgan, Kenneth O." label="Morgan, Kenneth O."/>
<link wikidata="Q39078678" start="132980" end="132992" title="Martin Pugh (author)" label="Pugh, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="133000" end="133053" title="Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party" label="Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040839" start="135329" end="135345" title="Carl Stephenson (historian)" label="Stephenson, Carl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31724" wikidata="Q129373" url="?curid=31724" title="Geography of the United Kingdom">
<text>The United Kingdom is a sovereign state located off the north-western coast of continental Europe. The United Kingdom is made up of four countries – England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. With a total area of approximately , the UK occupies the major part of the British Isles archipelago and includes the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern one-sixth of the island of Ireland and many smaller surrounding islands. It is the world&#x27;s 7th largest island country. The mainland areas lie between latitudes 49°N and 59°N (the Shetland Islands reach to nearly 61°N), and longitudes 8°W to 2°E. The Royal Observatory, Greenwich, in south-east London, is the defining point of the Prime Meridian.

The UK lies between the North Atlantic and the North Sea, and comes within of the north-west coast of France, from which it is separated by the English Channel. It shares a international land boundary with the Republic of Ireland. The Channel Tunnel bored beneath the English Channel now links the UK with France.

The British Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies are covered in their own respective articles, see below.

== Area ==
The total area of the United Kingdom according to the Office for National Statistics is , comprising the island of Great Britain, the northeastern one-sixth of the island of Ireland (Northern Ireland) and many smaller islands. This makes it the 7th largest island country in the world. England is the largest country of the United Kingdom, at accounting for just over half the total area of the UK. Scotland at , is second largest, accounting for about a third of the area of the UK. Wales and Northern Ireland are much smaller, covering respectively.

The area of the countries of the United Kingdom is set out in the table below. Information about the area of England, the largest country, is also broken down by region.

The British Antarctic Territory, which covers an area of is geographically the largest of the British Overseas Territories followed by the Falkland Islands which covers an area of . The remaining twelve overseas territories cover an area .

Other countries with very similar land areas to the United Kingdom include Guinea (slightly larger), Uganda, Ghana and Romania (all slightly smaller). The UK is the world&#x27;s 80th largest country by land area and the 10th largest in Europe (if European Russia is included).

==Physical geography==
The physical geography of the UK varies greatly. England consists of mostly lowland terrain, with upland or mountainous terrain only found north-west of the Tees–Exe line. The upland areas include the Lake District, the Pennines, North York Moors, Exmoor and Dartmoor. The lowland areas are typically traversed by ranges of low hills, frequently composed of chalk, and flat plains. Scotland is the most mountainous country in the UK and its physical geography is distinguished by the Highland Boundary Fault which traverses the Scottish mainland from Helensburgh to Stonehaven. The faultline separates the two distinctively different regions of the Highlands to the north and west, and the Lowlands to the south and east. The Highlands are predominantly mountainous, containing the majority of Scotland&#x27;s mountainous landscape, while the Lowlands contain flatter land, especially across the Central Lowlands, with upland and mountainous terrain located at the Southern Uplands. Wales is mostly mountainous, though south Wales is less mountainous than north and mid Wales. Northern Ireland consists of mostly hilly landscape and its geography includes the Mourne Mountains as well as Lough Neagh, at , the largest body of water in the UK.

The overall geomorphology of the UK was shaped by a combination of forces including tectonics and climate change, in particular glaciation in northern and western areas.

The tallest mountain in the UK (and British Isles) is Ben Nevis, in the Grampian Mountains, Scotland. The longest river is the River Severn which flows from Wales into England. The largest lake by surface area is Lough Neagh in Northern Ireland, though Scotland&#x27;s Loch Ness has the largest volume.

=== Geology ===
The geology of the UK is complex and diverse, a result of it being subject to a variety of plate tectonic processes over a very extended period of time. Changing latitude and sea levels have been important factors in the nature of sedimentary sequences, whilst successive continental collisions have affected its geological structure with major faulting and folding being a legacy of each orogeny (mountain-building period), often associated with volcanic activity and the metamorphism of existing rock sequences. As a result of this eventful geological history, the UK shows a rich variety of landscapes.

====Precambrian====
The oldest rocks in the British Isles are the Lewisian gneisses, metamorphic rocks found in the far north-west of Scotland and in the Hebrides (with a few small outcrops elsewhere), which date from at least 2,700 Ma (Ma = million years ago). South and east of the gneisses are a complex mixture of rocks forming the North West Highlands and Grampian Highlands in Scotland. These are essentially the remains of folded sedimentary rocks that were deposited between 1,000 Ma and 670 Ma over the gneiss on what was then the floor of the Iapetus Ocean.

====Palaeozoic====
At 520 Ma, what is now Great Britain was split between two continents; the north of Scotland was located on the continent of Laurentia at about 20° south of the equator, while the rest of the country was on the continent of Gondwana near the Antarctic Circle. In Gondwana, England and Wales were largely submerged under a shallow sea studded with volcanic islands. The remains of these islands underlie much of central England with small outcrops visible in many places.

About 500 Ma southern Britain, the east coast of North America and south-east Newfoundland broke away from Gondwana to form the continent of Avalonia, which by 440 Ma had drifted to about 30° south. During this period north Wales was subject to volcanic activity. The remains of these volcanoes are still visible, one example of which is Rhobell Fawr dating from 510 Ma. Large quantities of volcanic lava and ash known as the Borrowdale Volcanics covered the Lake District and this can still be seen in the form of mountains such as Helvellyn and Scafell Pike.

Between 425 and 400 Ma Avalonia had joined with the continent of Baltica, and the combined landmass collided with Laurentia at about 20° south, joining the southern and northern halves of Great Britain together. The resulting Caledonian Orogeny produced an Alpine-style mountain range in much of north and west Britain.

The collision between continents continued during the Devonian period, producing uplift and subsequent erosion, resulting in the deposition of numerous sedimentary rock layers in lowlands and seas. The Old Red Sandstone and the contemporary volcanics and marine sediments found in Devon originated from these processes.

Around 360 Ma Great Britain was lying at the equator, covered by the warm shallow waters of the Rheic Ocean, during which time the Carboniferous Limestone was deposited, as found in the Mendip Hills and the Peak District of Derbyshire. Later, river deltas formed and the sediments deposited were colonised by swamps and rain forest. It was in this environment that the Coal Measures were formed, the source of the majority of Britain&#x27;s extensive coal reserves.

Around 280 Ma the Variscan orogeny mountain-building period occurred, again due to collision of continental plates, causing major deformation in south-west England. The general region of Variscan folding was south of an east–west line roughly from south Pembrokeshire to Kent. Towards the end of this period granite was formed beneath the overlying rocks of Devon and Cornwall, now exposed at Dartmoor and Bodmin Moor.

By the end of the Carboniferous period the various continents of the Earth had fused to form the super-continent of Pangaea. Britain was located in the interior of Pangea where it was subject to a hot arid desert climate with frequent flash floods leaving deposits that formed beds of red sedimentary rock.

====Mesozoic====
As Pangaea drifted during the Triassic, Great Britain moved away from the equator until it was between 20° and 30° north. The remnants of the Variscan uplands in France to the south were eroded down, resulting in layers of the New Red Sandstone being deposited across central England.

Pangaea began to break up at the start of the Jurassic period. Sea levels rose and Britain drifted on the Eurasian Plate to between 31° and 40° north. Much of Britain was under water again, and sedimentary rocks were deposited and can now be found underlying much of England from the Cleveland Hills of Yorkshire to the Jurassic Coast in Dorset. These include sandstones, greensands, oolitic limestone of the Cotswold Hills, corallian limestone of the Vale of White Horse and the Isle of Portland. The burial of algae and bacteria below the mud of the seafloor during this time resulted in the formation of North Sea oil and natural gas.
The modern continents having formed, the Cretaceous saw the formation of the Atlantic Ocean, gradually separating northern Scotland from North America. The land underwent a series of uplifts to form a fertile plain. After 20 million years or so, the seas started to flood the land again until much of Britain was again below the sea, though sea levels frequently changed. Chalk and flints were deposited over much of Great Britain, now notably exposed at the White Cliffs of Dover and the Seven Sisters, and also forming Salisbury Plain.

====Cenozoic====
Between 63 and 52 Ma, the last volcanic rocks in Great Britain were formed. The major eruptions at this time produced the Antrim Plateau, the basaltic columns of the Giant&#x27;s Causeway and Lundy Island in the Bristol Channel.

The Alpine Orogeny that took place in Europe about 50 Ma, was responsible for the folding of strata in southern England, producing the London Basin syncline, the Weald-Artois Anticline to the south, the North Downs, South Downs and Chiltern Hills.

During the period the North Sea formed, Britain was uplifted. Some of this uplift was along old lines of weakness left from the Caledonian and Variscan Orogenies long before. The uplifted areas were then eroded, and further sediments, such as the London Clay, were deposited over southern England.

The major changes during the last 2 million years were brought about by several recent ice ages. The most severe was the Anglian Glaciation, with ice up to thick that reached as far south as London and Bristol. This took place between about 478,000 to 424,000 years ago, and was responsible for the diversion of the River Thames onto its present course. During the most recent Devensian glaciation, which ended a mere 10,000 years ago, the icesheet reached south to Wolverhampton and Cardiff. Among the features left behind by the ice are the fjords of the west coast of Scotland, the U-shaped valleys of the Lake District and erratics (blocks of rock) that have been transported from the Oslo region of Norway and deposited on the coast of Yorkshire.

Amongst the most significant geological features created during the last twelve thousand years are the peat deposits of Scotland, and of coastal and upland areas of England and Wales.

At the present time Scotland is continuing to rise as a result of the weight of Devensian ice being lifted. Southern and eastern England is sinking, generally estimated at 1 mm ( in) per year, with the London area sinking at double the speed partly due to the continuing compaction of the recent clay deposits.

===Mountains and hills===


The ten tallest mountains in the UK are all found in Scotland. The highest peaks in each part of the UK are:
*Scotland: Ben Nevis, 
*Wales: Snowdon (Yr Wyddfa), (Snowdonia), 
*England: Scafell Pike (Cumbrian Mountains), 
*Northern Ireland: Slieve Donard (Mourne Mountains), 

The ranges of mountains and hills in the UK include:
*Scotland: Cairngorms, Scottish Highlands, Southern Uplands, Grampian Mountains, Monadhliath Mountains, Ochil Hills, Campsie Fells, Cuillin
*Wales: Brecon Beacons (Bannau Brycheiniog), Cambrian Mountains (Mynyddoedd Cambria), Clwydian Hills (Bryniau Clwyd), Snowdonia (Eryri), Black Mountains (Y Mynyddoedd Duon), Preseli Hills (Y Preseli)
*England: Cheviot Hills, Chilterns, Cotswolds, Dartmoor, Lincolnshire Wolds, Exmoor, Lake District, Malvern Hills, Mendip Hills, North Downs, Peak District, Pennines, South Downs, Shropshire Hills, Yorkshire Wolds
*Northern Ireland: Mourne Mountains, Antrim Plateau, Sperrin Mountains

The lowest point of the UK is in the Fens of East Anglia, in England, parts of which lie up to below sea level.

===Rivers and lakes===
;Main articles:
*List of lakes and lochs in the United Kingdom;
*List of rivers of the United Kingdom;
*List of waterfalls of the United Kingdom.

The longest river in the UK is the River Severn () which flows through both Wales and England.

The longest rivers in the UK contained fully within each of its constituent nations are:
*England: River Thames ()
*Scotland: River Tay ()
*Northern Ireland: River Bann ()
*Wales: River Usk ()

The largest lakes (by surface area) in the UK by country are:
*Northern Ireland: Lough Neagh ()
*Scotland: Loch Lomond ()
*England: Windermere ()
*Wales: Bala Lake (Llyn Tegid) ()

The deepest lake in the UK is Loch Morar with a maximum depth of ; Loch Ness is second at deep. The deepest lake in England is Wastwater which achieves a depth of .

Loch Ness is the UK&#x27;s largest lake in terms of volume.

===Artificial waterways===
&quot;Main articles:&quot; Waterways in the United Kingdom, Canals of Great Britain, Dams and reservoirs in United Kingdom

As a result of its industrial history, the United Kingdom has an extensive system of canals, mostly built in the early years of the Industrial Revolution, before the rise of competition from the railways. The United Kingdom also has numerous dams and reservoirs to store water for drinking and industry. The generation of hydroelectric power is rather limited, supplying less than 2% of British electricity, mainly from the Scottish Highlands.

===Coastline===
The UK has a coastline which measures about . The heavy indentation of the coastline helps to ensure that no location is more than from tidal waters.

The UK claims jurisdiction over the continental shelf, as defined in continental shelf orders or in accordance with agreed upon boundaries, an exclusive fishing zone of , and territorial sea of .

The UK has an Exclusive Economic Zone of in Europe. However, if all crown dependencies and overseas territories are included then the total EEZ is which is the 5th largest in the world.

====Inlets====
*Cardigan Bay
*Lyme Bay
*Bristol Channel
*Thames Estuary
*Morecambe Bay
*Solway Firth
*The Wash
*Humber Estuary
*Firth of Forth
*Firth of Tay
*Moray Firth
*Firth of Clyde
*Firth of Lorn

====Headlands====
The geology of the United Kingdom is such that there are many headlands along its coast. A list of headlands of the United Kingdom details many of them.

===Tidal flats===
A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were of tidal flats in the United Kingdom, making it the 12th ranking country in terms of how much tidal flat occurs there.

===Islands===

In total, it is estimated that the UK is made up of over one thousand small islands, the majority located off the north and west coasts of Scotland. About 130 of these are inhabited according to the 2001 census.

The largest island in the UK is Great Britain. The largest islands by constituent country are Lewis and Harris in Scotland at , Wales&#x27; Anglesey at , the Isle of Wight in England at , and Rathlin Island in Northern Ireland at roughly ;

===Climate===
The climate of the UK is generally temperate, although significant local variation occurs, particularly as a result of altitude and distance from the coast. In general the south of the country is warmer than the north, and the west wetter than the east. Due to the warming influence of the Gulf Stream, the UK is significantly warmer than some other locations at a similar latitude, such as Newfoundland.

The prevailing winds are southwesterly, from the North Atlantic Current. More than 50% of the days are overcast. There are few natural hazards, although there can be strong winds and floods, especially in winter.

Average annual rainfall varies from over in the Scottish Highlands down to in Cambridge. The county of Essex is one of the driest in the UK, with an average annual rainfall of around , although it typically rains on over 100 days per year. In some years rainfall in Essex can be below , less than the average annual rainfall in Jerusalem and Beirut.

The highest temperature recorded in the UK was at Coningsby in Lincolnshire, on 20 July 2022. The lowest was recorded at Braemar in the Grampian Mountains, Scotland, on 11 February 1895 and 10 January 1982 and Altnaharra, also in Scotland, on 30 December 1995.

==Human geography==
=== Demographics ===
===Political geography===


====Government====

The United Kingdom as a whole is governed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom. The Parliament of the United Kingdom, based at the Palace of Westminster in London, only legislates for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland on reserved matters, such as national security, broadcasting and currency, as Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have devolved governments and legislatures – the Scottish Parliament, Senedd (Welsh Parliament) and Northern Ireland Assembly respectively. The devolved governments and legislatures can make laws in a number of areas, such as culture, education

The Scottish Parliament has been described as &quot;one of the most powerful devolved parliaments in the world&quot;, and can legislate for Scotland in areas in which the Northern Ireland Assembly or Welsh Parliament cannot for their respective countries, such as in areas as the distribution of money from dormant bank accounts, policing, criminal investigations and private security, anti-social behaviour and public order, air gun licensing, consumer advocacy and advice, Pubs Code Regulations, Sunday trading, heating and cooling, policing of railways and railway property, public sector compensation, the Crown Estate, registration of births, deaths and places of worship, Registration of land, agricultural charges and debentures, bank holidays and marriage, family relationships, matters concerning children.

By contrast, England has no devolved system of government, that is, the Parliament of the United Kingdom makes laws for England, as well as for reserved matters in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. England is governed by UK government ministers and legislated for by the UK parliament. The London region has a devolved assembly but proposals for elected Regional Assemblies in England were rejected in the first referendum covering North East England. (&quot;See Government of England.&quot;)

The UK (specifically, Northern Ireland) has an international land boundary with the Republic of Ireland of 499 km. There is also a boundary between the jurisdiction of France and the UK on the Channel Tunnel.

====Local government====

Each part of the UK is subdivided into further local governmental regions:
*England: Unitary Authorities, county councils, district councils, parish councils
*Wales: Principal areas, communities
*Scotland: Council areas, communities
*Northern Ireland: Districts

Historically the UK was divided into counties or shires: administrative areas through which all civil responsibilities of the government were passed. Each county or shire had a county town as its administrative centre and was divided into individual parishes that were defined along ecclesiastic boundaries.

Between 1889 (1890 in Scotland) and 1974, the political boundaries were based on the traditional counties, but due to changes in population centres, the traditional counties became impractical as local government areas in certain highly urbanised areas. The Local Government Act 1972 created a new system of administrative counties, designed to take account of the widely differing populations across different parts of the country.

In the 1990s further population growth led to more political changes on a local level. Unitary authorities were formed across the entirety of Scotland and Wales, and in larger cities in England. Many unpopular administrative counties were also abolished at this time, leading to a mixture of two-tier and single-purpose authorities. Further reorganisations are planned if and when regional assemblies in England are revisited in the future.

===Economic geography===

The economic geography of the UK reflects not only its current position in the global economy, but its long history both as a trading nation and an imperial power.

The UK led the Industrial Revolution and its highly urban character is a legacy of this, with all its major cities being current or former centres of various forms of manufacturing. However, this in turn was built on its exploitation of natural resources, especially coal and iron ore.

====Primary industry====
The UK&#x27;s primary industry was once dominated by the coal industry, heavily concentrated in the north, the Midlands and south Wales. This is all but gone and the major primary industry is North Sea oil. Its activity is concentrated on the UK Continental Shelf to the north-east of Scotland.

====Manufacturing====
The UK&#x27;s heavy manufacturing drove the industrial revolution. A map of the major UK cities gives a good picture of where this activity occurred, in particular Belfast, Birmingham, Glasgow, Liverpool, London, Manchester, Newcastle and Sheffield. Today there is no heavy manufacturing industry in which UK-based firms can be considered world leaders. However, areas of the UK still have a notable manufacturing base, including the Midlands which remains a strong manufacturing centre, and the North West which accounts for 60% of the United Kingdom&#x27;s manufacturing output. More recently, high technology firms have concentrated largely along the M4 motorway, partly because of access to Heathrow Airport, but also because of agglomeration economies.

====Finance and services====
Once, every large city had a stock exchange. Now, the UK financial industry is concentrated overwhelmingly in the City of London and Canary Wharf, with back office and administrative operations often dispersed around the south of England. London is one of the world&#x27;s great financial centres and is usually referred to as a world city. There is also a significant legal and ebusiness industry in Leeds.

====Regional disparity====
The effect of changing economic fortune has contributed to the creation of the so-called North-South divide, in which decaying industrial and ex-industrial areas of Northern England, Scotland and Wales contrast with the wealthy, finance and technology-led southern economy. This has led successive governments to develop regional policy to try to rectify the imbalance. However, this is not to say that the north–south divide is uniform; some of the worst pockets of deprivation can be found in London, whilst parts of Cheshire and North Yorkshire are very wealthy. Nor is the North-South divide limited to the economic sphere; cultural and political divisions weigh heavily too.

==Natural resources==

Historically, much of the United Kingdom was forested. Since prehistoric times, man has deforested much of the United Kingdom.

Agriculture is intensive, highly mechanised, and efficient by European standards, producing about 60% of food needs with only 1% of the labour force. It contributes around 2% of GDP. Around two thirds of production is devoted to livestock, one third to arable crops.

In 1993, it was estimated that land use was:
*Arable land: 25%
*Permanent crops: 0%
*Permanent pastures: 46%
*Forests and Woodland: 10%
*Other: 19%
*Irrigated: 1,080 km2

The UK has a variety of natural resources including:
*Geological: coal, petroleum, natural gas, limestone, chalk, gypsum, silica, rock salt, china clay, iron ore, tin, silver, gold, lead.
*Agricultural: arable land, wheat, barley, sheep

The UK has large coal, natural gas, and oil reserves; primary energy production accounts for 10% of GDP, one of the highest shares of any industrial nation. Due to the island location of the UK, the country has great potential for generating electricity from wave power and tidal power, although these have not yet been exploited on a commercial basis.

==Environment==

===Current issues===

England is one of the most densely populated countries/regions in the world, and the most densely populated major nation in Europe. The high population density (especially in the southeast of England) coupled with a changing climate, is likely to put extreme pressure on the United Kingdom&#x27;s water resources in the future.

The United Kingdom is reducing greenhouse gas emissions. It has met Kyoto Protocol target of a 12.5% reduction from 1999 levels and intends to meet the legally binding target of a 20% cut in emissions by 2010. By 2015, to recycle or compost at least 33% of household waste. Between 1998-99 and 1999–2000, household recycling increased from 8.8% to 10.3% respectively.

According to a 2018 survey for the World Wide Fund for Nature, the United Kingdom is one of the most nature-depleted countries in the world, coming in 189th place out of 218 countries.

===International agreements===
The United Kingdom is a party to many international agreements, including:
Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands and Whaling.

The UK has signed, but not ratified, the international agreement on Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants.

==Geography of dependent territories==
===Crown dependencies===
*Geography of the Isle of Man
*Geography of the Channel Islands
**Geography of Jersey
**Geography of Guernsey
**Geography of Alderney
** Geography of Sark
**Geography of Herm

===Overseas territories===
*Geography of Anguilla
*Geography of Bermuda
*Geography of the British Antarctic Territory
*Geography of the British Indian Ocean Territory
*Geography of the British Virgin Islands
*Geography of the Cayman Islands
*Geography of the Falkland Islands
*Geography of Gibraltar
*Geography of Montserrat
*Geography of the Pitcairn Islands
*Geography of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
*Geography of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
*Geography of Akrotiri and Dhekelia
*Geography of the Turks and Caicos Islands

==See also==

*British Overseas Territories
*Crown Dependencies
*City status in the United Kingdom
*Conservation in the United Kingdom
*Demographics of the United Kingdom
*Extreme points of the United Kingdom
*Centre points of the United Kingdom
*Geography of England
*Geography of Europe
*Geography of Ireland
*Geography of Scotland
*Geography of Wales
*List of caves in the United Kingdom
*List of conurbations in the United Kingdom
*List of places in the United Kingdom
*North-South divide in the United Kingdom
*Towns of the United Kingdom
*Transport in the United Kingdom
** Rail transport in the United Kingdom
==Notes==
==References==
*CIA Factbook
*UK Government Statistics

==External links==

*UK climate averages provided by the Meteorological Office
*Ordnance Survey geofacts page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4" end="18" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="24" end="39" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="79" end="97" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="137" end="146" title="Countries of the United Kingdom" label="countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="149" end="156" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="158" end="166" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="168" end="173" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="178" end="194" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="271" end="284" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="285" end="296" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="324" end="337" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="384" end="391" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859151" start="465" end="479" title="List of island countries" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="541" end="557" title="Shetland Islands" label="Shetland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="612" end="640" title="Royal Observatory, Greenwich" label="Royal Observatory, Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="693" end="707" title="Prime Meridian" label="Prime Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="734" end="748" title="North Atlantic" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="757" end="766" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="812" end="818" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="854" end="869" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="920" end="939" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="945" end="959" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="1029" end="1057" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="1062" end="1080" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1127" end="1136" title="#Geography of dependent territories" label="see below"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="1204" end="1234" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="1265" end="1278" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859151" start="1407" end="1421" title="List of island countries" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365965" start="1436" end="1443" title="Geography of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="1459" end="1488" title="Countries of the United Kingdom" label="country of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118306" start="1549" end="1557" title="Geography of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670632" start="1634" end="1639" title="Geography of Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q822900" start="1644" end="1660" title="Geography of Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1812" end="1819" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="1833" end="1840" title="country" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q48091" start="1865" end="1871" title="Regions of England" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q165783" start="1878" end="1905" title="British Antarctic Territory" label="British Antarctic Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="2013" end="2029" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="2190" end="2196" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="2216" end="2222" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="2224" end="2229" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="2234" end="2241" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q52107" start="2420" end="2438" title="physical geography" label="physical geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365965" start="2465" end="2472" title="Geography of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694523" start="2573" end="2586" title="Tees–Exe line" label="Tees–Exe line"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="2617" end="2630" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="2636" end="2644" title="Pennines" label="Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544595" start="2646" end="2662" title="North York Moors" label="North York Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q593627" start="2664" end="2670" title="Exmoor" label="Exmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="2675" end="2683" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="2774" end="2779" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118306" start="2798" end="2806" title="Geography of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173082" start="2900" end="2923" title="Highland Boundary Fault" label="Highland Boundary Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007088" start="2967" end="2978" title="Helensburgh" label="Helensburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002177" start="2982" end="2992" title="Stonehaven" label="Stonehaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="3065" end="3074" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="3106" end="3114" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327668" start="3312" end="3328" title="Central Lowlands" label="Central Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549065" start="3381" end="3397" title="Southern Uplands" label="Southern Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670632" start="3399" end="3404" title="Geography of Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="3435" end="3446" title="south Wales" label="south Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="3472" end="3477" title="North Wales" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094811" start="3482" end="3491" title="mid Wales" label="mid Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q822900" start="3493" end="3509" title="Geography of Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478931" start="3576" end="3592" title="Mourne Mountains" label="Mourne Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q206942" start="3604" end="3615" title="Lough Neagh" label="Lough Neagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="3672" end="3685" title="geomorphology" label="geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="3744" end="3753" title="tectonics" label="tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="3758" end="3772" title="Climate variability and change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="3788" end="3798" title="glaciation" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="3885" end="3894" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124736" start="3903" end="3921" title="Grampian Mountains" label="Grampian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="3958" end="3970" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="3988" end="3993" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q206942" start="4044" end="4055" title="Lough Neagh" label="Lough Neagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q49650" start="4100" end="4109" title="Loch Ness" label="Loch Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="4242" end="4256" title="plate tectonic" label="plate tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535325" start="4464" end="4484" title="Geological structure of Great Britain" label="geological structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="4540" end="4547" title="orogeny" label="orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="4598" end="4606" title="volcanism" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107425" start="4745" end="4754" title="landscape" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537363" start="4824" end="4839" title="Lewisian gneiss" label="Lewisian gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="4912" end="4920" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="5105" end="5114" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542364" start="5119" end="5127" title="Grampian" label="Grampian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="5195" end="5211" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q581244" start="5311" end="5324" title="Iapetus Ocean" label="Iapetus Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="5405" end="5414" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q858071" start="5471" end="5480" title="Laurentia" label="Laurentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="5507" end="5514" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="5570" end="5578" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q182657" start="5588" end="5604" title="Antarctic Circle" label="Antarctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="5631" end="5636" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="5693" end="5701" title="volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="5867" end="5880" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="5896" end="5908" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q510087" start="5959" end="5967" title="Avalonia" label="Avalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="6063" end="6071" title="volcanism" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320822" start="6156" end="6168" title="Rhobell Fawr" label="Rhobell Fawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="6218" end="6222" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946620" start="6244" end="6264" title="Borrowdale Volcanics" label="Borrowdale Volcanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="6277" end="6290" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q427283" start="6351" end="6360" title="Helvellyn" label="Helvellyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146222" start="6365" end="6377" title="Scafell Pike" label="Scafell Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q510087" start="6403" end="6411" title="Avalonia" label="Avalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q805735" start="6445" end="6452" title="Baltica" label="Baltica"/>
<link wikidata="Q858071" start="6494" end="6503" title="Laurentia" label="Laurentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="6568" end="6581" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q846077" start="6606" end="6624" title="Caledonian Orogeny" label="Caledonian Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="6637" end="6643" title="Alps" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="6755" end="6770" title="Devonian period" label="Devonian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517523" start="6903" end="6920" title="Old Red Sandstone" label="Old Red Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="6982" end="6987" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891116" start="7118" end="7129" title="Rheic Ocean" label="Rheic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920360" start="7208" end="7220" title="Mendip Hills" label="Mendip Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330811" start="7229" end="7242" title="Peak District" label="Peak District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="7246" end="7256" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="7265" end="7276" title="river delta" label="river delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="7331" end="7336" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="7342" end="7353" title="rain forest" label="rain forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137826" start="7391" end="7404" title="Coal Measures" label="Coal Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="7473" end="7477" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q840828" start="7507" end="7523" title="Variscan orogeny" label="Variscan orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q213361" start="7743" end="7756" title="Pembrokeshire" label="Pembrokeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="7760" end="7764" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="7797" end="7804" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="7847" end="7852" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="7857" end="7865" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="7882" end="7890" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q889885" start="7895" end="7906" title="Bodmin Moor" label="Bodmin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="8025" end="8032" title="Pangaea" label="Pangaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="8034" end="8041" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="8198" end="8209" title="sedimentary" label="sedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="8264" end="8272" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="8396" end="8402" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="8520" end="8527" title="Pangaea" label="Pangaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="8566" end="8574" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="8626" end="8640" title="Eurasian Plate" label="Eurasian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="8714" end="8730" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132159" start="8804" end="8819" title="Cleveland Hills" label="Cleveland Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="8823" end="8832" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q575976" start="8840" end="8854" title="Jurassic Coast" label="Jurassic Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535351" start="8858" end="8864" title="Geology of Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="8880" end="8889" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604432" start="8892" end="8901" title="greensand (geology)" label="greensand"/>
<link wikidata="Q632078" start="8904" end="8911" title="oolite" label="oolitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="8912" end="8921" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="8929" end="8943" title="Cotswold Hills" label="Cotswold Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511163" start="8945" end="8964" title="corallian limestone" label="corallian limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540110" start="8972" end="8991" title="Vale of White Horse" label="Vale of White Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q82337" start="9000" end="9016" title="Portland Limestone" label="Isle of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="9032" end="9037" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="9042" end="9050" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="9127" end="9140" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="9145" end="9156" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="9199" end="9209" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="9235" end="9249" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="9295" end="9308" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="9530" end="9535" title="Chalk" label="Chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="9540" end="9545" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q754785" start="9617" end="9638" title="White Cliffs of Dover" label="White Cliffs of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754640" start="9647" end="9660" title="Seven Sisters, Sussex" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472049" start="9679" end="9694" title="Salisbury Plain" label="Salisbury Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="9836" end="9850" title="County Antrim" label="Antrim Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="9856" end="9862" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106187" start="9880" end="9901" title="Giant&amp;#x27;s Causeway" label="Giant&amp;#x27;s Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q324812" start="9906" end="9918" title="Lundy Island" label="Lundy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q188203" start="9926" end="9941" title="Bristol Channel" label="Bristol Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q661478" start="9948" end="9962" title="Alpine Orogeny" label="Alpine Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602736" start="10079" end="10091" title="London Basin" label="London Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319440" start="10092" end="10100" title="syncline" label="syncline"/>
<link wikidata="Q283623" start="10106" end="10128" title="Weald-Artois Anticline" label="Weald-Artois Anticline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="10147" end="10158" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q584108" start="10160" end="10171" title="South Downs" label="South Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849" start="10176" end="10190" title="Chiltern Hills" label="Chiltern Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="10215" end="10224" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="10245" end="10251" title="Tectonic uplift" label="uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733342" start="10440" end="10451" title="London Clay" label="London Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="10564" end="10587" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="several recent ice ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763420" start="10613" end="10631" title="Anglian Stage" label="Anglian Glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="10683" end="10689" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="10694" end="10701" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="10808" end="10820" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="10869" end="10889" title="Devensian glaciation" label="Devensian glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="10958" end="10971" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="10976" end="10983" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="11035" end="11040" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q649266" start="11077" end="11093" title="glaciated valley" label="U-shaped valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="11101" end="11114" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q372934" start="11119" end="11126" title="Glacial erratic" label="erratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="11181" end="11185" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="11196" end="11202" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="11233" end="11242" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="11348" end="11352" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414356" start="11701" end="11711" title="Compaction (geology)" label="compaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="11786" end="11794" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="11890" end="11899" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217142" start="11910" end="11917" title="Snowdon" label="Snowdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q867913" start="11932" end="11941" title="Snowdonia" label="Snowdonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146222" start="11955" end="11967" title="Scafell Pike" label="Scafell Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="11969" end="11987" title="Cumbrian Mountains" label="Cumbrian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q550163" start="12010" end="12023" title="Slieve Donard" label="Slieve Donard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478931" start="12025" end="12041" title="Mourne Mountains" label="Mourne Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q54050" start="12074" end="12078" title="hill" label="hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q747064" start="12110" end="12120" title="Cairngorms" label="Cairngorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="12122" end="12140" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549065" start="12142" end="12158" title="Southern Uplands" label="Southern Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124736" start="12160" end="12178" title="Grampian Mountains (Scotland)" label="Grampian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897866" start="12180" end="12201" title="Monadhliath Mountains" label="Monadhliath Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q45828" start="12203" end="12214" title="Ochil Hills" label="Ochil Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031632" start="12216" end="12229" title="Campsie Fells" label="Campsie Fells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143317" start="12231" end="12238" title="Cuillin" label="Cuillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q904522" start="12247" end="12261" title="Brecon Beacons" label="Brecon Beacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028218" start="12284" end="12302" title="Cambrian Mountains" label="Cambrian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397855" start="12325" end="12339" title="Clwydian Hills" label="Clwydian Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q867913" start="12357" end="12366" title="Snowdonia" label="Snowdonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q880441" start="12376" end="12391" title="Black Mountains, Wales" label="Black Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q638763" start="12413" end="12426" title="Preseli Hills" label="Preseli Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q383335" start="12449" end="12462" title="Cheviot Hills" label="Cheviot Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849" start="12464" end="12473" title="Chilterns" label="Chilterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="12475" end="12484" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="12486" end="12494" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474787" start="12496" end="12514" title="Lincolnshire Wolds" label="Lincolnshire Wolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q593627" start="12516" end="12522" title="Exmoor" label="Exmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="12524" end="12537" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577855" start="12539" end="12552" title="Malvern Hills AONB" label="Malvern Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920360" start="12554" end="12566" title="Mendip Hills" label="Mendip Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="12568" end="12579" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330811" start="12581" end="12594" title="Peak District" label="Peak District"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="12596" end="12604" title="Pennines" label="Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q584108" start="12606" end="12617" title="South Downs" label="South Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504254" start="12619" end="12635" title="Shropshire Hills AONB" label="Shropshire Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600864" start="12637" end="12652" title="Yorkshire Wolds" label="Yorkshire Wolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478931" start="12672" end="12688" title="Mourne Mountains" label="Mourne Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="12690" end="12704" title="Antrim Plateau" label="Antrim Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q600408" start="12706" end="12723" title="Sperrin Mountains" label="Sperrin Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="12758" end="12766" title="the Fens" label="the Fens"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="12770" end="12781" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="12826" end="12835" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752950" start="12878" end="12923" title="List of lakes and lochs in the United Kingdom" label="List of lakes and lochs in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573517" start="12926" end="12962" title="List of rivers of the United Kingdom" label="List of rivers of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006302" start="12965" end="13005" title="List of waterfalls of the United Kingdom" label="List of waterfalls of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="13043" end="13055" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="13203" end="13215" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q19719" start="13230" end="13239" title="River Tay" label="River Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19691" start="13262" end="13272" title="River Bann" label="River Bann"/>
<link wikidata="Q19699" start="13284" end="13293" title="River Usk" label="River Usk"/>
<link wikidata="Q206942" start="13379" end="13390" title="Lough Neagh" label="Lough Neagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q208926" start="13405" end="13416" title="Loch Lomond" label="Loch Lomond"/>
<link wikidata="Q390370" start="13430" end="13440" title="Windermere" label="Windermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335466" start="13452" end="13461" title="Bala Lake" label="Bala Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444264" start="13509" end="13519" title="Loch Morar" label="Loch Morar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49650" start="13546" end="13555" title="Loch Ness" label="Loch Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q514635" start="13606" end="13615" title="Wastwater" label="Wastwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q49650" start="13645" end="13654" title="Loch Ness" label="Loch Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974573" start="13760" end="13791" title="Waterways in the United Kingdom" label="Waterways in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031104" start="13793" end="13816" title="Canals of Great Britain" label="Canals of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973229" start="13818" end="13855" title="List of dams and reservoirs in United Kingdom" label="Dams and reservoirs in United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="13942" end="13947" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="13989" end="14010" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="14052" end="14059" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="14099" end="14102" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="14108" end="14118" title="reservoir (water)" label="reservoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="14179" end="14198" title="hydroelectric power" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="14331" end="14340" title="coastline" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="14505" end="14522" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q28808088" start="14680" end="14703" title="Exclusive economic zone of the United Kingdom" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="14710" end="14716" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q747189" start="14869" end="14881" title="Cardigan Bay" label="Cardigan Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879675" start="14883" end="14891" title="Lyme Bay" label="Lyme Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q188203" start="14893" end="14908" title="Bristol Channel" label="Bristol Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059075" start="14910" end="14924" title="Thames Estuary" label="Thames Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866414" start="14926" end="14939" title="Morecambe Bay" label="Morecambe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q195413" start="14941" end="14953" title="Solway Firth" label="Solway Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463998" start="14955" end="14963" title="The Wash" label="The Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="14965" end="14979" title="Humber Estuary" label="Humber Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="14981" end="14995" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765455" start="14997" end="15009" title="Firth of Tay" label="Firth of Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360927" start="15011" end="15022" title="Moray Firth" label="Moray Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35654" start="15024" end="15038" title="Firth of Clyde" label="Firth of Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444742" start="15040" end="15053" title="Firth of Lorn" label="Firth of Lorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622030" start="15164" end="15203" title="list of headlands of the United Kingdom" label="list of headlands of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="15691" end="15704" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q363778" start="15753" end="15769" title="Lewis and Harris" label="Lewis and Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="15799" end="15807" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="15817" end="15830" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136111" start="15851" end="15865" title="Rathlin Island" label="Rathlin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="15949" end="15958" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="16204" end="16215" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="16305" end="16317" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211798" start="16369" end="16391" title="North Atlantic Current" label="North Atlantic Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="16582" end="16600" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="16612" end="16621" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="16637" end="16642" title="Essex, England" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="16862" end="16871" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="16876" end="16882" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008682" start="16935" end="16944" title="Coningsby" label="Coningsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="16948" end="16960" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q897175" start="17006" end="17013" title="Braemar" label="Braemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124736" start="17021" end="17039" title="Grampian Mountains (Scotland)" label="Grampian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q443014" start="17095" end="17105" title="Altnaharra" label="Altnaharra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="17285" end="17317" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="17370" end="17391" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="17423" end="17431" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="17433" end="17438" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="17443" end="17459" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17463" end="17479" title="Devolved, reserved and excepted matters#Reserved" label="reserved matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="17624" end="17643" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="17645" end="17670" title="Senedd (Welsh Parliament)" label="Senedd (Welsh Parliament)"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="17675" end="17700" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q744894" start="17719" end="17756" title="devolution in the United Kingdom" label="devolved governments and legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469078" start="18431" end="18443" title="Crown Estate" label="Crown Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315283" start="18782" end="18790" title="Devolved, reserved and excepted matters" label="reserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="18932" end="18945" title="London region" label="London region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309196" start="18996" end="19026" title="Regional Assemblies in England" label="Regional Assemblies in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="19074" end="19092" title="North East England" label="North East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588630" start="19105" end="19126" title="Government of England" label="Government of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="19220" end="19239" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561328" start="19457" end="19476" title="Unitary authorities of England" label="Unitary Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="19478" end="19492" title="county council" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q349084" start="19495" end="19512" title="Districts of England" label="district councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137435" start="19514" end="19529" title="Parish councils in England" label="parish councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q683738" start="19538" end="19553" title="Subdivisions of Wales" label="Principal areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403338" start="19555" end="19566" title="community council" label="communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="19578" end="19591" title="Subdivisions of Scotland" label="Council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403338" start="19593" end="19604" title="community council" label="communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049540" start="19624" end="19633" title="Districts of Northern Ireland" label="Districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="19684" end="19689" title="shire" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="19761" end="19771" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="19812" end="19823" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="19885" end="19891" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19918" end="19930" title="ecclesiastic" label="ecclesiastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="20202" end="20227" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="20465" end="20484" title="Unitary authority" label="Unitary authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="20554" end="20560" title="city" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="20994" end="21008" title="British Empire" label="imperial power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="21026" end="21047" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q548599" start="21232" end="21265" title="exploitation of natural resources" label="exploitation of natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="21278" end="21282" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="21287" end="21295" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="21380" end="21384" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="21434" end="21442" title="English Midlands" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="21447" end="21458" title="south Wales" label="south Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="21515" end="21528" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887933" start="21566" end="21586" title="UK Continental Shelf" label="UK Continental Shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="21608" end="21616" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="21805" end="21812" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="21814" end="21824" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="21826" end="21833" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="21835" end="21844" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="21846" end="21852" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="21854" end="21864" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="21866" end="21875" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="21880" end="21889" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="22075" end="22083" title="English Midlands" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="22137" end="22147" title="North West England" label="North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638174" start="22295" end="22306" title="M4 motorway" label="M4 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="22336" end="22352" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="22458" end="22472" title="stock exchange" label="stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="22543" end="22557" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q124377" start="22562" end="22574" title="Canary Wharf" label="Canary Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="22758" end="22768" title="world city" label="world city"/>
<link wikidata="Q734253" start="22808" end="22817" title="ebusiness" label="ebusiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="22830" end="22835" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060535" start="22954" end="22972" title="North-South divide in the United Kingdom" label="North-South divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118368" start="23186" end="23201" title="regional policy" label="regional policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="23360" end="23366" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="23384" end="23392" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="23397" end="23412" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060535" start="23442" end="23460" title="North-South divide in the United Kingdom" label="North-South divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="23614" end="23620" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="23630" end="23641" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="23657" end="23667" title="deforestation" label="deforested"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="23697" end="23708" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="23712" end="23721" title="intensive agriculture" label="intensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160362" start="23730" end="23740" title="mechanisation" label="mechanised"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="23759" end="23765" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="23875" end="23878" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="23926" end="23935" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q173113" start="23950" end="23956" title="agronomy" label="arable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="23996" end="24004" title="land use" label="land use"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="24011" end="24022" title="Arable land" label="Arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q362087" start="24029" end="24043" title="Permanent crop" label="Permanent crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="24050" end="24068" title="Pasture" label="Permanent pastures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="24075" end="24081" title="Forest" label="Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="24087" end="24095" title="Woodland" label="Woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="24114" end="24123" title="Irrigation" label="Irrigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="24202" end="24206" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="24208" end="24217" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="24219" end="24230" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="24232" end="24241" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="24243" end="24248" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="24250" end="24256" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="24258" end="24264" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="24266" end="24275" title="rock salt" label="rock salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="24277" end="24287" title="china clay" label="china clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="24289" end="24297" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="24299" end="24302" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="24304" end="24310" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="24312" end="24316" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="24318" end="24322" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="24339" end="24350" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="24352" end="24357" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="24359" end="24365" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="24367" end="24372" title="domestic sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="24391" end="24395" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="24397" end="24408" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="24414" end="24417" title="Petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="24474" end="24477" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="24512" end="24529" title="industrial nation" label="industrial nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208554" start="24633" end="24643" title="wave power" label="wave power"/>
<link wikidata="Q184037" start="24648" end="24659" title="tidal power" label="tidal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="25127" end="25137" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="25164" end="25178" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="25411" end="25420" title="recycling" label="recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="25500" end="25526" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="25786" end="25800" title="Nitrogen Oxide" label="Nitrogen Oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="25817" end="25824" title="Sulfur" label="Sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991463" start="25871" end="25903" title="Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty" label="Antarctic-Environmental Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352119" start="25905" end="25938" title="Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources" label="Antarctic-Marine Living Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996339" start="25940" end="25955" title="Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals" label="Antarctic Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q182814" start="25957" end="25973" title="Antarctic Treaty" label="Antarctic Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="25975" end="25987" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="25989" end="26003" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="26036" end="26051" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="26275" end="26283" title="Wetlands" label="Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="26288" end="26295" title="Whaling" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719128" start="26477" end="26505" title="Geography of the Isle of Man" label="Geography of the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="26507" end="26539" title="Geography of the Channel Islands" label="Geography of the Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535163" start="26542" end="26561" title="Geography of Jersey" label="Geography of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="26564" end="26585" title="Geography of Guernsey" label="Geography of Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26588" end="26609" title="Alderney#Geography and natural history" label="Geography of Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26613" end="26630" title="Sark#Geography and geology" label="Geography of Sark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26633" end="26650" title="Herm#Geography and geology" label="Geography of Herm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123264" start="26680" end="26701" title="Geography of Anguilla" label="Geography of Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123411" start="26703" end="26723" title="Geography of Bermuda" label="Geography of Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26725" end="26769" title="British Antarctic Territory#Geography" label="Geography of the British Antarctic Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q654233" start="26771" end="26818" title="Geography of the British Indian Ocean Territory" label="Geography of the British Indian Ocean Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123427" start="26820" end="26859" title="Geography of the British Virgin Islands" label="Geography of the British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347374" start="26861" end="26892" title="Geography of the Cayman Islands" label="Geography of the Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535263" start="26894" end="26927" title="Geography of the Falkland Islands" label="Geography of the Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="26929" end="26951" title="Geography of Gibraltar" label="Geography of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535204" start="26953" end="26976" title="Geography of Montserrat" label="Geography of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107872" start="26978" end="27011" title="Geography of the Pitcairn Islands" label="Geography of the Pitcairn Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192184" start="27013" end="27070" title="Geography of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha" label="Geography of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27072" end="27129" title="Geography of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands#Geography" label="Geography of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27131" end="27165" title="Akrotiri and Dhekelia#Geography" label="Geography of Akrotiri and Dhekelia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27167" end="27208" title="Turks and Caicos Islands#Geography" label="Geography of the Turks and Caicos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="27225" end="27253" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="27255" end="27273" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="27275" end="27308" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="City status in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162977" start="27310" end="27344" title="Conservation in the United Kingdom" label="Conservation in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983621" start="27346" end="27380" title="Demographics of the United Kingdom" label="Demographics of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244628" start="27382" end="27418" title="Extreme points of the United Kingdom" label="Extreme points of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062673" start="27420" end="27455" title="Centre points of the United Kingdom" label="Centre points of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365965" start="27457" end="27477" title="Geography of England" label="Geography of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q119716" start="27479" end="27498" title="Geography of Europe" label="Geography of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q822900" start="27500" end="27520" title="Geography of Ireland" label="Geography of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118306" start="27522" end="27543" title="Geography of Scotland" label="Geography of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670632" start="27545" end="27563" title="Geography of Wales" label="Geography of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435839" start="27565" end="27600" title="List of caves in the United Kingdom" label="List of caves in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q516491" start="27602" end="27644" title="List of conurbations in the United Kingdom" label="List of conurbations in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273358" start="27646" end="27682" title="List of places in the United Kingdom" label="List of places in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060535" start="27684" end="27724" title="North-South divide in the United Kingdom" label="North-South divide in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15151170" start="27726" end="27753" title="Towns of the United Kingdom" label="Towns of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365401" start="27755" end="27786" title="Transport in the United Kingdom" label="Transport in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27790" end="27826" title="Transport in England#Rail" label="Rail transport in the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31725" wikidata="Q1983621" url="?curid=31725" title="Demographics of the United Kingdom">
<text>The population of the United Kingdom was estimated at in . It is the 21st most populated country in the world and has a population density of , with England having significantly greater density than Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. Almost a third of the population lives in south east England, which is predominantly urban and suburban, with people in the capital city, London, whose population density was in .

The population of the UK has undergone demographic transition—that is, the transition from a (typically) pre-industrial population, with high birth and mortality rates and slow population growth, through a stage of falling mortality and faster rates of population growth, to a stage of low birth and mortality rates with, again, lower rates of growth. This growth through &#x27;natural change&#x27; has been accompanied in the past two decades by growth through net immigration into the United Kingdom, which since 1999 has exceeded natural change.

The United Kingdom&#x27;s high literacy rate (99% at age 15 and above) is attributable to universal state education, introduced at the primary level in 1870 (Scotland 1872, free 1890) and at the secondary level in 1900. Parents are obliged to have their children educated from the ages of 5 to 16 years. In England, 16–17-year olds should remain in education, employment or training (for example, in the form of A-Levels, vocational training, and apprenticeships), until the age of 18.

The United Kingdom&#x27;s population is predominantly White British (75.98% at the 2021 Census), but due to migration from Commonwealth nations, Britain has become ethnically diverse. The second and third largest non-white racial groups are Asian British at 8.6% of the population, followed by Black British people at 3.71%.

The main language of the United Kingdom is British English. Scots, a Germanic sister language of English, is widely spoken in many parts of Scotland. Some Celtic languages, namely Scottish Gaelic and Irish, are still spoken by minorities in Scotland and Northern Ireland, respectively, and Cornish has been revived to a limited degree in Cornwall; but the predominant language in all these areas is English. Welsh is widely spoken as a first language in parts of North and West Wales, and to lesser extent in South East Wales, where English is the dominant first language.

==History==
=== Before the census, 200–1800 ===
Roman Britain had an estimated population between 2.8 million and 3 million at the end of the second century AD. At the end of the fourth century, it had an estimated population of 3.6 million, of whom 125,000 consisted of the Roman army and their families and dependents. The urban population of Roman Britain was about 240,000 people at the end of the fourth century. Roman Britain&#x27;s capital city, Londinium, is estimated to have had a population of about 60,000.

Following the Roman withdrawal from Britain, Germanic tribes from continental Europe such as the Angles, Saxons and Jutes began a period of significant migration to the southeastern part of the island, notably bringing their language, Old English. Nevertheless, the overall population is believed to have fallen precipitously due to political upheavals and plagues. By the time of the compilation of the Domesday Book in the eleventh century, there may have between 1.25 and 2 million people living in England. Though the Domesday Book did not count the English population, it has been regarded as one of the first attempts to produce a census of the country.

Between the years of 1086 and 1750, the English population fluctuated in size due to civil war, famines and plagues. By the end of the 13th century, the population was estimated to have reached between four and six million people, but a combination of factors such as widespread famine and disease in the following century collapsed the population dramatically. An agricultural crisis in 1315 to 1322 and the Black Death in 1348 to 1350 collapsed the population by over a third of its pre-existing number, and the growth rate. By 1377, the population was estimated on a poll-tax of all people aged 14 and over, depending on the population amount of those under 14, to be around 2.2 million to 3.1 million.

Periods of instability over the 15th century such as the War of the Roses caused the population to, while grow, increase at a slowed pace. The general factors behind the slow increase was a high mortality rate due to war, less marriages within the population and late marriages, keeping fertility levels lower than they should have been for the time and a net emigration of English people out of the country. However, in contrast to the preceding century, by the 16th century, this situation has elevated itself due to political stability under the Tudor monarchy and little civil unrest which would have resulted in a higher mortality rate. While this was overturned with the English Civil War in 17th century, it allowed the population to grow at a faster pace, causing the population of England to reach a pre-collapse total of 5.74 million by 1750. In Scotland, population growth was not to the same extent as it was in England, which resulted in being significantly lower in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, which is often ascribed to similar factors halting it such as a high mortality rate, especially for infants, and later marriage and childbearing patterns. Ireland on the other hand before the 19th century consistently had rapid population growth, which has been ascribed to higher fertility rates and earlier marriage than England. Furthermore, the Plantation of Ulster in the 17th century also affected the population total of Scotland with an estimated 100,000 Scots migrating to Ulster, additionally, the Jacobite rebellion in 1745 also caused significant emigration. The estimated population total of Scotland in 1691 was 1.23 million.

The impetus to collect population data was reinforced due to food supply concerns and war against France in the late 18th century and the beginning of the early 19th century. In 1800, the Census Act was passed, authorising the first modern census in British history to be conducted.

=== Census established and the demographic transition, 1800–2000 ===
The first Census in 1801 revealed that the population of Great Britain was 10.5 million. Of this, England&#x27;s population had grown to 8.3 million, Wales population rested at 0.6 million while Scotland had a population of 1.6 million. In Ireland, the population rested at an estimate of between 4.5 and 5.5 million inhabitants. Since 1801, a census has been conducted every decade, in Ireland this was conducted for the first time in 1821.

During the Industrial Revolution, the demographic transition started to occur within the United Kingdom, going from a pre-industrial society demographically to one of an industrialised society. By 1841 Census, the population of England and Wales rested at 15.9 million, doubling in the space of 40 years, for Ireland 8.2 million and for Scotland 2.6 million. This slowed rate of growth for Scotland may be attributed to higher net emigration of Scottish people out of the nation, and two typhus epidemics in 1837 and 1847.

Factors often associated with the beginning of the demographic transition began to change dramatically as well, which contributed to the rapid increase. For example, Child mortality decreased dramatically, the proportion of children born in London who died before the age of five decreased from 74.5% in 1730–1749 to 31.8% in 1810–1829. General mortality was thought to have declined as well, especially after 1850 as well as an increased birth rate caused the English population to sustain itself in the second phase of the transition from 1750 to 1870.

Due to this, in the second half of the 19th century the population of England continued to grow quickly from 16.8 million in 1851 to 30.5 million in 1901. This rapid growth was also seen in the other constituent nations. In Wales, the population increased from 0.6 million in 1801 to 2 million in 1901, in Scotland, the population increased from 1.6 million to 4.5 million in 1901. In contrast however and due to the Great Irish Famine, which began in the 1840s, caused the deaths of 1 million Irish people, and caused well over a million to emigrate. Mass emigration became entrenched as a result of the famine, and Ireland&#x27;s population decreased rapidly, from 8.2 million in 1841 to 3.2 million in 1901. However this massive population collapse did not effect Northern Ireland to the same extent, due to being more industrialised and urbanised and while the population did decline, it had recovered itself by the beginning of the 20th century. This prolonged period of emigration and net population decline in Irish history was only reversed by the middle of the 20th century.

By the 1870s, the total fertility rate of the UK population declined from 4.88 children per woman in 1871, to 2.4 by 1921, representing a transition to the third stage of the demographic transition. Traditional means of birth control were used such as abstinence and withdrawal facilitated the collapse of the birth rate, this was also hastened by the 1930s by more modern methods of contraception which were beginning to be used with increased acceptance. From 1840 to 1930 there was a net emigration of English people out of the country which resulted in the population being stunted in the capacity it could have grown to.

During the first half of the 20th century, the United Kingdom began to approach the 4th stage of the demographic transition. The end of the First World War and the loss of lives of troops, coupled with an influenza outbreak is estimated to have caused the death of upwards of 900,000 people in the United Kingdom. This as a consequence shrunk the male population of the Lost Generation and altered the sex ratio, which slowed the growth rate of the population down. By the end of the Second World War, this transition had been completed and the society had a low but fluctuating birth rate, a low death rate and a slowed growth rate of the population. In 1948, the British Nationality Act was signed which allowed the access of the peoples of the British Empire&#x27;s colonies to migrate to the country being classed in nationality as the same as a native of the United Kingdom. This law, while an unintentional side-effect, led to the start of modern immigration to the United Kingdom.

The move into the 4th stage also took place during major social change in the United Kingdom throughout the 1960s. Liberalisation of society during the decade led to the 1967 Abortion Act which legalised abortion in the United Kingdom for the first time, and the 1969 Divorce Reform Act, which liberalised the circumstances under which someone can get a divorce. Between these years, the population fluctuated; from the 1950s onwards the population increased through natural growth but by the time of the mid-1970s the population decreased due to emigration, which took net migration to a negative, and deaths exceeding births. For the first time in 1973, the birth rate of the country fell below replacement level, due to the previous liberalising acts. By the 1980s, the decline of population growth had recovered to an extent due to a reversal of net emigration.

In the 1990s, international migration began to contribute more proportionally to population growth, and by 1998 this had passed natural increase as the main provider of growth. Liberalisation of immigration rules under the new government allowed rapid increase of the number of migrants arriving, quadrupling the number from a net migration rate of 50,000 a year, to 200,000 a year.

=== Modern century, 2000–present ===
By the beginning of the 21st century, the population of the United Kingdom rested at a total of 59,113,000 people. In each constituent nation, the population of England was 49,449,700, Scotland had a population of 5,064,200, Wales had a population of 2,910,200 and Northern Ireland a population of 1,689,300. Increased international migration which began to rapidly increase at the end of the 20th century also has brought increased ethnic heterogenization to the British population, not only in ethnicity and race, but also in country of birth. In 2001, the White British population was registered to be 88.52% of the total population, but by 2011, this proportion of the population had dropped to 81.88%, with other ethnic groups either rising by 50% of their respective total population in 2001 or doubling entirely.

Such rapid immigration growth boosted population growth in the United Kingdom. In 2011, the population sat at around 63 million people.

== Population ==
The population of the UK in the last recorded census in 2011 was 63 million, of whom 31 million were male and 32 million female. The 2011 census recorded the population of England as 53.0 million, Scotland as 5.3 million, Wales as 3.1 million, and Northern Ireland as 1.8 million. At the last recorded population estimate, it was estimated that the UK population was at a total of 67,081,234 people.

There are 13 urban areas that exceed 500,000 inhabitants: they are centred on London, Birmingham, Glasgow, Leeds and Bradford, Southampton and Portsmouth, Sheffield, Liverpool, Leicester, Manchester, Belfast, Bristol, Newcastle-upon-Tyne and Nottingham.



=== Population by constituent country ===
=== Population change over time ===

The following table shows the total UK population estimated at census dates. Pre 1901 figures include the whole of Ireland, whereas from 1901 onwards only the population of Northern Ireland is included.

Population density calculated on:
* Pre–1901: 243,820 km2 total land area for the United Kingdom plus 70,273 km2 land area of the Republic of Ireland.
* Post–1901: its current boundaries.

==== Future projections ====

The UK government first began publishing population projections for the country in the 1920s under the Government Actuary&#x27;s Department (GAD) which were mainly produced to be used for long-term financial estimates for pensions and other schemes of social insurance. However, since the Second World War, population projections have taken an expanded role in all areas of influencing government policy. The GAD produced population projections every year from 1955 to 1979 and then switched it to every 2 years up to 1991. The Office for National Statistics took control of producing population projections for the country in 2006.

The British Office for National Statistics&#x27; 2016-based National Population Projections indicated that, if recent trends continue, the UK&#x27;s population would increase by 3.6 million between mid-2016 and mid-2026. This represents an average annual growth rate of 0.5%. Over the same period, the population of England is projected to grow by 5.9%; for Wales, this figure is 3.1%, while for Scotland and Northern Ireland the figures are 3.2% and 4.2% respectively. These projections did not allow for any possible effects of the UK leaving the European Union.

=== Fertility ===
Since 1838, it has been compulsory to register a birth or death in the United Kingdom.

First official data on the fertility rate of the country was first made available in 1938, However estimates of the total fertility rate (TFR) can be made back all the way till 1541.

The fertility rate of the country before the 19th century maintained itself at an average of around 5 children per woman. This fertility rate within the United Kingdom has been falling since 1870, when the country began into transition into the 3rd stage of the demographic transition. This transition represents the change in reproductive strategy from how many children a mother &#x27;needs&#x27; to more of how many she &#x27;wants&#x27; and a substitution of quality over quantity in the offspring produced. From the 1880s onwards, the birth rate began to decline rapidly from the levels it had previous sustained itself at. In England this crude birth rate decline represented a 44% decrease over a period from 1875 to 1920.

A number of factors have been argued to have contributed to this ranging from four broad spectrums of biological, technological changes and developments in the society, socio-economic reasons and cultural considerations. In the context of the Industrial Revolution, a large number of socio-economic developments occurred; large scale urbanisation of the population caused mass internal movements of people to high density population centres, income per capita of citizens rose significantly especially in the last half of the 19th century, coupled with large scale economic growth improved the livelihoods of the working and middle classes of the United Kingdom, this growth in the standard of living led also to the collapse of mortality rates, which had been in decline since the early 18th century and more especially the infant mortality. This development came about with the decline of child labour at the same time as well which meant there was less of a need for a quantity of children to uphold the household economically, educational quality of the country rose during the same time period which meant that children held more economical potential through educated labour means.

The decline and equalling out of the gender gap in terms of place in the workforce meant that women were beginning in the 19th century to become a larger part of the workforce which also contributed to the birth rate decline.

Improvements in public diets and nutritional quality increases, which are linked to biological factors such as a decline in lactation, have also been included as a potential factor in the decline of the fertility rate. Technological developments within the society also began to have an effect; contraceptive use become somewhat usable on a mass scale in the latter half of the 19th century due to technological developments in the production of rubber. Abortion, while illegal during the 19th century, was also used by women, however to what extent at the time is unknown.

Cultural considerations such as decline in religious adherence (albeit little data on this matter during the 19th century) have also been considered as reasons. While these factors altogether are debated by demographers as to which were more important than each other, it is generally accepted that due to these factors overall, mothers could begin to invest more time and nurture &#x27;quality&#x27; into their offspring rather than having an increased &#x27;quantity&#x27; of children that were needed in the past for various such reasons, and that this development led to the decrease of the total fertility rate.

By 1914, the birthrate sat at around 2.88 children per woman, however by 1918 had collapsed proportionally by almost 50% due to World War One and sank to 2.03 children. In the post-World War One period, while the birthrate of the country boomed at the very end of the war reaching a peak of 3.08 children in 1920, this began to endure a rapid decline and had slumped to historic lows by the 1930s, for the first time in the country&#x27;s history falling below a replacement level fertility rate. This did not recover in-till the end of the Second World War in 1945.

In the post-World War Two period, the fertility rate of the country boomed once again, bringing itself out of the below replacement level in the 1930s to levels not seen since the late 19th century. This peaked in 1964, with a TFR of 2.95. However, by 1973, the fertility rate of the country collapsed again below replacement, and has not since in the present day reached a replacement level again. However population issues such as the sub-replacement level fertility rate have often been categorised as something in which the government does not view as a major issue. Little incentives were made and have been made to increase the birth rate throughout the UK&#x27;s post war period. However compared to other countries in continental Western European standards, the United Kingdom managed to retain a seemingly &#x27;high&#x27; fertility rate.

Family planning policies were enacted during the 1970s due to concerns of rapid population growth during the 1960s. The 1973 NHS Reorganisation Act is an example of such policies, within this act family planning advice and supplies were first issued to the public. Over this time period, with previous liberalising acts such as the Abortion Act and the Divorce Reform Act, and scientific developments such as increased access to contraceptive methods to reduce pregnancies, such as the contraceptive pill, it is generally ascribed that these social changes were the major contributors to the decline of the fertility rate below replacement level in the latter half of the 20th century. With these changes also, pre-marital conceptions fell to 1950 levels by the late 1970s. This pattern of decline of the birth rate is similar to other European countries.

The government&#x27;s position was further presented and then re-iterated in 1984 at the UN Conference on Population in Mexico;The United Kingdom(&#x27;s) government does not pursue a population policy in the sense of actively trying to influence the overall size of the population, its age-structure, or the components of change except in the field of immigration. Nor has it expressed a view about the size of population, or the age-structure, that would be desirable. ...The current level of births has not been the cause of general anxiety. The prevailing view is that decisions about fertility and childbearing are for people themselves to make, but that it is proper for government to provide individuals with the information and the means necessary to make their decisions effective. To this end, the government provides assistance with family planning as part of the National Health Service. The ‘ageing’ of the population does raise social and economic issues. However, it is believed that these will prove manageable; and also, to a degree, that society will adapt...’ In 2003, Right to Request was setup which allowed the parents of small children to request flexible working times which included shorter working hours for parents to care for their children. However, although a majority of requests for Right to Request are accepted, a report in 2006 found that its impact was negligible as mothers tended to switch employers to get reduced hours regardless.

Due to migration beginning in the late 90s and especially during the 2000s lead to the overall total fertility rate of the country to rise by 0.1 in the period of 2004 to 2011.

In 2012, the UK&#x27;s total fertility rate (TFR) was 1.92 children per woman, below the replacement rate, which in the UK is 2.075. In 2001, the TFR was at a record low of 1.63, but it then increased every year until it reached a peak of 1.96 in 2008, before decreasing again. In 2012 and 2013, England and Wales&#x27;s TFR decreased to 1.85. In Scotland however TFR is lower: it decreased from 1.75 in 2010 to 1.67 in 2012. Northern Ireland has the highest TFR in the UK, standing at 2.02 in 2010 and 2.03 in 2012.



==== Mother&#x27;s mean age at first birth ====
The first available data on when a mother gives birth for the first time was in 1920.

The reduction of the total fertility rate of the United Kingdom has also had an effect on the mean age in which a mother gives birth to her first child.

The age in which a mother gives birth to her first child has changed depending on the time period, but since the 1970s the age in which someone gives birth has been trending upwards.
==== Family size ====
The reduction of the fertility rate has also had an effect on the general family size of mothers in the United Kingdom, with the two being interlinked with each other. The family size of the average UK family can be estimated for a &quot;completed family size&quot; (CFS), which is an estimate of the amount of children a woman has birthed by the end of her childbearing years.

Family size within the UK has shifted towards two or one children in recent decades, rather than in the past when larger family sizes were more prominent and sought after. This pattern is similar to other European countries, where couples are having fewer children. Increasingly, there are also more couples who are completely childless; this has been increasing since the 1950s.
=== Life expectancy ===


Life expectancy has increased in the United Kingdom since the 18th century due to precipitate declines in child mortality, see below, and from relatively minor improvements in healthcare. A life expectancy of 40, the historical norm, does not mean that person is likely to die at 40 years old but rather when he or she is very old or very young; much in line with a bathtub curve.

At the start of the 20th century, the life expectancy at birth was only 45.6 years.

By 1950, life expectancy at birth had risen to 68.6 years. During the latter half of the century, further factors influenced the increase of life expectancy: diseases and the improvement of healthcare in the 1950s, decline in smoking in the mid-1970s and improvements in treating heart disease in the 1990s contributed to its decline.

At the start of the 21st century, the life expectancy at birth was 77.8 years.

In 2011 the life expectancy at birth of the UK was around 80.4 years, but the rate of increase has been stalling. Potential factors behind this may be austerity measures imposed in the beginning of the 2010s, which coincidentally since then mortality rates have slowed down in decline or older people dying off at faster rates than expected. On the topic of austerity measures, Professor Richard Faragher has said that &quot;It is possible to have high or rising life expectancy during austerity, as is the case in Japan. Similarly, you can have rising life expectancy despite high levels of inequality – this was the case in Britain from 1900–1950.&quot; but noted that austerity measures to social services like the NHS, especially social care support for the elderly may be causing a stalling of life expectancy increase due to a decreased quality of life for older generations.
==== Infant mortality ====

Infant mortality has been on the decline since the Second Industrial Revolution, although the majority of the decline came around from the start to the end of the 20th century. In raw terms for example, infant mortality in England sat around 151 deaths to 1000 live births in 1901 but by the end of the century it had plummeted down to only 6 deaths per 1000 births.

There are two general lines of thought which are usually taken from into analysing the decline of infant mortality rates, the first line of thought comes from social historians, who ascribe the decline of infant mortality to social phenomenons of the time such as the need for a healthy population for the sake of the nation&#x27;s fighting capabilities and political issues surrounding women. The second line of thought comes from demographers themselves which more or less ascribe the decline of infant mortality itself more to the general decline of mortality altogether in the society than any particular reason why.

Physical unfitness during the Boer War came into national prominence as many recruits came back to be too medically unfit for service. With this, In 1904, the &quot;Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Physical Deterioration&quot; was published which listed large amounts of details of the failings of the British population, and for that matter government, in sustaining a healthy population.

The current rate of infant mortality in the United Kingdom is roughly around 3.82 deaths per 1,000 live births.

=== Age structure ===

Interlinked with fertility and mortality, The age structure of the United Kingdom has varied with how rates of fertility and mortality have changed throughout the country&#x27;s history. Due to the transition to an industrialised society, the United Kingdom has also undergone a &#x27;demographic transition&#x27;: that is to say, that it has gone from a high birth rate, high mortality rate society to a low birth rate, low mortality rate society over the space of two centuries.

Before the 18th century, the United Kingdom retained an age structure universal to societies in the first stage of the transition theory, with high fertility rates and high mortality rates, in the late 18th century, the Industrial Revolution began, kickstarting the country&#x27;s transition into the second phase: mortality rates declined but birth rates stayed at the same level; by 1870, the country had begun to transition into the third phase: the birth rate began to decline from around near 5 children per woman to below replacement level in the 1930s. The fourth phase of the transition began in the 1960s, when the fertility rate rose, and peaked during the middle of the decade, and then collapsed by 1973 to a below replacement level rate. Since then, the rate has not risen to an above replacement level fertility rate; this has resulted in a population which is currently ageing: in 2007, for the first time in the country&#x27;s history, there were more people over the age of 60 than there were under the age of 16.

Peaks and bands within the population represent different periods in which people were born, for example, a large peak of people in particularly for those aged 70–74 born following the Second World War and a wide band for those aged 50–59, born during the 1960s baby boom. Those aged 80 upwards would have been born in the 1930s baby dearth when the birth rate was below replacement level. On the younger band of the population there is a noticeable gap between the ages of 14 and 20, this due to at the beginning of the 21st century a lower number of children being born (and a subsequent lower TFR), however in the years following the birth rate rose during the 2010s and a &#x27;broadening&#x27; of the pyramid began for those in the younger years leading to more children in those age cohorts. In relation to the sex ratio of the country, in the higher ages of the population, there are more women than men reflecting the higher life expectancies of women in the population, in the lower ages there are more men than women because there are slightly more boys than girls born each year. In relation to the older age brackets, In 2015, there were estimated to be over half a million people (556,270) aged 90 and over living in the UK, up from 194,670 people in 1985, and there were estimated to be 14,570 centenarians (people aged 100 or over) and 850 people aged 105 or over. The Office of National Statistics has also wrote in their mid-2016 report on population projections that the median age of the British population was 40 years of age, and this will continue to rise as more people in the population age and a below-replacement level fertility level not refilling the population. This will make the number of people aged 85 and over double from 1.6 million in mid-2016 to 3.2 million in mid-2041.

The demographic ageing of the population is not evenly spread geographically, as people in rural areas are typically of a higher age than those living in metropolitan areas such as Greater London for example.



=== Urbanisation and population density ===

==== Population density ====
The United Kingdom is one of the most densely populated countries in Europe; in 2020 it was the 8th most densely populated country.

The current largest metropolitan areas are listed below:

==== Urbanisation ====

Rapid urbanisation began with the onset of the Industrial Revolution in the mid to late 18th century, shifting jobs and more importantly people away from rural Britain&#x27;s dominance at the time which was primarily agricultural, to manufacturing jobs within urban areas which started to spring up. In 1750, an estimated total of around only 1 million people lived in some sort of urban area such as a town or city, which was around 1/6th of the estimated total population but a century later this had risen to 8 million people in 1850, equating to just over half of the nation.

While this mass urbanisation affected pre-existing cities to a large degree such as London, smaller and &#x27;newer&#x27; towns were in particular effected by the re-distribution of the population and exploded in raw population growth. Cities such as Birmingham, Bristol, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield and Newcastle for example had an explosive expansion in population numbers around the middle of the 19th century due to the industrial expansion of said cities bringing jobs and again people in for work. London during the 19th century become noted as the &#x27;premier city&#x27; of the world, being the most populated city from 1825 to 1900 and being the first city in Europe and one of the first in the world to reach the figure of one million inhabitants, and then 5 million inhabitants. This urbanisation in the 19th century has had two phases. This mass influx of the population into the cities resulted in a centralisation of the population into the inner city areas however by the time of the late 19th century and early 20th century when technological advancements in transport kicked off allowing cities to expand their &#x27;peripherals&#x27; from the inner areas to create large scale &#x27;city regions&#x27; of their own. London in particular during the 19th century had the majority of its population within the city living in the inner centre, however by the 20th century a massive expansion of &#x27;Outer London&#x27; began which slowly became larger in population size by the middle of the century than Inner London.

By the end of the 20th century the figure of urbanisation was 80% of the country. Importance in population size however of the capital declined during the latter half of the 20th century. By the end of the 20th century, London&#x27;s ranking on the most populated cities of the world had fallen down to not even being in the top 20.

The current classification of an &#x27;urban&#x27; area, also termed as a &#x27;built-up area&#x27; (BUA) in the 2011 census, is a settlement which takes variables from both numerical population numbers and population density; in population numbers this is roughly more than or 10,000 people living in an area. Anything below that is classified as &#x27;rural&#x27;, having several levels of distinction to define a rural town and fringe, village or hamlet which is usually taken from population density figures. These areas are then defined within &#x27;output areas&#x27; (OA&#x27;s) themselves, which are geographic areas of the United Kingdom. The population which resides within classified &#x27;urban&#x27; areas was 84.4% of total population in 2022 and the annual rate of urbanisation change is estimated to be around 0.8% between 2020 and 2025.

== Vital statistics==
===Statistics from 1900===

=== Current vital statistics ===
===Total fertility rates by region===
===Structure of the population===



=== Births in England and Wales by place of birth of parents ===
Parents’ country of birth:

==Social issues==

=== Marriage, divorce, families and household types ===

==== Marriage and divorce ====

In 2004, 58% of births were conceived within a married couple, 35% by non-married couples registered by both parents and 7% by non-married mothers who registered the birth alone.

This varied from each constituent nation, Wales for example had the highest births outside of marriage at 51% in 2004, In England this percentage was 42% and in Scotland 47%. Northern Ireland had the lowest of 35% in 2004.

==== Household and family type ====
=== Sexual orientation ===

Out of the 600,000 people in the UK that applied to go to university through UCAS in 2020, 7.2%, or 40,000, described themselves as LGBT on their application form. UCAS estimates this to be a rate 2.5 times higher than the overall UK population. The UCAS report in collaboration with Stonewall also found LGBT students were more likely to come from disadvantaged backgrounds (compared to those who identified as heterosexual or didn&#x27;t specify), have a disability (compared to non-LGBT students) and have a mental health condition (compared to non-LGBT students).

For the first time, the 2021 United Kingdom census included a question on sexual orientation. Results for Scotland are expected to be published from spring 2024 onwards.
=== Gender identity ===
In the 2021 United Kingdom census, in England and Wales, 262,000 people (0.5%) answered that their gender identity was different from their sex assigned at birth, including 0.10% who identified as a trans man, 0.10% as a trans woman, and 0.06% as non-binary. 1% of people aged 16 to 24 years said that their gender identity was different from their sex assigned at birth.

=== Abortion ===
Abortion in the United Kingdom (however not Northern Ireland) was officially decriminalised under the Abortion Act 1967, allowing women for the first time to get an abortion under numerous medical grounds outlined within the act. Previously, this was outlawed under the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 and then the updated Infant Life (Preservation) Act 1929 which only permitted an abortion if the death of a child was &quot;done in good faith for the purpose only of preserving the life of the mother&quot;.

In 2020, the number of conceptions which led to an abortion was around 25.3%

== Health ==
=== General health ===
; Death rate and cause
=== Health issues ===
==== Disability ====

== Employment and income ==
The unemployment rate for the youth age bracket of 15–24 was 11.2% in 2019 – 13% for males and 9.2% for females.

=== Method of transportation to work ===

==Migration ==

=== Historical and present net numbers ===

Migration to the UK has varied through its history. Irish migration from the Great Famine predominated during the 19th century. Additionally Jewish migration from Russia also arrived famously into Bethnal Green in London.

Starting from the 1950s onwards, following on from the British Nationality Act 1948 which de jure allowed the migration of upwards 800,000,000 British subjects who were now British citizens in law, modern mass migration to the United Kingdom began. During this decade West Indians from the Caribbean, those from Jamaica and so on began to arrive.

During the middle of the 1960s to the 70s, migration flipped in origin to the majority of those arriving being of South Asian origin from the Indian sub-continent. Immigration restrictions, in response to the ever increasing number arriving, were introduced, such as the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1962, Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968 and the Immigration Act 1971.

Through the 1970s, 80s and early 90s, net migration to the United Kingdom was often negative in terms of numbers, with more people leaving the country, than entering in total.

Since 1994, net migration in numbers has been in the positives, with more people entering the country, rather than leaving. Migration increased fourfold following the election of Tony Blair in 1997, immigration restrictions were undone such as the primary purpose rule.

In 2004, along with Ireland and Sweden, Britain was one of the only countries within the EU to not implement &#x27;transitional controls&#x27; on migration flows from the newly joined A8 countries from Eastern Europe. Around 453,000 immigrants, which has been revised upwards in recent years, from these new counties were estimated in 2015 to have migrated to the UK.

===United Kingdom migration data===



=== Country of birth ===
Country of birth was first asked as a census question in 1841.

In the 1980s to 1990s, around 12 to 13% of births were born to foreign born mothers. In 2004, this had risen to 20% of births being born to foreign born mothers. The fertility rate among non-UK born women was 1.98 and among UK born women 1.50 in 2020.


=== Internal ===
Population movements of the country have fluctuated over time, in the 19th century with the urbanisation of the country, large amounts of people moved to the capital and the nearby industrial cities, but in recent years there has been a general trend of &#x27;de-urbanisation&#x27; as parts of the population have moved back to the countryside. An example of recent large scale internal movement in the 21st century has been the departure of 220,000 White British Londoners to other areas of rural England and Wales over the 2000s and over the 2010s around a total of 550,000 people left the city. Demographically by age, the people leaving the city more than entering tend to be in their 30s and 40s while people entering in their 20s.

== Ethnicity ==

=== Ethnic demographic breakdown ===
Note:


Geographic distributionAge structure of ethnic groups


Ethnicity of school pupils
&lt;gallery mode=&quot;packed&quot; caption=&quot;Ethnicity of school pupils with England and its administrative districts in the school year of 2021/2022&quot;&gt;
File:White total school children within England.svg|White: 71.4%
File:White British school children within England.svg|White British: 63.9%
&lt;/gallery&gt;Ethnicity of live births and total fertility rate
=== Future projections ===

Numerous predictions and projections of the future ethnic demography of the United Kingdom have been made over the years.

In 2010, academic David Coleman produced research postulating a future demographic decline of the White British in Britain, indicating that they would become a minority in Birmingham and London during the 2020s. He also estimated that around 2056 to 2066, the trend of a declining share of the white populace will result in the United Kingdom having an overall white minority.

In Prospect, he outlined four projections for a majority-minority scenario within the United Kingdom;

* If net immigration trends (in 2010) continued its overall trend of 254,000 a year and net emigration of the White British was 74,000 a year (180,000 per year), the White British would decline to 59% of the total population by 2051, &#x27;Other Whites&#x27; projected to be at 10% and non-Whites projected to be 31% of the population. By 2066 this would inevitably lead to the White British being a minority of the population.
* If migration to the United Kingdom was to decline to a net inflow of 80,000 per year, the White British would be 63% of the population by 2051 and would fall below 50% in 2080.
* Using a cross-party group of MP&#x27;s recommendation of &#x27;balanced migration&#x27;, where there is neither a net inflow or outflow, where immigration only consists of 74,000 a year and emigration of the White British the same, the White British would be 67% of the population by 2051 and then fall below 50% by the end of the century.
* If there is no emigration of citizens and no immigration to the United Kingdom (&#x27;natural change&#x27; scenario), then the White British would remain at around 80% of the population by 2051 and would still remain the majority by the end of the century, albeit a reduced percentage (roughly around 75 – 70%)
* A fifth estimate, made by the Philip Rees and the University of Leeds, estimate that if assumptions about ethnic self-identification are taken into account, and that there is a net outflow of citizens at 38,000 a year, most of which are non-white and long term net migration like mentioned turns negative, this would result in the White British remaining at around 80% of the population by 2051, 20% of which would be ethnic minorities and 15% of that 20% would be non-white.
==Religion==


In 2001, the question of religious adherence was asked for the first time since 1851 in the United Kingdom Census.

The traditional religion in the United Kingdom is Christianity. In England the established church is the Church of England (Anglican). In Scotland, the Church of Scotland (a Presbyterian Church) is regarded as the &#x27;national church&#x27; but there is not an established church.

In Wales there is no established church, with the Church in Wales having been disestablished in 1920. Likewise, in Ireland, the Church of Ireland was disestablished in 1871. In Northern Ireland and parts of Western Scotland there are lingering sectarian divides between Roman Catholic and Protestant communities.

The table below shows data regarding religion for the 2001, 2011 and 2021/22 censuses:

In the 2011 Census, rather than select one of the specified religions offered on the Census form, many people chose to write in their own religion. Some of these religions were reassigned to one of the main religions offered. In England and Wales, 241,000 people belonged to religious groups which did not fall into any of the main religions. The largest of these were Pagans (56,620), Spiritualists (39,061) and Jains (20,288). Despite its high-profile nature there were only 2,418 Scientologists. The census also recorded 176,632 people stating their religion as Jedi Knight and 6,242 people as Heavy Metal after a campaign by &quot;Metal Hammer&quot;. These returns were classified as &quot;No religion&quot;, along with Atheist, Agnostic, Humanist, and Free Thinker. Those who ticked Heathen who had been categorised as no religion in 2001 were categorised as other. It is unclear how the ONS treated people who ticked &quot;Other&quot; but did not write in any religion.

In 2012 the British Social Attitudes Survey found the highest number to be non-religious (48%) followed by Christians (46%) with another six per cent identifying otherwise. Discrepancies found between surveys may be the result of differences in phrasing, question order, and data collection method.

=== Future projections ===
In 2017, Pew Research Center has found that by 2050 on all scenarios, the Muslim population of the United Kingdom will rise, depending on the scenario the percentage of the population which will be Muslim will either be 9.7% in a zero migration scenario, 16.7% in a medium migration scenario or 17.2% in a high migration scenario.

==Languages==
The United Kingdom&#x27;s de facto official language is English which is spoken as a first language by 95% of the population. Six regional languages—Scots, Ulster-Scots, Welsh, Cornish, Irish and Scottish Gaelic—are protected under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Abilities in these languages (other than Cornish) for those aged three and above were recorded in the census of 2011 as follows.

=== Regional languages ===
Cornish is spoken by around 2,500 people. In the 2011 census, 464 respondents aged three and over in Cornwall said that Cornish was their main language, amounting to 0.09% of the total population of Cornwall aged three and over.

After English, Polish was the second most common language given in the United Kingdom census 2011. 618,091 respondents aged three and over said that Polish was their main language, amounting to 1.01% of the total population of the United Kingdom aged three and over.

The French language is spoken in some parts of the Channel Islands although the islands, like the Isle of Man, are not part of the United Kingdom.
British Sign Language is also common.

=== Proficiency in English ===
==National identity==
Respondents to the 2011 UK census gave their national identities as follows.

==Education==

In the present day each country of the United Kingdom has a separate education system, with power over education matters in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland being devolved.

Universal state education in England and Wales was introduced for primary level in 1870 and secondary level in 1900. Education is mandatory from the ages of 5 to 18, The majority of children are educated in state-sector schools, only a small proportion of which select on the grounds of academic ability. Despite a fall in actual numbers, the proportion of children in England attending private schools rose slightly from 7.1% to 7.3% between 2004 and 2007.

Scotland first legislated for universal provision of education in 1696. Four per cent of children in Scotland attend private schools, a rate which has remained relatively stable since 2015.

In Wales, one of the most notable distinctive features of education in Wales is the emphasis on the Welsh language – lessons in which are compulsory for all until the age of 16. While a significant minority of students (15.7% in the 2014\15 academic year) are taught primarily through the medium of Welsh.
==See also==
*Demographics of England
*Demographics of Scotland
*Demographics of Wales
*Demographics of Northern Ireland
*Demographics of London
*Demographics of Birmingham
*Demographics of Liverpool
*Demographics of Greater Manchester
*Demographics of Tees Valley
*City status in the United Kingdom
*List of cities in the United Kingdom
*List of UK city regions by population
*List of urban areas in the United Kingdom
*Genetic history of the British Isles

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* Census 2001 website
*Abstract (1833). &quot;Abstract of the Answers and Returns made pursuant to an act passed in the eleventh year of the reign of His Majesty King George IV intituled an act for taking an account of the population of Great Britain, and the increase and diminution thereof&quot;. Population Register Abstract 1831. British Parliamentary Papers, 38.
*Arkell, T. (1992). &quot;An Examination of the Poll Taxes of the late Seventeenth Century, the Marriage Duty Act and Gregory King.&quot;
*K. Schürer, &amp; T. Arkell (eds.), &quot;Surveying the People: the interpretation and use of document sources for the study of population in the late seventeenth century&quot; (pp. 142–177). Oxford: Leopard&#x27;s Hill Press.
*Boulton, J. (1992). &quot;The Marriage Duty Act and parochial registration in London, 1695–1706&quot;. In: K. Schürer, &amp; T. Arkell (eds.), &quot;Surveying the People: the interpretation and use of document sources for the study of population in the late seventeenth century&quot;; pp. 222–252. Oxford: Leopard&#x27;s Hill Press.
*Boulton, J. (1993). &quot;Clandestine marriage in London: an examination of the neglected urban variable&quot;, in: &quot;Urban History&quot;; 20, pp. 191–210.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="69" end="109" title="List of countries and dependencies by population" label="21st most populated country in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="149" end="156" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="199" end="204" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="206" end="214" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="220" end="236" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="376" end="382" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="458" end="480" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="561" end="566" title="Birth rate" label="birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="571" end="580" title="Mortality rate" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005196" start="885" end="920" title="Modern immigration to the United Kingdom" label="immigration into the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="1000" end="1008" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154307" start="1059" end="1084" title="Education in the United Kingdom" label="universal state education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358882" start="1121" end="1125" title="Elementary Education Act 1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933621" start="1127" end="1151" title="Scottish education in the nineteenth century" label="Scotland 1872, free 1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="1381" end="1389" title="A-Levels" label="A-Levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="1391" end="1410" title="vocational training" label="vocational training"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994501" start="1510" end="1523" title="White British" label="White British"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="1539" end="1550" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1579" end="1591" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="1620" end="1638" title="ethnically diverse" label="ethnically diverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722871" start="1697" end="1710" title="Asian British" label="Asian British"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244280" start="1750" end="1770" title="Black British people" label="Black British people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="1825" end="1840" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="1842" end="1847" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="1937" end="1953" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1962" end="1977" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="1982" end="1987" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2023" end="2031" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2036" end="2052" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="2072" end="2079" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="2120" end="2128" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="2190" end="2195" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="2245" end="2250" title="North Wales" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094812" start="2255" end="2265" title="West Wales" label="West Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567141" start="2291" end="2307" title="South East Wales" label="South East Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="2404" end="2417" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="2631" end="2641" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q927198" start="2809" end="2818" title="Londinium" label="Londinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="2973" end="2979" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="2981" end="2987" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q154845" start="2992" end="2997" title="Jutes" label="Jutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3111" end="3122" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="3280" end="3293" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="3946" end="3957" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="4301" end="4317" title="Wars of the Roses" label="War of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="4793" end="4807" title="Tudor period" label="Tudor monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="5100" end="5108" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q393046" start="5613" end="5633" title="Plantation of Ulster" label="Plantation of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="5746" end="5752" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="5772" end="5798" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="Jacobite rebellion in 1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="6003" end="6009" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058956" start="6093" end="6103" title="Census Act 1800" label="Census Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058956" start="6268" end="6282" title="Census Act 1800" label="Census in 1801"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="6712" end="6733" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="6739" end="6761" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887918" start="6898" end="6909" title="1841 United Kingdom census" label="1841 Census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7185" end="7222" title="Typhus#19th century" label="two typhus epidemics in 1837 and 1847"/>
<link wikidata="Q61559" start="7391" end="7406" title="Child mortality" label="Child mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400412" start="7837" end="7858" title="demographics of England" label="population of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="8198" end="8216" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="8275" end="8287" title="Irish people" label="Irish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="8548" end="8564" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9633" end="9648" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="9698" end="9716" title="Spanish flu" label="influenza outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q234105" start="9863" end="9878" title="Lost Generation" label="Lost Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9977" end="9993" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970544" start="10158" end="10181" title="British Nationality Act 1948" label="British Nationality Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="10240" end="10254" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005196" start="10439" end="10479" title="modern immigration to the United Kingdom" label="modern immigration to the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668431" start="10652" end="10669" title="Abortion Act 1967" label="1967 Abortion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757197" start="10745" end="10768" title="Divorce Reform Act 1969" label="1969 Divorce Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q598949" start="11179" end="11196" title="Sub-replacement fertility" label="replacement level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994501" start="12329" end="12342" title="White British" label="White British"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="12801" end="12805" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="13232" end="13242" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="13244" end="13251" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670140" start="13253" end="13271" title="West Yorkshire Urban Area" label="Leeds and Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567412" start="13273" end="13299" title="South Hampshire" label="Southampton and Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="13301" end="13310" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="13312" end="13321" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="13323" end="13332" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="13334" end="13344" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="13346" end="13353" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="13355" end="13362" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="13364" end="13383" title="Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="Newcastle-upon-Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="13388" end="13398" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058981" start="13545" end="13551" title="Census in the United Kingdom" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q129373" start="13732" end="13782" title="Area of countries and regions of the United Kingdom" label="243,820 km2 total land area for the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="13816" end="13835" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588663" start="14008" end="14044" title="Government Actuary&amp;#x27;s Department" label="Government Actuary&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="14551" end="14581" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="15076" end="15083" title="Brexit" label="leaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="15238" end="15252" title="Total fertility rate" label="fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="15657" end="15679" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515895" start="16295" end="16317" title="Socioeconomic status" label="socio-economic reasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q217200" start="16369" end="16390" title="Second Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="16855" end="16869" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="16951" end="16967" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="17017" end="17029" title="child labour" label="child labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18862" end="18875" title="World War One" label="World War One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519948" start="18910" end="18928" title="Aftermath of World War I" label="post-World War One"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="19275" end="19291" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722724" start="19309" end="19327" title="Mid-20th century baby boom" label="post-World War Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973017" start="20271" end="20298" title="National Health Service Reorganisation Act 1973" label="1973 NHS Reorganisation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668431" start="20483" end="20495" title="Abortion Act 1967" label="Abortion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757197" start="20504" end="20522" title="Divorce Reform Act 1969" label="Divorce Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344800" start="20637" end="20655" title="Oral contraceptive pill" label="contraceptive pill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21097" end="21124" title="UN Conference on Population" label="UN Conference on Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="22681" end="22701" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="22747" end="22763" title="replacement rate" label="replacement rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="24457" end="24472" title="Life expectancy" label="Life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q432465" start="24823" end="24836" title="bathtub curve" label="bathtub curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="26058" end="26061" title="National Health Service" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="26250" end="26266" title="Infant mortality" label="Infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="27270" end="27278" title="Second Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27405" end="27473" title="Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Physical Deterioration" label="Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Physical Deterioration"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="27797" end="27806" title="Total fertility rate" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="27811" end="27820" title="Mortality rate" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="27995" end="28017" title="Industrialisation" label="industrialised society"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="28065" end="28087" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="28482" end="28503" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="29479" end="29495" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944360" start="30602" end="30613" title="centenarian" label="centenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="30678" end="30707" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office of National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="31284" end="31298" title="Greater London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="31651" end="31672" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="32436" end="32446" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="32457" end="32466" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="32477" end="32486" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="32500" end="32505" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="32507" end="32516" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="32521" end="32530" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595843" start="32739" end="32751" title="19th-century London" label="19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q144298" start="33633" end="33645" title="Outer London" label="Outer London"/>
<link wikidata="Q859427" start="33738" end="33750" title="Inner London" label="Inner London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473813" start="35846" end="35850" title="UCAS" label="UCAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q681943" start="36053" end="36062" title="Stonewall (charity)" label="Stonewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="36362" end="36388" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 United Kingdom census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="36539" end="36565" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 United Kingdom census"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="36631" end="36646" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458483" start="36672" end="36693" title="Sex assignment" label="sex assigned at birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449503" start="36731" end="36740" title="trans man" label="trans man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="36753" end="36764" title="trans woman" label="trans woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="36779" end="36789" title="Non-binary gender" label="non-binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="36966" end="36982" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668431" start="37024" end="37041" title="Abortion Act 1967" label="Abortion Act 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079046" start="37192" end="37228" title="Offences Against the Person Act 1861" label="Offences Against the Person Act 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028853" start="37250" end="37285" title="Infant Life (Preservation) Act 1929" label="Infant Life (Preservation) Act 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="37940" end="37952" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124204" start="38060" end="38073" title="Bethnal Green" label="Bethnal Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970544" start="38141" end="38169" title="British Nationality Act 1948" label="British Nationality Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="38576" end="38596" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian sub-continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153788" start="38705" end="38737" title="Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1962" label="Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153790" start="38739" end="38771" title="Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968" label="Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004994" start="38780" end="38800" title="Immigration Act 1971" label="Immigration Act 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="39435" end="39447" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="A8 countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994501" start="40469" end="40482" title="White British" label="White British"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="40529" end="40534" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232466" start="41442" end="41455" title="David Coleman (demographer)" label="David Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994501" start="41522" end="41535" title="White British" label="White British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570937" start="41805" end="41813" title="Prospect (magazine)" label="Prospect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994501" start="42015" end="42028" title="White British" label="White British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994501" start="42425" end="42438" title="White British" label="White British"/>
<link wikidata="Q503424" start="43219" end="43238" title="University of Leeds" label="University of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="43855" end="43873" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="43881" end="43898" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="43900" end="43908" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="43928" end="43946" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="43950" end="43969" title="Presbyterian Church" label="Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="44062" end="44067" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089788" start="44109" end="44124" title="Church in Wales" label="Church in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="44137" end="44151" title="Disestablishment" label="disestablished"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="44187" end="44204" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352121" start="44303" end="44320" title="Sectarianism" label="sectarian divides"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="44329" end="44343" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="44830" end="44836" title="Paganism" label="Pagans"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="44847" end="44860" title="Spiritualism (movement)" label="Spiritualists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="44874" end="44879" title="Jainism" label="Jains"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="44944" end="44957" title="Scientologist" label="Scientologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="45026" end="45037" title="Jedi" label="Jedi Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="45058" end="45069" title="Heavy metal music" label="Heavy Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="45096" end="45108" title="Metal Hammer" label="Metal Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="45185" end="45192" title="Atheist" label="Atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="45204" end="45212" title="Humanism" label="Humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q285441" start="45249" end="45256" title="Heathenry (new religious movement)" label="Heathen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971037" start="45450" end="45481" title="British Social Attitudes Survey" label="British Social Attitudes Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="45774" end="45793" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="46196" end="46210" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="46260" end="46265" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="46267" end="46279" title="Ulster Scots dialects" label="Ulster-Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="46281" end="46286" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="46288" end="46295" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="46307" end="46322" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="46347" end="46398" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="46557" end="46564" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="47202" end="47223" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400412" start="48535" end="48558" title="Demographics of England" label="Demographics of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044226" start="48560" end="48584" title="Demographics of Scotland" label="Demographics of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369783" start="48586" end="48607" title="Demographics of Wales" label="Demographics of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619323" start="48609" end="48641" title="Demographics of Northern Ireland" label="Demographics of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256030" start="48643" end="48665" title="Demographics of London" label="Demographics of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256125" start="48667" end="48693" title="Demographics of Birmingham" label="Demographics of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256131" start="48695" end="48720" title="Demographics of Liverpool" label="Demographics of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256130" start="48722" end="48756" title="Demographics of Greater Manchester" label="Demographics of Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q124119545" start="48758" end="48785" title="Demographics of Tees Valley" label="Demographics of Tees Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="48787" end="48820" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="City status in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q207474" start="48822" end="48858" title="List of cities in the United Kingdom" label="List of cities in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131314646" start="48860" end="48897" title="List of UK city regions by population" label="List of UK city regions by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q516491" start="48899" end="48940" title="List of urban areas in the United Kingdom" label="List of urban areas in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532903" start="48942" end="48978" title="Genetic history of the British Isles" label="Genetic history of the British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="49195" end="49209" title="King George IV" label="King George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="49367" end="49374" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="British"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31726" wikidata="Q678363" url="?curid=31726" title="Politics of the United Kingdom">
<text>The United Kingdom is a constitutional monarchy which, by legislation and convention, operates as a unitary parliamentary democracy. A hereditary monarch, currently King Charles III, serves as head of state while the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, currently Sir Keir Starmer since 2024, serves as the head of the elected government.

Under the United Kingdom&#x27;s parliamentary system, executive power is exercised by His Majesty&#x27;s Government, whose Prime Minister is formally appointed by the King to act in his name. The King must appoint a member of parliament that can command the confidence of the House of Commons, usually the leader of the majority party or apparent majority party, though the King may choose to appoint an alternative if they say that they cannot expect the confidence of the House. Having taken office, the Prime Minister can then appoint all other ministers from parliament. 
The Parliament has two houses: the House of Commons and the House of Lords. The Crown in Parliament is the UK&#x27;s supreme legislative body, with unlimited powers of legislation subject only to convention. Normally bills passed by both Houses become law when presented for Royal Assent. However, there is provision in the Parliament Acts by which the democratically elected House of Commons could exceptionally obtain Royal Assent to a bill which the House of Lords has repeatedly failed or refused to pass. However, any use of this Parliament Acts procedure could provoke a constitutional crisis. 

Parliament has devolved some legislative powers to the parliaments of Scotland and Wales and the assembly of Northern Ireland. Many other limited powers are granted by statute to the Privy Council, H.M.Ministers or other authorities, to make delegated legislation on particular subjects.

The British political system is a multiple-party system and was according to the V-Dem Democracy Indices 2023 the 22nd most electorally democratic in the world. From the 1920s to date, the two dominant parties have been the Conservative Party and the Labour Party. Before the Labour Party rose in British politics, the Liberal Party was the other major political party, along with the Conservatives. While coalition and minority governments have been an occasional feature of parliamentary politics, the first-past-the-post electoral system used for general elections tends to maintain the dominance of these two parties, though each has in the past century relied upon a third party, such as the Liberal Democrats, to deliver a working majority in Parliament. A Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition government held office from 2010 until 2015, the first coalition since 1945. The coalition ended following parliamentary elections on 7 May 2015, in which the Conservative Party won an outright majority of seats, 330 of the 650 seats in the House of Commons, while their coalition partners lost all but eight seats.

With the partition of Ireland, Northern Ireland received home rule in 1920, though civil unrest meant direct rule was restored in 1972. Support for nationalist parties in Scotland and Wales led to proposals for devolution in the 1970s, though only in the 1990s did devolution happen. Today, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland each possess a parliament and government, with devolution in Northern Ireland being conditional on participation in certain all-Ireland institutions. The British government remains responsible for non-devolved matters and, in the case of Northern Ireland, co-operates with the government of the Republic of Ireland. Devolution of executive and legislative powers may have contributed to increased support for independence in the constituent parts of the United Kingdom. The principal Scottish pro-independence party, the Scottish National Party, became a minority government in 2007 and then went on to win an overall majority of MSPs at the 2011 Scottish Parliament elections which formed the current Scottish Government administration. In a 2014 referendum on independence 44.7% of voters voted for independence versus 55.3% against. In Northern Ireland, Irish nationalist parties such as Sinn Féin advocate Irish reunification. In Wales, Welsh nationalist parties such as Plaid Cymru support Welsh independence.

The constitution of the United Kingdom is uncodified, being made up of constitutional conventions, statutes and other elements. This system of government, known as the Westminster system, has been adopted by other countries, especially those that were formerly parts of the British Empire. 
The United Kingdom is also responsible for several other territories, which fall into two categories: the Crown Dependencies, in the immediate vicinity of the UK, are strictly-speaking subject to the British Crown (i.e., the Monarch) but not part of the United Kingdom (though &quot;de facto&quot; British territory), and British Overseas Territories, as British colonies were re-designated in 1983, which are part of the sovereign territory of the United Kingdom, in which different aspects of internal governance have been delegated to local governments, with each territory having its own first minister, (though the titles differ, such as in the case of the Chief Minister of Gibraltar). They remain subject to the Parliament of the United Kingdom (which refers only to Great Britain and Northern Ireland, governed directly by the British Government, and not via local subsidiary governments or officers.

==History==
* Treaty of Union agreed by commissioners for each parliament on 22 July 1706.
* Acts of Union 1707, passed by both the Parliament of England and the Parliament of Scotland to form the Kingdom of Great Britain.
* Acts of Union 1800, passed by both the Parliament of Great Britain and the Parliament of Ireland to form the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
* Government of Ireland Act 1920, passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom and created the partition of Ireland. The republican southern part of Ireland became Republic of Ireland (also known as Éire), leaving Northern Ireland part of the union.
* The Accession of the United Kingdom to the European Communities (EC) took effect on 1 January 1973.
* The United Kingdom withdrew from the European Union (EU) on 31 January 2020.

==The Crown==
The British monarch, currently King Charles III, is the head of state of the United Kingdom. Though he takes little direct part in government, the Crown remains the fount in which ultimate power over the executive government, the judiciary, the legislature and the established Church of England formally lies. These powers are known as the royal prerogative and cover a vast amount of things, such as the issue or withdrawal of passports, the appointment or dismissal of the prime minister or even the declaration of war. The powers are delegated from the Crown primarily to the Prime Minister, who may freely appoint privy councillors, junior ministers and other officers and servants of the Crown, (civil, military, diplomatic, and others such as the secret services) to exercise them. All powers are subject to the Rule of Law, so that the legality of their exercise may always be judicially reviewed and quashed by the High Court, and their exercise is supervised by Parliament when it is sitting. 
The exercise of most powers by His Majesty&#x27;s Government generally does not require the consent of Parliament; but certain statutory powers are subject to positive or negative resolutions of Parliament, notably the powers to make delegated legislation by Statutory Instruments, and to make certain Rules and Orders.

The head of His Majesty&#x27;s Government, the prime minister, has weekly meetings to consult the sovereign, when they may express their feelings, warn, or advise the prime minister in the government&#x27;s work.

According to the uncodified constitution of the United Kingdom, the monarch has the following powers:

Domestic powers
* The power to appoint (and theoretically to dismiss) a prime minister
* The powers to appoint members to the Privy Council, to dismiss privy councillors, and to summon only selected privy councillors to meetings of the Cabinet
* The powers to summon, prorogue and dissolve Parliament
* The power to grant (or theoretically to refuse) Royal Assent to parliamentary bills, making them legal Acts of Parliament
* The power to create new peers, to be summoned to parliament as members of the House of Lords
* The powers to commission officers in the Armed Forces, and to command the Armed Forces of the United Kingdom
* The powers to create and grant offices and employments to exercise royal powers, including the senior judiciary, and to dismiss most other officers at the pleasure of the Crown.
* The power to issue and withdraw passports
* The power to exercise the prerogative of mercy to pardon criminal convictions or reduce sentences
* The powers to grant honours, ranks, titles, decorations, medals and patronage
* The power to create corporations by Royal charter
Foreign powers
* The power to make and ratify treaties
* The power to declare war and peace
* The power to deploy the Armed Forces overseas
* The power to recognise states
* The power to accredit and receive diplomats

==Executive==
Executive power in the United Kingdom is exercised by the Sovereign, King Charles III, via His Majesty&#x27;s Government and the devolved national authorities – the Scottish Government, the Welsh Government and the Northern Ireland Executive; and by up to three more layers of elected local authorities, often County Councils, District Councils, and Parish Councils. For example, the Corporation of The City of London, which administers only about one square mile of the capital historicalu enjoys some exceptional local powers, to the exclusion of all other local authorities below Parliament.
===His Majesty&#x27;s Government===
The monarch appoints a Prime Minister as the head of His Majesty&#x27;s Government in the United Kingdom, guided by the strict convention that the Prime Minister should be the member of the House of Commons most likely to be able to form a Government with the support of that House. In practice, this means that the leader of any political party with an majority of seats in the House of Commons is chosen to be the Prime Minister. If no party has an absolute majority, the leader of the largest party is given the first opportunity to form a coalition. The Prime Minister then selects other Ministers who make up the Government and act as political heads of various Government Departments. About twenty of the most senior government ministers make up the Cabinet and approximately 100 ministers in total comprise the government. In accordance with constitutional convention, all ministers within the government are either Members of Parliament or peers in the House of Lords. 

As in some other parliamentary systems of government (especially those based upon the Westminster system), the executive (called &quot;the government&quot;) is drawn from and is answerable to Parliament – a successful vote of no confidence will force the government either to resign or to seek a parliamentary dissolution and a general election. In practice, members of parliament of all major parties are strictly controlled by whips who try to ensure they vote according to party policy. If the government has a large majority, then they are very unlikely to lose enough votes to be unable to pass legislation.

====The Prime Minister and the Cabinet====
The Prime Minister, currently Sir Keir Starmer, is the most senior minister in the Cabinet. Their tenure begins when they are appointed by the monarch. The Prime Minister is responsible for chairing Cabinet meetings, selecting Cabinet ministers (and all other positions in His Majesty&#x27;s government), and formulating government policy. The Prime Minister being the &quot;de facto&quot; leader of the UK, exercises executive functions that are nominally vested in the sovereign (by way of the Royal Prerogatives). Historically, the British monarch was the sole source of executive powers in the government. However, following the lead of the Hanoverian monarchs, an arrangement of a &quot;Prime Minister&quot; chairing and leading the Cabinet began to emerge. Over time, this arrangement became the effective executive branch of government, as it assumed the day-to-day functioning of the British government away from the sovereign.

Theoretically, the Prime Minister is &quot;primus inter pares&quot; (i.e., Latin for &quot;first among equals&quot;) among their Cabinet colleagues. While the Prime Minister is the senior Cabinet Minister, they are theoretically bound to make executive decisions in a collective fashion with the other Cabinet ministers. The Cabinet, along with the PM, consists of Secretaries of State from the various government departments, the Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain, the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord President of the Council, the President of the Board of Trade, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and Ministers without portfolio. Cabinet meetings are typically held weekly, while Parliament is in session.

====Government departments and the Civil Service====

The Government of the United Kingdom contains a number of ministries known mainly, though not exclusively as departments, e.g., Department for Education. These are politically led by a Government Minister who is often a Secretary of State and member of the Cabinet. The minister may also be supported by a number of junior ministers. In practice, several government departments and ministers have responsibilities that cover England alone, with devolved bodies having responsibility for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, (for example – the Department of Health), or responsibilities that mainly focus on England (such as the Department for Education).

Implementation of the Minister&#x27;s decisions is carried out by a permanent politically neutral organisation known as the Civil Service. Its constitutional role is to support the Government of the day regardless of which political party is in power. Unlike some other democracies, senior civil servants remain in post upon a change of Government. Administrative management of the department is led by a head civil servant known in most Departments as a Permanent secretary. The majority of the civil service staff in fact work in executive agencies, which are separate operational organisations reporting to Departments of State.

&quot;Whitehall&quot; is often used as a metonym for the central core of the Civil Service. This is because most Government Departments have headquarters in and around the former Royal Palace Whitehall.

==Heads of governments==

HM Government of the United Kingdom is the central government of the United Kingdom. Based in London, it is headed by the prime minister. As England does not have its own separate government, it is governed directly by the prime minister and UK Government. The Scottish Government is the devolved government of Scotland and is based in the capital city of Scotland Edinburgh. The Scottish Government is headed by the first minister and is supported by their deputy first minister. The Northern Ireland Executive, based in Belfast, is headed by both the First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland under the terms of the Good Friday Agreement (1998), whilst the first minister of Wales serves as the leader of the Welsh Government, located in the Welsh capital, Cardiff. 

===Current heads of government===

===Timeline of leaders===

==Devolved national governments==
===Scottish Government===

The Scottish Government is responsible for all issues that are not explicitly reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament at Westminster, by the Scotland Act; including NHS Scotland, education, justice, rural affairs, agriculture, forestry and fisheries, some aspects of the benefits system, elections to the Scottish Parliament and local government, some aspects of the energy network, the environment, the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service, some aspects of equality legislation, housing, planning, sport, culture, tourism, the Crown Estate, onshore oil and gas licensing, some aspects of taxation including Scottish council tax and transport. 

In the 2024–25 financial year, its annual budget was almost £60 billion. The government is led by the first minister, assisted by the deputy first minister alongside various Ministers with individual portfolios and remits. The Scottish Parliament nominates a Member to be appointed as First Minister by the King. The first minister then appoints their Ministers (known as Cabinet Secretaries) and junior Ministers, subject to approval by the Parliament. The first minister, the Ministers (but not junior ministers), the Lord Advocate and Solicitor General are the Members of the Scottish Government and attend meetings of the Scottish cabinet, as set out in the Scotland Act 1998. They are collectively known as &quot;the Scottish Ministers&quot;.

The Scottish Government has been described as &quot;one of the world&#x27;s most powerful devolved administrations&quot;.

===Welsh Government===

The Welsh Government and Senedd have more limited powers than those devolved to Scotland, although following the passing of the Government of Wales Act 2006 and the 2011 Welsh devolution referendum, the Senedd can now legislate in some areas through an Act of Senedd Cymru. The current First Minister of Wales, or &quot;Prif Weinidog Cymru&quot; in Welsh, is Eluned Morgan of Welsh Labour.

===Northern Ireland Executive===
Assembly have powers closer to those already devolved to Scotland. The Northern Ireland Executive is led by a diarchy, most recently First Minister Michelle O&#x27;Neill (Sinn Féin) and deputy First Minister Emma-Little Pengelly (DUP)

==Legislatures==

The British Parliament is the supreme legislative body in the United Kingdom (i.e., there is parliamentary sovereignty), and government is drawn from and answerable to it. Parliament is bicameral, consisting of the House of Commons and the House of Lords. There are also devolved Scottish and Welsh parliaments and a devolved assembly in Northern Ireland, with varying degrees of legislative authority.

===British Parliament===
====House of Commons====

The four countries of the United Kingdom are divided into parliamentary constituencies of broadly equal population by the four Boundary Commissions. Each constituency elects a Member of Parliament (MP) to the House of Commons at general elections and, if required, at by-elections. As of the 2010 general election there are 650 constituencies (there were 646 before that year&#x27;s general election). At the 2017 general election, of the 650 MPs, all but one – Sylvia Hermon – were elected as representatives of a political party. However, as of the 2019 general election, there are currently 11 independent MPs, who have either chosen to leave their political party or have had the whip withdrawn.

In modern times, all prime ministers and leaders of the opposition have been drawn from the Commons, not the Lords. Alec Douglas-Home resigned from his peerages days after becoming prime minister in 1963, and the last prime minister before him from the Lords left in 1902 (the Marquess of Salisbury).

One party usually has a majority in parliament, because of the use of the First Past the Post electoral system, which has been conducive in creating the current Two-party system. The monarch normally asks a person commissioned to form a government simply whether it can &quot;survive&quot; in the House of Commons, something which majority governments are expected to be able to do. In exceptional circumstances the monarch asks someone to &#x27;form a government&#x27; &quot;with a parliamentary minority&quot; which in the event of no party having a majority requires the formation of a coalition government or &#x27;confidence and supply&#x27; arrangement. This option is only ever taken at a time of national emergency, such as war-time. It was given in 1916 to Bonar Law, and when he declined, to David Lloyd George and in 1940 to Winston Churchill. A government is not formed by a vote of the House of Commons, it is a commission from the monarch. The House of Commons gets its first chance to indicate confidence in the new government when it votes on the Speech from the throne (the legislative programme proposed by the new government).

====House of Lords====

The House of Lords was previously a largely hereditary aristocratic chamber, although including life peers, and Lords Spiritual. It is currently midway through extensive reforms, the most recent of these being enacted in the House of Lords Act 1999, in which it sought to reduce the number of hereditary peers within the Lords to remove their automatic right to sit and vote. Although, through negotiation, 92 peers remain temporarily in the Lords. However, in September 2024, Starmer&#x27;s Labour government introduced the House of Lords (Hereditary Peers) Bill. The bill strives to remove all individuals who hold legislative positions, resulting from birthright, to improve democratic representation within the legislative system - this is expected to become law by the end of 2025 (or early 2026). The house consists of two very different types of member, the Lords Temporal and Lords Spiritual. Lords Temporal include appointed members (life peers with no hereditary right for their descendants to sit in the house) and ninety-two remaining hereditary peers, elected from among, and by, the holders of titles which previously gave a seat in the House of Lords. The Lords Spiritual represent the established Church of England and number twenty-six: the Five Ancient Sees (Canterbury, York, London, Winchester and Durham), and the 21 next-most senior bishops. Secular organisations such as Humanists UK oppose bishops sitting in the House of Lords. The movement to end the Church of England&#x27;s status as the official state religion of the United Kingdom is known as disestablishmentarianism. Alternatives include a secular state in which the state purports to be officially neutral in matters of religion.

The House of Lords currently acts to review legislation initiated by the House of Commons, with the power to propose amendments, and can exercise a suspensive veto. This allows it to delay legislation if it does not approve it for twelve months. However, the use of vetoes is limited by convention and by the operation of the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949: the Lords may not veto the &quot;money bills&quot; or major manifesto promises (see Salisbury convention). Persistent use of the veto can also be overturned by the Commons, under a provision of the Parliament Act 1911. Often governments will accept changes in legislation in order to avoid both the time delay, and the negative publicity of being seen to clash with the Lords. However the Lords still retain a full veto in acts which would extend the life of parliament beyond the 5-year term limit introduced by the Parliament Act 1911.

The Constitutional Reform Act 2005 outlined plans for a Supreme Court of the United Kingdom to replace the role of the Law Lords.

The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom replaced the House of Lords as the final court of appeal on civil cases within the United Kingdom on 1 October 2009.

===Devolved national parliaments===

Though the British parliament remains the sovereign parliament, Scotland and Wales have devolved parliaments and Northern Ireland has an assembly. Each can have its powers broadened, narrowed or changed by an act of the UK Parliament. Both the Scottish Parliament and the Welsh Senedd gained legislative power over some forms of taxation between 2012 and 2016. Their power over economic issues is significantly constrained by an act of parliament passed in 2020. 

The UK is a unitary state with a devolved system of government. This contrasts with a federal system, in which sub-parliaments or state parliaments and assemblies have a clearly defined constitutional &quot;right&quot; to exist and a &quot;right&quot; to exercise certain constitutionally guaranteed and defined functions and cannot be unilaterally abolished by acts of the central parliament. All three devolved parliaments are elected by proportional representation: the additional-member system is used in Scotland and Wales, and single transferable vote is used in Northern Ireland. England, therefore, is the only country in the UK not to have its own devolved parliament. However, senior politicians of all main parties have voiced concerns in regard to the West Lothian question, which is raised where certain policies for England are set by MPs from all four constituent nations whereas similar policies for Scotland or Wales might be decided in the devolved assemblies by legislators from those countries alone. Alternative proposals for English regional government have stalled, following a poorly received referendum on devolved government for the North East of England, which had hitherto been considered the region most in favour of the idea, with the exception of Cornwall, where there is widespread support for a Cornish Assembly, including all five Cornish MPs. England is therefore governed according to the balance of parties across the whole of the United Kingdom.

The government has no plans to establish an English parliament or assembly although several pressure groups are calling for one. One of their main arguments is that MPs (and thus voters) from different parts of the UK have inconsistent powers. Currently an MP from Scotland can vote on legislation which affects only England but MPs from England (or indeed Scotland) cannot vote on matters devolved to the Scottish parliament. Indeed, the former Prime Minister Gordon Brown, who was an MP for a Scottish constituency until the 2015 general election, introduced some laws that only affect England and not his own constituency. This anomaly is known as the West Lothian question.

The policy of the British Government in England was to establish elected regional assemblies with no legislative powers. The London Assembly was the first of these, established in 2000, following a referendum in 1998, but further plans were abandoned following rejection of a proposal for an elected assembly in North East England in a referendum in 2004. Unelected regional assemblies remain in place in eight regions of England.

====Scottish Parliament====

The Scottish Parliament is the national, unicameral legislature of Scotland, located in the Holyrood area of the capital Edinburgh. The Parliament, informally referred to as &quot;Holyrood&quot; (cf. &quot;Westminster&quot;), is a democratically elected body comprising 129 members who are known as Members of the Scottish Parliament, or MSPs. Members are elected for four-year terms under the mixed-member proportional representation system. As a result, 73 MSPs represent individual geographical constituencies elected by the plurality (&quot;first past the post&quot;) system, with a further 56 returned from eight additional member regions, each electing seven MSPs.

The current Scottish Parliament was established by the Scotland Act 1998 and its first meeting as a devolved legislature was on 12 May 1999. The parliament has the power to pass laws and has limited tax-varying capability. Another of its roles is to hold the Scottish Government to account. The &quot;devolved matters&quot; over which it has responsibility include education, health, agriculture, and justice. A degree of domestic authority, and all foreign policy, remains with the British Parliament in Westminster. The public take part in Parliament in a way that is not the case at Westminster through Cross-Party Groups on policy topics which the interested public join and attend meetings of alongside Members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs).

The resurgence in Celtic language and identity, as well as &#x27;regional&#x27; politics and development, has contributed to forces pulling against the unity of the state. This was clearly demonstrated when – although some argue it was influenced by general public disillusionment with Labour – the Scottish National Party (SNP) became the largest party in the Scottish Parliament by one seat.

Alex Salmond (leader of SNP between 2004 and 2014) made history becoming the first First Minister of Scotland from a party other than Labour following the 2007 Scottish Parliament election. The SNP governed as a minority government following this election. Scottish nationalism which advocates for Scotland regaining its independence has experienced a dramatic rise in popularity in recent years, with a pivotal moment coming at the 2011 Scottish Parliament election where the SNP capitalised on the collapse of the Liberal Democrat support to improve on their 2007 performance to win the first ever outright majority at Holyrood (despite the voting system being specifically designed to prevent majorities), with Labour remaining the largest opposition party.

This election result prompted the leader of the three main opposition parties to resign. Iain Gray was succeeded as Scottish Labour leader by Johann Lamont, Scottish Conservative and Unionist leader, Annabel Goldie was replaced by Ruth Davidson, and Tavish Scott, leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats was replaced by Willie Rennie.

A major SNP manifesto pledge was to hold a referendum on Scottish Independence, which was duly granted by the British Government and held on 18 September 2014. When the nationalists came to power in 2011, opinion polls placed support for independence at around 31%, but in 2014, 45% voted to leave the union. In the wake of the referendum defeat, membership of the SNP surged to over 100,000, overtaking the Liberal Democrats as the third largest political party in the UK by membership, and in the general election of May 2015 the SNP swept the board and took 56 of the 59 Westminster constituencies in Scotland (far surpassing their previous best of 11 seats in the late 1970s) and winning more than 50% of the Scottish vote.

Salmond resigned as first minister and leader of the SNP following the country&#x27;s rejection of independence in September 2014, and was succeeded in both roles by his deputy first minister and deputy leader of the SNP, Nicola Sturgeon. Additionally, following the independence referendum, Lamont stood down as Scottish Labour leader and Jim Murphy was elected to replace her. Murphy remained leader until the general election in 2015 in which he lost his seat in Westminster. After the defeat, he resigned his position MSP Kezia Dugdale became leader of the party. In 2017, Dugdale unexpectedly resigned and was replaced as Scottish Labour leader by Richard Leonard. He held the post until resigning in January 2021, with Anas Sarwar replacing him the following month.

====Senedd====
The Senedd (formerly the National Assembly for Wales) is the devolved legislature of Wales with power to make legislation and vary taxes. The Parliament comprises 60 members, who are known as Members of the Senedd, or MSs (). Members are elected for four-year terms under an additional members system, where 40 MSs represent geographical constituencies elected by the plurality system, and 20 MSs from five electoral regions using the d&#x27;Hondt method of proportional representation.

The Welsh Parliament was created by the Government of Wales Act 1998, which followed a referendum in 1997. On its creation, most of the powers of the Welsh Office and Secretary of State for Wales were transferred to it. The Senedd had no powers to initiate primary legislation until limited law-making powers were gained through the Government of Wales Act 2006. Its primary law-making powers were enhanced following a Yes vote in the referendum on 3 March 2011, making it possible for it to legislate without having to consult the British parliament, nor the Secretary of State for Wales in the 20 areas that are devolved.

====Northern Ireland Assembly====
The government of Northern Ireland was established as a result of the 1998 Good Friday Agreement. This created the Northern Ireland Assembly. The Assembly is a unicameral body consisting of 90 members elected under the single transferable vote form of proportional representation. The Assembly is based on the principle of power-sharing, in order to ensure that both communities in Northern Ireland, unionist and nationalist, participate in governing the region. It has power to legislate in a wide range of areas and to elect the Northern Ireland Executive (cabinet). It sits at Parliament Buildings at Stormont in Belfast.

The Assembly has authority to legislate in a field of competences known as &quot;transferred matters&quot;. These matters are not explicitly enumerated in the Northern Ireland Act 1998 but instead include any competence not explicitly retained by the Parliament at Westminster. Powers reserved by Westminster are divided into &quot;excepted matters&quot;, which it retains indefinitely, and &quot;reserved matters&quot;, which may be transferred to the competence of the Northern Ireland Assembly at a future date. Health, criminal law and education are &quot;transferred&quot; while royal relations are all &quot;excepted&quot;.

While the Assembly was in suspension, due to issues involving the main parties and the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA), its legislative powers were exercised by the UK government, which effectively had power to legislate by decree. Laws that would normally be within the competence of the Assembly were passed by the UK government in the form of Orders-in-Council rather than legislative acts.

There has been a significant decrease in violence over the last twenty years, though the situation remains tense, with the more hard-line parties such as Sinn Féin and the Democratic Unionist Party now holding the most parliamentary seats (see Demographics and politics of Northern Ireland).

==Judiciary==
The United Kingdom does not have a single legal system due to it being created by the political union of previously independent countries with the terms of the Treaty of Union guaranteeing the continued existence of Scotland&#x27;s separate legal system. Today the UK has three distinct systems of law: English law, Northern Ireland law and Scots law. Recent constitutional changes saw a new Supreme Court of the United Kingdom come into being in October 2009 that took on the appeal functions of the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, comprising the same members as the Supreme Court, is the highest court of appeal for several independent Commonwealth countries, the UK overseas territories, and the British crown dependencies.

===England, Wales and Northern Ireland===

Both English law, which applies in England and Wales, and Northern Ireland law are based on common-law principles. The essence of common-law is that law is made by judges sitting in courts, applying their common sense and knowledge of legal precedent (&quot;stare decisis&quot;) to the facts before them. The Courts of England and Wales are headed by the Senior Courts of England and Wales, consisting of the Court of Appeal, the High Court of Justice (for civil cases) and the Crown Court (for criminal cases). The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is the highest court in the land for both criminal and civil cases in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland and any decision it makes is binding on every other court in the hierarchy.

===Scotland===

Scots law, a hybrid system based on both common-law and civil-law principles, applies in Scotland. The chief courts are the Court of Session, for civil cases, and the High Court of Justiciary, for criminal cases. The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom serves as the highest court of appeal for civil cases under Scots law. Sheriff courts deal with most civil and criminal cases including conducting criminal trials with a jury, known that as Sheriff solemn Court, or with a Sheriff and no jury, known as (Sheriff summary Court). The Sheriff courts provide a local court service with 49 Sheriff courts organised across six Sheriffdoms.

==Electoral systems==

Various electoral systems are used in the UK:

* The first-past-the-post system is used for general elections to the House of Commons and also for some local government elections in England and Wales. The first-past-the-post system elects members to parliament through individual elections in each of the 650 constituencies in the UK. To be elected to the House of Commons, candidates require the biggest share of votes. Each constituency can only elect one member to parliament; voters are given a ballot paper with a list of candidates from which they can select one. [1]
* The plurality-at-large voting (the bloc vote) is also used for some local government elections in England and Wales. The plurality system is a simple way of election; the winner requires only to gain more votes than any other candidate.[2]
* The additional-member system is used for elections to the Scottish Parliament, Senedd, and London Assembly. The system is implemented differently in each of the three locations. The additional member&#x27;s system used when electing members of parliament is a combination of the first-past-the-post system and the party-list system. Voters are given two ballots: one is for the candidates running to be elected as MP, and the other has a list of parties that are running for a seat in parliament. Voters choose their preferred party. [3]
* The single transferable vote system is used in Northern Ireland to elect the Northern Ireland Assembly, local councils, and Members of the European Parliament, and in Scotland to elect local councils. The single transferrable vote is a form of proportional representation; the strength of a party in parliament is equal to the number of votes they received during a general election. Areas elect a team of representatives rather than the traditional one; they also represent a larger area. Voters rank their choices; they can rank as many as they choose since parties will run more than one candidate in each area. To be elected, candidates have to receive a specific number of votes, the quota, which is decided based on the number of vacancies and the number of people that can vote.[4]
* The alternative vote system is used for by-elections in Scottish local councils. The alternative vote system is designed to deal with vote splitting. Under the first-past-the-post system, a candidate can win even when the majority votes against them if this majority is split over several other candidates. Voters rank the candidates from their preferred to their least preferred; if a candidate is the first choice for more than half of the votes cast, they win. But when there is no majority, the loser is removed, and the second choice becomes the first. This process is repeated until one candidate receives the majority. [5]
* The D&#x27;Hondt method of party-list proportional representation was used for European Parliament elections in England, Scotland, and Wales between 1999 and 2019 (the last such election before &#x27;Brexit&#x27;).
* The supplementary vote was used to elect directly elected mayors in England, including the mayor of London before 2022.

The use of the first-past-the-post to elect members of Parliament is unusual among European nations. The use of the system means that when three or more candidates receive a significant share of the vote, MPs are often elected from individual constituencies with a plurality (receiving more votes than any other candidate), but not an absolute majority (50 percent plus one vote).

Elections and political parties in the United Kingdom are affected by Duverger&#x27;s law, the political science principle that states that plurality voting systems, such as first-past-the-post, tend to lead to the development of two-party systems. The UK, like several other states, has sometimes been called a &quot;two-and-a-half party system&quot; because parliamentary politics is dominated by the Labour Party and Conservative Party, while the Liberal Democrats used to hold a significant number of seats (but still substantially less than Labour and the Conservatives), and several small parties (some of them regional or nationalist) trailed far behind in the number of seats, although this changed in the 2015 general election.

In the last few general elections, voter mandates for Westminster in the 30–40% ranges have been swung into 60% parliamentary majorities. No single party has won a majority of the popular vote since the Third National Government of Stanley Baldwin in 1935. On two occasions since World War II – 1951 and February 1974 – a party that came in second in the popular vote came out with the largest number of seats.

Electoral reform for parliamentary elections has been proposed many times. Calls for reforms to the first-past-the-post electoral system comes from the significant disproportionate representation that emerges with elections, diminishing the idea of fair elections, also resulting in candidates winning a constituency vote without the majority vote. Leaving smaller parties without representation in Parliament. The plurality rule (first-past-the-post) voting system states that candidates do not require the majority vote (of 50% + 1), but only more votes than any other candidate which gives leading parties the advantage while heavily discriminating against smaller parties who may rely on dispersed national support. The Jenkins Commission report in October 1998 suggested implementing the Alternative Vote Top-up (also called alternative vote plus or AV+) in parliamentary elections. Under this proposal, most MPs would be directly elected from constituencies by the alternative vote, with a number of additional members elected from &quot;top-up lists.&quot; However, no action was taken by the Labour government at the time. There are several groups in the UK campaigning for electoral reform, including the Electoral Reform Society, Make Votes Count Coalition, and Fairshare. The boundary commission for England has also suggested in its 2023 boundary review that constituency lines should be redrawn to allow constituencies to have a similar number of residents.

The 2010 general election resulted in a hung parliament (no single party was able to command a majority in the House of Commons). This was only the second general election since World War II to return a hung parliament, the first being the February 1974 election. The Conservatives gained the most seats (ending 13 years of Labour government) and the largest percentage of the popular vote but fell 20 seats short of a majority.

The Conservatives and Liberal Democrats entered into a new coalition government, headed by David Cameron. Under the terms of the coalition agreement, the government committed itself to holding a referendum in May 2011 on whether to change parliamentary elections from first-past-the-post to AV. Electoral reform was a major priority for the Liberal Democrats, who favour proportional representation but were able to negotiate only a referendum on AV (the alternative vote system is not a form of proportional representation) with the Conservatives. The coalition partners campaigned on opposite sides, with the Liberal Democrats supporting AV and the Conservatives opposing it. The referendum resulted in the Conservatives&#x27; favour, and the first-past-the-post system was maintained.

==Political parties==

Since the 1920s the two main political parties in the UK, in terms of the number of seats in the House of Commons, are the Conservative and Unionist Party and the Labour Party. The Scottish National Party has the second largest party membership, but a smaller number of MPs as it only fields candidates for constituencies in Scotland.

The modern day Conservative Party was founded in 1834 and is an outgrowth of the Tory movement or party, which began in 1678. Today it is still colloquially referred to as the Tory Party and members/supporters are referred to as &quot;Tories&quot;. The Liberal Democrats (or &quot;Lib Dems&quot;) were founded in 1988 by an amalgamation of the Liberal Party and the Social Democratic Party (SDP), a right-wing Labour breakaway movement formed in 1981. The Liberals and SDP had contested elections together as the SDP–Liberal Alliance for seven years previously. The modern Liberal Party had been founded in 1859 as an outgrowth of the Whig movement or party (which began at the same time as the Tory Party and was its historical rival) as well as the Radical and Peelite tendencies.

The Liberal Party was one of the two dominant parties (along with the Conservatives) from its founding until the 1920s, when it rapidly declined in popularity, and was supplanted on the left by the Labour Party, which was founded in 1900 and formed its first minority government in 1924. Since that time, the Labour and Conservative parties have been dominant, with the Liberals (later Liberal Democrats) being the third-largest party until 2015, when they lost 49 of their 57 seats. They lost 1 seat in the 2019 general election, but in the 2024 general election gained 64 seats and are, once again, the third-largest party in the House of Commons, with a total of 72 seats.

From the 2015 general election until the 2024 general election, the Scottish National Party was the third-largest party. They gained 56 seats in 2015. Founded in 1934, the SNP advocates Scottish independence and has had continuous representation in Parliament since 1967. The SNP currently leads a minority government in the Scottish Parliament, and after the 2019 general election had 48 MPs in the House of Commons. This number was significantly reduced to just 9 MPs in the 2024 general election, making the SNP the fourth-largest party.

Minor parties also hold seats in parliament:
*Reform UK, a right-wing party, currently has five MPs, all elected in the 2024 general election. It was formerly known as the Brexit Party and is a supplantation of the now extraparliamentary United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP)
*Plaid Cymru, the centre-left to left Welsh nationalist party, has had continuous representation in Parliament since 1974, and currently hold four of the 32 Welsh seats. They currently have four MPs. Plaid has the third highest number of seats in the Senedd, after Welsh Labour, and the Welsh Conservatives.
*In Northern Ireland, 17 of 18 MPs are from parties that only contest elections in Northern Ireland (except for Sinn Féin, which contests elections in both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland). The exception being one MP as of the 2024 UK general election who is an independent. The right-wing and unionist Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) (who currently hold five seats), the left-wing and republican Sinn Féin (who currently hold seven seats), the nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) (who currently hold two), the centrist non-sectarian Alliance Party of Northern Ireland (who currently hold one seat), the centre-right unionist Ulster Unionist Party (UUP; who currently hold one seat), and the right-wing unionist Traditional Unionist Voice (TUV; who have one seat), all hold seats in the House of Commons. Sinn Féin has a policy of abstentionism and their MPs refuse to take their seats in Parliament, and have done so since 1918. The DUP, Sinn Féin, the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP), Alliance Party and the SDLP are considered the five major political parties in Northern Ireland, holding the most seats in the Northern Ireland Assembly.
*The Green Party of England and Wales has four MPs. 
*There are also independent MPs. One is the Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle who revoked his Labour affiliation after the 2019 Speaker election. Others have had their whip revoked or have resigned from their political party. Six independent MPs were elected at the 2024 UK general election.

After two years of being a minority government, the Conservatives gained a majority in the general election in 2019, but lost this majority to the Labour Party in the 2024 general election.

===Conservatives (Tories)===

The Conservative Party won the largest number of seats at the 2015 general election, returning 330 MPs, enough for an overall majority, and went on to form the first Conservative majority government since the 1992 general election. The Conservatives won only 318 seats at the 2017 general election, but went on to form a confidence and supply deal with the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) who got 10 seats in the House of Commons, allowing the Conservative Party to remain in government. The Conservatives won a majority government in 2019, taking 365 seats and forming the first majority government since 2015–17. The party won 121 seats at the 2024 general election, making it the second-largest group in the House of Commons.

The Conservative Party can trace its origin back to 1662, with the Court Party and the Country Party being formed in the aftermath of the English Civil War. The Court Party soon became known as the Tories, a name that has stuck despite the official name being &#x27;Conservative&#x27;. The term &quot;Tory&quot; originates from the Exclusion Crisis of 1678–1681 – the Whigs were those who supported the exclusion of the Roman Catholic Duke of York from the thrones of England, Ireland and Scotland, and the Tories were those who opposed it. Generally, the Tories were associated with lesser gentry and the Church of England, while Whigs were more associated with trade, money, larger land holders (or &quot;land magnates&quot;), expansion and tolerance of Catholicism. The Rochdale Radicals were a group of more extreme reformists who were also heavily involved in the cooperative movement. They sought to bring about a more equal society, and are considered by modern standards to be left-wing.

After becoming associated with repression of popular discontent in the years after 1815, the Tories underwent a fundamental transformation under the influence of Robert Peel, himself an industrialist rather than a landowner, who in his 1834 &quot;Tamworth Manifesto&quot; outlined a new &quot;Conservative&quot; philosophy of reforming ills while conserving the good.
Though Peel&#x27;s supporters subsequently split from their colleagues over the issue of free trade in 1846, ultimately joining the Whigs and the Radicals to form what would become the Liberal Party, Peel&#x27;s version of the party&#x27;s underlying outlook was retained by the remaining Tories, who adopted his label of Conservative as the official name of their party.

The Conservatives were in government for eighteen years between 1979 and 1997, under the leadership of the first-ever female prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, and former Chancellor of the Exchequer John Major (1990–97). Their landslide defeat at the 1997 general election saw the Conservative Party lose over half their seats gained in 1992, and saw the party re-align with public perceptions of them. The Conservatives lost all their seats in both Scotland and Wales, and was their worst defeat since 1906.
In 2008, the Conservative Party formed a pact with the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) to select joint candidates for European and House of Commons elections; this angered the DUP as by splitting the Unionist vote, republican parties will be elected in some areas.

After thirteen years in opposition, the Conservatives returned to power as part of a coalition agreement with the Liberal Democrats in 2010, going on to form a majority government in 2015. David Cameron resigned as prime minister in July 2016, which resulted in the appointment of the country&#x27;s second female prime minister, Theresa May. The Conservative Party is the only party in the history of the United Kingdom to have been governed by a female prime minister. In 2019, Boris Johnson was appointed prime minister after May stepped down during Brexit negotiations. At one point during 2019 his party had a parliamentary minority for a short period after he ejected a large number of party members, of which some were subsequently allowed to return for the 2019 General election. Following the election the Tories returned with a majority government under Johnson.

Historically, the party has been the mainland party most pre-occupied by British unionism, as attested to by the party&#x27;s full name, the Conservative and Unionist Party. This resulted in the merger between the Conservatives and Joseph Chamberlain&#x27;s Liberal Unionist Party, composed of former Liberals who opposed Irish home rule. The unionist tendency is still in evidence today, manifesting sometimes as a scepticism or opposition to devolution, firm support for the continued existence of the United Kingdom in the face of movements advocating independence from the UK, and a historic link with the cultural unionism of Northern Ireland.

===Labour===
The Labour Party won the largest number of seats in the House of Commons at the 2024 general election, with 411 seats overall. The Party won the second-largest number of seats at the 2019 general election, with 202 seats, 60 seats less than 2017.

The history of the Labour Party goes back to 1900, when a Labour Representation Committee was established and changed its name to &quot;The Labour Party&quot; in 1906. After 1918, this led to the demise of the Liberal Party as the main reformist force in British politics. The existence of the Labour Party on the left-wing of British politics led to a slow waning of energy from the Liberal Party, which has consequently assumed third place in national politics. After performing poorly at the general elections of 1922, 1923 and 1924, the Liberal Party was superseded by the Labour Party as being the party of the left.

Following two brief spells in minority governments in 1924 and 1929–1931, the party was part of the Churchill war ministry during World War II. When the war ended the Labour Party won a landslide victory at the 1945 &quot;khaki election&quot;; winning a majority for the first time ever. Throughout the rest of the twentieth century, Labour governments alternated with Conservative governments. The Labour Party suffered the &quot;wilderness years&quot; of 1951–1964 (three consecutive general election defeats) and 1979–1997 (four consecutive general election defeats). During this second period, Margaret Thatcher, who became Leader of the Conservative Party in 1975, made a fundamental change to Conservative policies, turning the Conservative Party into an economically liberal party. At the 1979 general election, she defeated James Callaghan&#x27;s Labour government following the Winter of Discontent. For all of the 1980s and most of the 1990s, Conservative governments under Thatcher and her successor John Major pursued policies of privatisation, anti-trade-unionism, and, for a time, monetarism, now known collectively as Thatcherism.

The Labour Party elected left-winger Michael Foot as their leader in 1980, and he responded to dissatisfaction within the Labour Party by pursuing a number of radical policies developed by its grassroots members. In 1981, several centrist and right-leaning Labour MPs formed a breakaway group called the Social Democratic Party (SDP), a move which split Labour and is widely believed to have made the Labour Party unelectable for a decade. The SDP formed an alliance with the Liberal Party which contested the 1983 and 1987 general elections as a pro-European, centrist alternative to Labour and the Conservatives. Following some initial success, the SDP did not prosper (partly due to its unfavourable distribution of votes by the First-Past-the-Post electoral system), and was accused by some of splitting the Labour vote.
The SDP eventually merged with the Liberal Party to form the Liberal Democrats in 1988.

The Labour Party was defeated in a landslide at the 1983 general election, and Michael Foot was replaced shortly thereafter by Neil Kinnock as party leader. Kinnock progressively expelled members of Militant, a left-wing group which practised entryism, and moderated many of the party&#x27;s policies. Despite these changes, as well as electoral gains and also due to Kinnock&#x27;s negative media image, Labour was defeated at the 1987 and 1992 
general elections, and he was succeeded by Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Smith. Shadow Home Secretary Tony Blair became Leader of the Labour Party following Smith&#x27;s sudden death from a heart attack in 1994. He continued to move the Labour Party towards the &quot;centre&quot; by loosening links with the unions and continuing many of Thatcher&#x27;s neoliberal policies. This, coupled with the professionalising of the party machine&#x27;s approach to the media, helped Labour win a historic landslide at the 1997 general election, after eighteen consecutive years of Conservative rule. Some observers say the Labour Party had by then morphed from a democratic socialist party to a social democratic party, a process which delivered three general election victories but alienated some of its core base; leading to the formation of the Socialist Labour Party. A subset of Labour MPs stand as joint Labour and Co-operative candidates due to a long-standing electoral alliance between the Labour Party and the Co-operative Party – the political arm of the British co-operative movement. At the 2019 general election, 26 were elected.

Following Tony Blair&#x27;s election as leader of Labour, the part was reformed under the &quot;New Labour&quot; branding and won the 1997 election with an overall landslide victory. Under &quot;New Labour&quot;, the Human Rights Act and National Minimum Wage Act were passed in 1998.

===Liberal Democrats===

The Liberal Democrats won the third largest number of seats at the 2024 general election, returning 72 MPs. 

The Liberal Democrats were founded in 1988 by an amalgamation of the Liberal Party with the Social Democratic Party, but can trace their origin back to the Whigs and the Rochdale Radicals who evolved into the Liberal Party. The term &#x27;Liberal Party&#x27; was first used officially in 1868, though it had been in use colloquially for decades beforehand. The Liberal Party formed a government in 1868 and then alternated with the Conservative Party as the party of government throughout the late-nineteenth century and early-twentieth century.

The Liberal Democrats are a party with policies on constitutional and political reforms, including changing the voting system for general elections (2011 United Kingdom Alternative Vote referendum), abolishing the House of Lords and replacing it with a 300-member elected Senate, introducing fixed five-year Parliaments, and introducing a National Register of Lobbyists. They also support what they see as greater fairness and social mobility. In the coalition government, the party promoted legislation introducing a pupil premium – funding for schools directed at the poorest students to give them an equal chance in life. They also supported same-sex marriage and increasing the income tax threshold to £10,000, a pre-election manifesto commitment.

In the 2010 election, David Cameron formed a coalition government with Nick Clegg. After the 2015 elections, the Conservative government continued with a single party rather than a coalition.

Some coalition government reforms that were proposed were for fixed term parliaments. This piece of legislation consisted of setting a five-year interval between general elections. Another piece of coalition reform that was enacted was the Scottish independence referendum. The result overall was remain.

===Scottish National Party===

The Scottish National Party won the third-largest number of seats in the House of Commons at the 2015 general election, winning 56 MPs from the 59 constituencies in Scotland having won 50% of the popular vote. This was an increase of 50 MPs on the result achieved in 2010. At the 2017 general election, the SNP won 35 seats, a net loss of 21 seats. At the 2019 general election, the SNP won 48 seats, a net gain of 13 seats. At the 2024 general election, the SNP won 9 seats, a net loss of 38 seats.

The SNP has enjoyed parliamentary representation continuously since 1967. Following the 2007 Scottish parliamentary elections, the SNP emerged as the largest party with 47 MSPs and formed a minority government with Alex Salmond as First Minister. After the 2011 Scottish parliamentary election, the SNP won enough seats to form a majority government, the first time this had ever happened since devolution was established in 1999. It won 64 of 129 seats in the Scottish Parliament in the 2021 Scottish Parliament election and currently runs a minority government in Scotland.

Members of the Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru work together as a single parliamentary group following a formal pact signed in 1986. This group currently has 13 MPs.

===Northern Ireland parties===
The Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) had 5 MPs elected at the 2024 general election. Founded in 1971 by Ian Paisley, it has grown to become the larger of the two main unionist political parties in Northern Ireland. Sinn Féin MPs had 7 MPs elected at the 2019 election, but Sinn Féin MPs traditionally abstain from the House of Commons and refuse to take their seats in what they view as a &quot;foreign&quot; parliament. The unionist parties Ulster Unionist Party, Traditional Unionist Voice, crosscommunity Alliance Party and nationalist party SDLP also have Commons representation.

===Plaid Cymru===
Plaid Cymru has enjoyed parliamentary representation continuously since 1974 and had 4 MPs elected at the 2019 general election, though one was suspended. Following the 2007 Welsh Assembly elections, they joined Labour as the junior partner in a coalition government, but have fallen down to the third-largest party in the Assembly after the 2011 Assembly elections, and have become an opposition party.

===Other parliamentary parties===

The Green Party of England and Wales had a single MP, Caroline Lucas, from 2010 until the 2024 UK general election (the party previously had an MP in 1992; Cynog Dafis, Ceredigion, who was elected on a joint Plaid Cymru/Green Party ticket). In the 2024 UK general election the Greens won four seats. It also has three seats on the London Assembly and over 800 local councillors as of May 2024.

The Brexit Party was founded in January 2019, with leader Nigel Farage (former retired UKIP leader). It initially had 14 MEPs, all of whom had been elected as members of UKIP. In the 2019 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom, it returned 29 MEPs. The MEPs were elected representatives of the party until 11pm on 31 January 2020 when the UK left the European Union and the position of British MEPs was subsequently abolished. It was reconstituted into the Reform Party. Reform won 5 seats in the 2024 UK general election. 

There are usually a small number of independent politicians in parliament with no party allegiance. In modern times, this has usually occurred when a sitting member leaves their party, and some such MPs have been re-elected as independents. Between 1950 and 2023, only two new members were elected as independents without having ever stood for a major party:
*Martin Bell represented the Tatton constituency in Cheshire between 1997 and 2001. He was elected following a &quot;sleaze&quot; scandal involving the-then incumbent Conservative MP, Neil Hamilton. Bell, a BBC journalist, stood as an anti-corruption independent candidate, and the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties withdrew their candidates from the election.
*Dr. Richard Taylor MP was elected for the Wyre Forest constituency in 2001 on a platform opposing the closure of Kidderminster hospital. He later established Health Concern, the party under which he ran in 2005.

In the 2024 UK general election six independents were elected.

===Non-Parliamentary political parties===

Other political parties exist, but struggle to return MPs to Parliament.

The UK Independence Party (UKIP) had one MP and 24 seats in the European Parliament as well as a number of local councillors. UKIP also had a MLA in the Northern Ireland Assembly. UKIP had become an emerging alternative party among some voters, gaining the third-largest share of the vote in the 2015 general election and the largest share of the vote of any party (27%) in the 2014 European elections. In 2014 UKIP gained its first ever MP following the defection and re-election of Douglas Carswell in the 2014 Clacton by-election. They campaign mainly on issues such as reducing immigration and EU withdrawal. They no longer have any MPs.

The Respect party, a left-wing group that came out of the anti-war movement had a single MP, George Galloway from 2005 to 2010, and again between 2012 and 2015.

Change UK was a political party formed and disbanded in 2019. It had five MPs, four of whom were elected as Labour MPs, and one as Conservative MPs.

Following the 2021 Scottish Parliament election the Scottish Greens have 8 MSPs in the Scottish Parliament and are the junior partner in the SNP/Green coalition. They also 35 local councillors.

The Green Party in Northern Ireland has previously had MLAs in the Northern Ireland Assembly. They currently have 8 local councillors.

The Scottish Socialist Party (SSP) won its first seat in the Scottish Parliament in the 1999 Scottish Parliament election. In the 2003 Scottish Parliament election the party increased their number of seats to 6. The party built up its support through opposing the war in Iraq and fighting for policies such as free school meals and an end to prescription charges. In the 2007 Scottish Parliament election it lost all of its MSPs but remains politically active and continues to contest elections.

The British National Party (BNP) became the official opposition in the 2006 Barking and Dagenham Council election, won a seat in the 2008 London Assembly election, two seats in the 2009 European elections, and received the fifth-highest share of votes in the 2010 general election. At their peak they had 58 local councillors. However, the early 2010s saw the BNP&#x27;s support collapse and became fractured, resulting in them losing all elected representation by 2018.

The British Democratic Party (BDP) was founded in 2013 by Andrew Brons, one of the British National Party&#x27;s two MEPs. In 2022, following the collapse of the BNP, a plethora of prominent ex-BNP members rapidly began coalescing around the British Democrats. It is currently the only far-right UK political party with any elected representation.

The Aspire Party has 24 out of the 45 seats in the Tower Hamlets council.

The Women&#x27;s Equality Party (WEP) was founded in 2015. The party gained its first elected representation in the 2019 United Kingdom local elections, winning one local councillor seat on Congleton Town Council. The party has no other elected representation at any other level of governance.

The Libertarian Party was founded in 2008 and has contested several local elections and parliamentary constituencies. It has no elected representatives at any level of governance.

The English Democrats was founded in 2002 and advocates England having its own parliament. The party&#x27;s candidate was elected mayor of Doncaster in 2009, before resigning from the party in February 2013.

Other parties include: the Socialist Labour Party (UK), the Socialist Party of Great Britain, the Communist Party of Britain, the Socialist Party (England and Wales), the Socialist Workers Party, the Liberal Party, Mebyon Kernow (a Cornish nationalist party) in Cornwall, the Yorkshire Party in Yorkshire, and the National Health Action Party. The Pirate Party UK existed from 2009 to 2020, before being relaunched in 2023.

Several local parties contest only within a specific area, a single county, borough or district. Examples include the Better Bedford Independent Party, which was one of the dominant parties in Bedford Borough Council and led by Bedford&#x27;s former Mayor, Frank Branston. The most notable local party is Health Concern, which controlled a single seat in the British Parliament from 2001 to 2010.

The Jury Team, launched in March 2009 and described as a &quot;non-party party&quot;, is an umbrella organisation seeking to increase the number of independent MPs.

The Official Monster Raving Loony Party (OMRLP) was founded in 1983. The OMRLP are distinguished by having a deliberately bizarre manifesto, which contains things that seem to be impossible or too absurd to implement – usually to highlight what they see as real-life absurdities. It is effectively regarded as a satirical political party.

===2015 to 2019===
After winning the largest number of seats and votes in the 2015 general election, the Conservatives under David Cameron, remained ahead of the Labour Party, led by Jeremy Corbyn since September 2015. The SNP maintained its position in Scotland, the party was just short of an overall majority at the Scottish parliamentary elections in May 2016.

However, a turbulent referendum on the United Kingdom&#x27;s membership of the European Union, called for by David Cameron, led to his resignation, the appointment of a new prime minister Theresa May, and divided opinion on Europe amongst the party.

In addition, the EU referendum campaign plunged the Labour Party into crisis and resulted in a motion of no confidence in the party leader Jeremy Corbyn being passed by the party&#x27;s MPs in a 172–40 vote, which followed a significant number of resignations from the Shadow Cabinet. This led to a leadership election which began with Angela Eagle, the former Shadow First Secretary of State and Shadow Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills who eight days later withdrew from the leadership race, to support Owen Smith, the former Shadow Secretary of State for Work and Pensions. This was won by Jeremy Corbyn with an increased majority.

Following the vote to leave the European Union, Nigel Farage offered his own resignation as leader, something he had campaigned for since 1992. A leadership contest also took place in the Green Party, which led to the joint election on 2 September 2016 of Jonathan Bartley and Caroline Lucas as co-leaders, who took over the role in a job-share arrangement. Lucas, was previously leader until 2010 and is the party&#x27;s only MP. Strategic cross-party alliances have been initiated, including a &quot;progressive alliance&quot; and a &quot;Patriotic Alliance&quot;, as proposed by UKIP donor Arron Banks.

In 2017, the prime minister, Theresa May, called a general election. She hoped to increase the conservative majority to diffuse party opposition to her deal to leave the EU. In the election, the conservatives lost seats and the Labour party, under Jeremy Corbyn, gained 30 seats. This led to a minority conservative government supported by the DUP.

In July 2019, Boris Johnson won the leadership of the conservative party following the resignation of May. He became the prime minister by default.

In August 2019, Prime Minister Boris Johnson requested the monarch, Queen Elizabeth II, to prorogue the British parliament. Although this measure is common for incoming governments to allow time to prepare the Queen&#x27;s speech, the move caused great controversy as it was announced to last 23 days instead of the usual 4 or 5 days. It would end the current session of the Parliament that had been running for 2 years and prevent further parliamentary debate. The government stated that it was nothing to do with Brexit and that there would still be &quot;ample time&quot; for debate before Brexit happens. Opponents believed that parliament had been suspended to force through a no-deal Brexit and prevent parliament from being able to thwart the government&#x27;s plan. Others argued that it facilitated the Brexit negotiations by forcing the EU to modify the current proposed deal. The move is unprecedented in British politics and caused debate in the media, an attempt to stop it in the Scottish Court of Session, an attempt by ex-prime minister John Major and others to stop it in the English High Court and in the High Court in Northern Ireland. It was reported by many media sources that the move takes the UK one more step towards a full dictatorship from its current status of &#x27;elective dictatorship&#x27;. The legality of the suspension of parliament was tested in courts in England and Scotland. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom. On 24 September, it ruled unanimously that the prorogation was both justiciable and unlawful. The prorogation was quashed and deemed &quot;null and of no [legal] effect&quot;. Parliament resumed the next day.

On the return of parliament the government lost its when Conservative MP Phillip Lee crossed the floor of the house to join the Liberal Democrats. This meant that the combined votes of the Conservative and DUP MPs amounted to one less than the combined votes of opposition parties. The government of Boris Johnson then lost a vote, 301 to 328, giving control of the agenda of the house to the MPs, removing the control the government had over the introduction of new laws. The 21 Conservative MPs who voted against their own government had the whip removed by Number 10, removing them from the party. This included long-standing members of the party. Johnson called for a general election and following a few attempts succeeded in getting a vote approving an election through parliament.

===Current political landscape===

In the December 2019 general election, the Conservative Party, led by Boris Johnson, won a large overall majority. Jeremy Corbyn resigned as leader of the Labour Party. Jo Swinson resigned as Lib Dem leader after losing her own seat.

On 20 December 2019, the Brexit withdrawal agreement was passed. The UK left the EU on 31 January 2020 at 11 p.m. GMT and entered a transition period, set to finish on 31 December 2020.

In January 2020, the Labour Party began the process of electing a new leader. On 4 April 2020, Keir Starmer was elected leader of the Labour Party with 56.2% of the vote in the first round.

In October 2020, Corbyn was suspended from the Labour Party over his comments about antisemitism. According to &quot;The Washington Post&quot;:
:Corbyn&#x27;s ouster from a party he led in the last two national elections, in 2019 and 2017, was a stunning rebuke and mark him now as a near-outcast, at least temporarily. The suspension also shines light on a long-running feud within Europe&#x27;s largest democratic socialist party over its very soul, as hard-left &quot;Corbynistas&quot; pushing for radical change duke it out with a more moderate wing more ideologically aligned with Tony Blair, the centrist former Labour prime minister.
The present dispute within the Labour party is likely causing the leftist political coalition to further fragment since the catastrophic result in 2019. Polling generally indicates that &quot;at present&quot; (August 2021) Labour has lost significant portions of its vote share to the Green party and the Liberal Democrats. At Labour Conference 2021, several showdowns between the left and right of the party are expected to take place. This includes but is not limited to: a motion to give members power to approve or reject decisions over the Labour whip within the PLP, a potential rejection of the pro-Starmer interim General Secretary David Evans by unions and members alike, a debate over PR and a significant debate over the loss of members and their subscription fees since Corbyn&#x27;s expulsion which has left the party in a dire state regarding its activist and financial bases.

The SNP and the Scottish Greens won the right to form a Scottish coalition government in May 2021. The precise arrangement is loose and allows the Greens freedom to criticise official SNP policy on key areas of disagreement. However, it provides FM Nicola Sturgeon with a mandate to call for a new independence referendum after the failed one in 2014. Proponents of a new referendum particularly cite Brexit as changing the political situation, thus leading Scots to be more pro-independence than in 2014. As an issue, Scottish independence is known to cross-cut across party lines, with many Scottish Labour voters in particular being favourable to the prospect of independence.

In 2022, the Democracy Index rated the United Kingdom as a &quot;full democracy&quot; ranking 18th worldwide with an overall score of 8.28 out of a maximum of 10. The V-Dem Democracy Indices ranked United Kingdom 22nd worldwide on electoral democracy.

===Membership===

All political parties have membership schemes that allow members of the public to actively influence the policy and direction of the party to varying degrees, though particularly at a local level. Membership of British political parties is around 1% of the British electorate, which is lower than in all European countries except for Poland and Latvia. Overall membership to a political party has been in decline since the 1950s. In 1951, the Conservative Party had 2.2 million members, and a year later in 1952 the Labour Party reached their peak of 1 million members (of an electorate of around 34 million).

The table below details the membership numbers of political parties that have more than 5,000 members.

No data could be collected for the four parties of Northern Ireland: the DUP, UUP, SDLP, and Sinn Féin. However, in January 1997, it was estimated that the UUP had 10,000 – 12,000 members, and the DUP had 5,000 members.

In December 2020, the UK Independence Party had 3,888 members.

==Local government==

The UK is divided into a complex system of local governance.

==Former European Union membership==
The United Kingdom first joined the then European Communities in January 1973 by the then Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath, and remained a member of the European Union (EU) that it evolved into; British citizens, and other EU citizens resident in the UK, between 1979 and 2019 elected members to represent them in the European Parliament in Brussels and Strasbourg.

The UK&#x27;s membership in the Union has been a major topic of debate over the years and has been objected to over questions of sovereignty, and in recent years there have been divisions in both major parties over whether the UK should form greater ties within the EU, or reduce the EU&#x27;s supranational powers. Opponents of greater European integration are known as &quot;Eurosceptics&quot;, while supporters are known as &quot;Europhiles&quot;. Division over Europe is prevalent in both major parties, although the Conservative Party is seen as most divided over the issue, both whilst in Government up to 1997 and after 2010, and between those dates as the opposition. However, the Labour Party is also divided, with conflicting views over British adoption of the euro whilst in Government (1997–2010).

British nationalists have long campaigned against European integration. The strong showing of the eurosceptic UK Independence Party (UKIP) since the 2004 European Parliament elections has shifted the debate over UK relations with the EU.

In March 2008, Parliament decided to not hold a referendum on the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty, signed in December 2007. This was despite the Labour government promising in 2004 to hold a referendum on the previously proposed Constitution for Europe.

On 23 June 2016, the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union in a referendum. After the referendum, it was debated as to how and when the UK should leave the EU. On 11 July 2016, the Cabinet Office Minister, John Penrose failed to deliver a final answer on whether it would be at the disposal of the Prime Minister and one of the Secretaries of State, through the royal prerogative, or of Parliament, through primary legislation.

In October 2016 the Conservative Prime Minister, Theresa May, announced that Article 50 would be invoked by &quot;the first quarter of 2017&quot;. On 24 January 2017 the Supreme Court ruled in the Miller case by a majority that the process could not be initiated without an authorising act of parliament, but unanimously ruled against the Scottish government&#x27;s claim in respect of devolution that they had a direct say in the decision to trigger Article 50. Consequently, the European Union (Notification of Withdrawal) Act 2017 empowering the prime minister to invoke Article 50 was passed and enacted by royal assent in March 2017.

Invocation of Article 50 by the United Kingdom government occurred on 29 March 2017, when Sir Tim Barrow, the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the European Union, formally delivered by hand a letter signed by Prime Minister Theresa May to Donald Tusk, the President of the European Council in Brussels. The letter also contained the United Kingdom&#x27;s intention to withdraw from the European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC or Euratom). This meant that the UK would cease to be a member of the EU on 30 March 2019, unless an extension to negotiations was agreed upon by the UK and EU.
The leaving date was subsequently revised by agreement with the EU to be 31 October 2019. This led to a change of prime minister who promised to leave the EU on this date either with a revised deal or with no-deal.

The UK withdrew from the EU at 23.00 GMT on 31 January 2020, beginning a transition period that was set to end on 31 December 2020. During the 11-month transition period, the UK and EU negotiated their future relationship which resulted in the EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement which was agreed on 24 December 2020 just days before the end of the transition period. The UK ended the transition period which ended the incorporation of European Union law into UK law, and ended its membership of the EU Customs Union, and the European single market at 23:00 GMT on 31 December 2020.

==International organisation participation==

*African Development Bank
*Asian Development Bank
*Australia Group
*Bank for International Settlements
*Commonwealth of Nations
*Caribbean Development Bank (non-regional)
*Council of Europe
*CERN
*Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council
*European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
*European Investment Bank
*European Space Agency
*Food and Agriculture Organization
*G5, G6, G7, G8
*G10
*Inmarsat
*Inter-American Development Bank
*International Atomic Energy Agency
*International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
*International Civil Aviation Organization
*International Chamber of Commerce
*International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
*International Criminal Court
*International Criminal Police Organization – Interpol
*International Development Association
*International Energy Agency
*International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
*International Finance Corporation
*International Fund for Agricultural Development
*International Hydrographic Organization
*International Labour Organization
*International Maritime Organization
*International Monetary Fund
*International Olympic Committee (IOC)
*International Organization for Migration (IOM) (observer)
*International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
*International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
*International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Intelsat)
*International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
*International Whaling Commission
*MONUC
*Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) (guest)
*North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
*Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA)
*Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)
*Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
*Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
*Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)
*Organization of American States (OAS) (observer)
* The Pacific Community (SPC)
*Permanent Court of Arbitration
*UNESCO
*United Nations
*United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
*United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (associate)
*United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
*United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
*United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
*United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
*United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
*United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
*United Nations Iraq–Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM)
*United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH)
*United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
*United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG)
*United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
*United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
*United Nations Security Council (permanent member)
*Universal Postal Union (UPU)
*UNTAET
*Western European Union
*World Confederation of Labour
*World Customs Organization
*World Health Organization
*World Intellectual Property Organization
*World Meteorological Organization
*World Trade Organization
*Zangger Committee
==See also==
* Politics of England
* Politics of Northern Ireland
* Politics of Scotland
* Politics of Wales
* Anarchism in the United Kingdom
* British left
* Conservatism in the United Kingdom
* Corruption in the United Kingdom
* Constitutional reform in the United Kingdom
* Electoral reform
* Electoral registration in the United Kingdom
* Endorsements in the 2024 United Kingdom general election
* Far-left politics in the United Kingdom
* Far-right politics in the United Kingdom
* Islamism in the United Kingdom
* Anti-fascism
* Post–World War II anti-fascism
* Labour Party leadership of Keir Starmer
* Liberalism in the United Kingdom
* Libertarianism in the United Kingdom
* List of British politicians who have acknowledged cannabis use
* List of elected British politicians who have changed party affiliation
* List of political scandals in the United Kingdom
* List of pressure groups in the United Kingdom
* Lobbying in the United Kingdom
* Make Votes Matter
* Parliament in the Making
* Radical Whigs
* Referendums in the United Kingdom
* Reform Acts
* Socialism in the United Kingdom
* United Kingdom common framework policies
===Overviews by period===
* 2010s in United Kingdom political history
* 2020s in United Kingdom political history
* Politics of the United Kingdom in the 19th century
* Premiership of Margaret Thatcher
* Premiership of John Major
* Premiership of Tony Blair
* Premiership of Gordon Brown
* Premiership of David Cameron
* Premiership of Theresa May
* Premiership of Boris Johnson
* Premiership of Liz Truss
* Premiership of Rishi Sunak

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot; (2004) online; short scholarly biographies of all the major people who died by 2009
* Addison, Paul and Harriet Jones, eds. &quot;A Companion to Contemporary Britain: 1939–2000&quot; (2005) excerpt and text search
* Brown, David, Robert Crowcroft, and Gordon Pentland, eds. &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Modern British Political History, 1800–2000&quot; (2018) excerpt
* Budge, Ian, et al. eds. &quot;The New British Politics&quot; (4th ed. 2007) 712pp
* Butler, David. &quot;British General Elections Since 1945&quot; (1995) 195pp; excerpt and text search
* Cannon, John, ed. &quot;The Oxford Companion to British History&quot; (2003), historical encyclopedia; 4000 entries in 1046pp excerpt and text search
* Childs, David. &quot;Britain since 1945: A Political History&quot; (2012) excerpt and text search
* Cook, Chris and John Stevenson, eds. &quot;Longman Companion to Britain Since 1945&quot; (1995) 336pp
* Fairlie, Henry. &quot;Oratory in Political Life,&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (Jan 1960) 10#1 pp 3–13. A survey of political oratory in Britain from 1730 to 1960. 
* Jonathan Freedland, &quot;A Feigned Reluctance&quot; (review of Rory Stewart, &quot;How Not to Be a Politician&quot;, Penguin Press, 2024, 454 pp.), &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;, vol. LXXI, no. 19 (5 December 2024), pp. 26–28. &quot;Perhaps what galled [Rory] Stewart and his Tory allies most, just as it infuriated their Never Trump counterparts in the Republican Party, was the flight from truth. The embodiment of the malaise was Boris Johnson... [Stewart] might also have mentioned humor, which was a secret weapon for Johnson just as it remains for Trump. US readers are likely to think of Trump when Stewart reflects that Johnson was dangerous precisely because &#x27;he alone could cloak a darker narrative in clowning.&#x27; Both men allowed and, in Trump&#x27;s case, still allow &#x27;the public to indulge ever more offensive opinions under the excuse that some of it might be a joke.&#x27;... The grief that runs through [Stewart&#x27;s] book is not for his party only. It is for his country... Britain&#x27;s international influence is now at the margins, especially after the country&#x27;s exit from the EU... [Stewart] has contempt for the media&#x27;s fixation on the trivial and the personal... Stewart discovered that, in contemporary politics, the liar who is brazen about his lies is seen as refreshingly honest, while the honest candidate who errs, but fails to brag about it, is the liar... The reluctant, introspective, intellectual pol[itician] can flourish for a while; they can even capture the imagination, especially of those voters who pride themselves on not falling for anything so shallow as charisma. But they rarely win.&quot; (p. 28.)
* Hennessy, Peter. &quot;The Prime Minister: The Office and Its Holders Since 1945&quot; (2001) except and text search; Attlee to Blair; 688pp 
* Jones, Harriet, and Mark Clapson, eds. &quot;The Routledge Companion to Britain in the Twentieth Century&quot; (2009) excerpt and text search
* King, Anthony. &quot;The British Constitution&quot; (2011) 464pp
* Leventhal, F.M. &quot;Twentieth-Century Britain: An Encyclopedia&quot; (2nd ed. 2002) 640pp; short articles by scholars
* Marr, Andrew. &quot;A History of Modern Britain&quot; (2009); also published as &quot;The Making of Modern Britain&quot; (2010), popular history 1945–2005
* Pugh, Martin. &quot;Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party&quot; (2011) excerpt and text search
* Ramsden, John, ed. &quot;The Oxford Companion to Twentieth-Century British Politics&quot; (2005) excerpt and text search

==External links==
* Prospect Magazine – UK based political magazine focussing on British and international politics, cultural essays and arguments 
* British Politics – the only academic journal devoted purely to the study of political issues in Britain 
* Directgov, main entry point for citizens to the UK government 
** Directgov – Guide to Government 
* Official UK parliament website
* Official UK parliamentary membership by party 
* British Government and Politics on the Internet from the Keele University School of Politics
* British Politics and Policy at LSE The London School of Economics&#x27; UK politics and policy blog 
* ePolitix – UK Politics news website 
* British Government and Politics Compiled by a retired English Librarian
* Women&#x27;s Parliamentary Radio Interviews and resources about women politicians in the UK</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4" end="18" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="24" end="47" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="74" end="84" title="Convention (norm)" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="100" end="107" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="108" end="131" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="135" end="145" title="Hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="146" end="153" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="170" end="181" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="193" end="206" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="217" end="253" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="269" end="281" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="288" end="292" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q918346" start="320" end="327" title="Elections in the United Kingdom" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="427" end="456" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="557" end="577" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="587" end="609" title="Motion of no confidence" label="command the confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="617" end="633" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="952" end="968" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="977" end="991" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="1042" end="1058" title="legislative body" label="legislative body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="1534" end="1542" title="devolved" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="1574" end="1597" title="Scottish Parliament" label="parliaments of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="1602" end="1607" title="Senedd" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="1628" end="1644" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="1702" end="1715" title="Privy Council (United Kingdom)" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="1842" end="1863" title="Multi-party system" label="multiple-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="1889" end="1912" title="V-Dem Democracy Indices" label="V-Dem Democracy Indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="2032" end="2050" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2059" end="2071" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="2127" end="2140" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="2214" end="2223" title="Coalition government" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="2228" end="2247" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="2312" end="2331" title="first-past-the-post" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q918346" start="2358" end="2375" title="Elections in the United Kingdom" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q354239" start="2480" end="2491" title="Third party (politics)" label="third party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="2505" end="2522" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="2571" end="2621" title="Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition government" label="Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="2718" end="2755" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="parliamentary elections on 7 May 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="2937" end="2957" title="partition of Ireland" label="partition of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2959" end="2975" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q129968" start="2976" end="2994" title="Government of Ireland Act 1920" label="received home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="3011" end="3023" title="The Troubles" label="civil unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="3219" end="3227" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="3229" end="3234" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800594" start="3372" end="3404" title="North/South Ministerial Council" label="certain all-Ireland institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="3533" end="3570" title="government of the Republic of Ireland" label="government of the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768282" start="3665" end="3724" title="Separatism in the United Kingdom" label="independence in the constituent parts of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="3740" end="3765" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish pro-independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="3777" end="3800" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="3811" end="3830" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="3886" end="3890" title="MSPs" label="MSPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862416" start="3898" end="3931" title="2011 Scottish Parliament election" label="2011 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="3958" end="3977" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="3999" end="4030" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="2014 referendum on independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="4113" end="4130" title="Irish nationalist" label="Irish nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="4147" end="4156" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752036" start="4166" end="4185" title="Irish reunification" label="Irish reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670915" start="4197" end="4214" title="Welsh nationalist" label="Welsh nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="4231" end="4242" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304490" start="4251" end="4269" title="Welsh independence" label="Welsh independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="4276" end="4310" title="constitution of the United Kingdom" label="constitution of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135084" start="4314" end="4324" title="Uncodified constitution" label="uncodified"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="4343" end="4368" title="Convention (political norm)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="4371" end="4378" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="4440" end="4458" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="4546" end="4560" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="4669" end="4687" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="4885" end="4913" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="5487" end="5502" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="5566" end="5584" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="5635" end="5657" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="5670" end="5694" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="5698" end="5716" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="5737" end="5764" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="5773" end="5794" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Parliament of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="5807" end="5850" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q129968" start="5854" end="5884" title="Government of Ireland Act 1920" label="Government of Ireland Act 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="5900" end="5932" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="5949" end="5969" title="partition of Ireland" label="partition of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="6018" end="6037" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="6068" end="6084" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824370" start="6106" end="6174" title="Accession of the United Kingdom to the European Communities" label="The Accession of the United Kingdom to the European Communities (EC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="6208" end="6264" title="Brexit" label="The United Kingdom withdrew from the European Union (EU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="6304" end="6319" title="British monarch" label="British monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="6336" end="6347" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="6356" end="6369" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6377" end="6391" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="6640" end="6657" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="6775" end="6789" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="7118" end="7129" title="Rule of Law" label="Rule of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128539" start="7223" end="7233" title="High Court" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="7636" end="7665" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="8177" end="8184" title="Cabinet (government)" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="8446" end="8460" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240694" start="8824" end="8844" title="prerogative of mercy" label="prerogative of mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="9014" end="9027" title="Royal charter" label="Royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="9261" end="9276" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="9335" end="9346" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="9352" end="9381" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="9426" end="9445" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="9451" end="9467" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="9476" end="9502" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Ireland Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="9915" end="9929" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="9945" end="9996" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government in the United Kingdom" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Government in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="10082" end="10098" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="10222" end="10237" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="10484" end="10493" title="Minister (government)" label="Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="10559" end="10581" title="Ministry (government department)" label="Government Departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="10648" end="10655" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="10741" end="10766" title="Constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="10815" end="10836" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="10840" end="10845" title="Peerage" label="peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="10853" end="10867" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="10888" end="10908" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="10957" end="10975" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="11089" end="11110" title="vote of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="11167" end="11192" title="parliamentary dissolution" label="parliamentary dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215622" start="11199" end="11215" title="List of United Kingdom general elections" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="11300" end="11305" title="Whip (politics)" label="whips"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="12508" end="12526" title="primus inter pares" label="primus inter pares"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="12896" end="12933" title="Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain" label="Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="12939" end="12954" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="12960" end="12989" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="12995" end="13026" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="13032" end="13068" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q61412205" start="13073" end="13100" title="Minister without portfolio (United Kingdom)" label="Ministers without portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="13291" end="13301" title="Ministry (government department)" label="ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612019" start="13361" end="13385" title="Department for Education" label="Department for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="13418" end="13437" title="Government Minister" label="Government Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q14214" start="13453" end="13471" title="Secretary of State (United Kingdom)" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="13490" end="13497" title="Cabinet (government)" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044742" start="13777" end="13797" title="Department of Health and Social Care" label="Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612019" start="13862" end="13886" title="Department for Education" label="Department for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="13988" end="14000" title="organisation" label="organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974879" start="14014" end="14027" title="Civil Service (United Kingdom)" label="Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q111759032" start="14345" end="14364" title="Permanent secretary" label="Permanent secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826641" start="14422" end="14440" title="executive agencies" label="executive agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="14564" end="14571" title="metonym" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="14715" end="14724" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="14753" end="14788" title="HM Government of the United Kingdom" label="HM Government of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="14847" end="14853" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="14875" end="14889" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="15014" end="15033" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="15041" end="15060" title="devolved government" label="devolved government"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="15064" end="15072" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="15118" end="15127" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="15170" end="15184" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="first minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="15211" end="15232" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="deputy first minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="15238" end="15264" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Ireland Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="15275" end="15282" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362221" start="15306" end="15366" title="First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland" label="First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="15390" end="15411" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q18996" start="15431" end="15454" title="First Minister of Wales" label="first minister of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="15483" end="15499" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="15531" end="15538" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315283" start="15743" end="15751" title="Devolved, reserved and excepted matters" label="reserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="15788" end="15799" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="15808" end="15820" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933548" start="15832" end="15844" title="NHS Scotland" label="NHS Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509538" start="15846" end="15855" title="Education in Scotland" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="15857" end="15864" title="Scots law" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="15938" end="15953" title="benefits system" label="benefits system"/>
<link wikidata="Q124607787" start="16034" end="16048" title="Energy in Scotland" label="energy network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437729" start="16071" end="16103" title="Scottish Fire and Rescue Service" label="Scottish Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q740218" start="16162" end="16167" title="Sport in Scotland" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007259" start="16169" end="16176" title="Culture of Scotland" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q641795" start="16178" end="16185" title="Tourism in Scotland" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603015" start="16187" end="16203" title="Crown Estate Scotland" label="the Crown Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124607849" start="16205" end="16234" title="Oil industry in Scotland" label="onshore oil and gas licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48769383" start="16252" end="16260" title="Income tax in Scotland" label="taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q322148" start="16271" end="16291" title="Council Tax" label="Scottish council tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835072" start="16296" end="16305" title="Transport in Scotland" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="16411" end="16425" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="first minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="16443" end="16464" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="deputy first minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="16509" end="16518" title="Ministry (government department)" label="portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="16536" end="16555" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="16616" end="16620" title="Charles III" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="16806" end="16822" title="junior ministers" label="junior ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807003" start="16829" end="16842" title="Lord Advocate" label="Lord Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154402" start="16847" end="16864" title="Solicitor General for Scotland" label="Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q32859621" start="16935" end="16951" title="Scottish cabinet" label="Scottish cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="16971" end="16988" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="17230" end="17236" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398140" start="17333" end="17361" title="Government of Wales Act 2006" label="Government of Wales Act 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982023" start="17370" end="17402" title="2011 Welsh devolution referendum" label="2011 Welsh devolution referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676706" start="17458" end="17477" title="Act of Senedd Cymru" label="Act of Senedd Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q18996" start="17491" end="17514" title="First Minister of Wales" label="First Minister of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q336521" start="17564" end="17577" title="Eluned Morgan" label="Eluned Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="17581" end="17593" title="Welsh Labour" label="Welsh Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="17629" end="17637" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="17739" end="17746" title="diarchy" label="diarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362221" start="17762" end="17776" title="First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland" label="First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837191" start="17777" end="17798" title="Michelle O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Michelle O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="17800" end="17809" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362221" start="17815" end="17836" title="First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland" label="deputy First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q21234823" start="17837" end="17857" title="Emma Little-Pengelly" label="Emma-Little Pengelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="17859" end="17862" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="DUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="17887" end="17905" title="British Parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="17976" end="18001" title="parliamentary sovereignty" label="parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="18069" end="18078" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="18098" end="18114" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="18123" end="18137" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="18347" end="18378" title="countries of the United Kingdom" label="countries of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="18410" end="18424" title="constituencies" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949922" start="18465" end="18485" title="Boundary commissions (United Kingdom)" label="Boundary Commissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="18514" end="18534" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="18630" end="18651" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="18721" end="18737" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="18747" end="18768" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q676383" start="18800" end="18813" title="Sylvia Hermon" label="Sylvia Hermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="18853" end="18868" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="18889" end="18910" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="19080" end="19105" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="leaders of the opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="19155" end="19172" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="19316" end="19337" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Marquess of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="19415" end="19451" title="First Past the Post electoral system" label="First Past the Post electoral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="19502" end="19518" title="Two-party system" label="Two-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="19930" end="19950" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q166663" start="20107" end="20116" title="Bonar Law" label="Bonar Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="20143" end="20161" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="20177" end="20194" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="20404" end="20426" title="Speech from the throne" label="Speech from the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="20556" end="20566" title="hereditary" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="20567" end="20579" title="aristocratic" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="20608" end="20617" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915459" start="20624" end="20639" title="Lords Spiritual" label="Lords Spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="20737" end="20760" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131580" start="21377" end="21391" title="Lords Temporal" label="Lords Temporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="21713" end="21724" title="State religion" label="established"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="21725" end="21742" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="21789" end="21799" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="21801" end="21805" title="Archbishop of York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587771" start="21807" end="21813" title="Bishop of London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271558" start="21815" end="21825" title="Bishop of Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080277" start="21830" end="21836" title="Bishop of Durham" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q656542" start="21906" end="21918" title="Humanists UK" label="Humanists UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282162" start="22086" end="22110" title="disestablishmentarianism" label="disestablishmentarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q859563" start="22135" end="22148" title="secular state" label="secular state"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="22375" end="22390" title="suspensive veto" label="suspensive veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414408" start="22553" end="22582" title="Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949" label="Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404757" start="22668" end="22688" title="Salisbury convention" label="Salisbury convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080258" start="22782" end="22801" title="Parliament Act 1911" label="Parliament Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635668" start="23127" end="23157" title="Constitutional Reform Act 2005" label="Constitutional Reform Act 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="23179" end="23214" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q190752" start="23329" end="23350" title="final court of appeal" label="final court of appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="23513" end="23521" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="23526" end="23531" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="23562" end="23578" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="23693" end="23712" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="23727" end="23733" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="23926" end="23939" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q512187" start="24000" end="24007" title="Federal republic" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="24354" end="24381" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="24387" end="24411" title="additional-member system" label="additional-member system"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="24447" end="24471" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="24501" end="24508" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267668" start="24563" end="24590" title="devolved English parliament" label="its own devolved parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q130936" start="24678" end="24699" title="West Lothian question" label="West Lothian question"/>
<link wikidata="Q48091" start="24969" end="24977" title="English regions" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="25073" end="25094" title="North East of England" label="North East of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="25192" end="25200" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171802" start="25242" end="25258" title="Cornish Assembly" label="Cornish Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="25860" end="25872" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q130936" start="26054" end="26075" title="West Lothian question" label="West Lothian question"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309196" start="26151" end="26170" title="Regional assembly (England)" label="regional assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="26203" end="26218" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q723138" start="26276" end="26286" title="1998 Greater London Authority referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="26390" end="26408" title="North East England" label="North East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058330" start="26414" end="26424" title="2004 North East England devolution referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48091" start="26489" end="26507" title="regions of England" label="regions of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="26543" end="26562" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="26580" end="26590" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="26606" end="26614" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625364" start="26631" end="26639" title="Holyrood, Edinburgh" label="Holyrood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="26660" end="26669" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="26745" end="26756" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="26770" end="26784" title="democratically" label="democratically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="26838" end="26872" title="Members of the Scottish Parliament" label="Members of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="26933" end="26973" title="mixed-member proportional representation" label="mixed-member proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437892" start="27037" end="27051" title="Scottish Parliament constituencies and electoral regions" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="27067" end="27076" title="plurality voting" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="27157" end="27174" title="Additional-member system" label="additional member"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="27266" end="27283" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="27311" end="27319" title="devolved" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="27320" end="27331" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="27470" end="27489" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509538" start="27576" end="27585" title="Education in Scotland" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197199" start="27587" end="27593" title="Health in Scotland" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="27612" end="27619" title="Scots law" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="27716" end="27727" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672822" start="27967" end="28009" title="Celtic Revival" label="resurgence in Celtic language and identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="28262" end="28285" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="28358" end="28370" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="28441" end="28467" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="28513" end="28546" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="2007 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112446" start="28556" end="28589" title="First Salmond government" label="governed as a minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336993" start="28615" end="28635" title="Scottish nationalism" label="Scottish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="28656" end="28691" title="Scottish independence" label="Scotland regaining its independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862416" start="28791" end="28824" title="2011 Scottish Parliament election" label="2011 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421398" start="29209" end="29218" title="Iain Gray" label="Iain Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q544698" start="29262" end="29275" title="Johann Lamont" label="Johann Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q544742" start="29320" end="29334" title="Annabel Goldie" label="Annabel Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177593" start="29351" end="29364" title="Ruth Davidson" label="Ruth Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339371" start="29370" end="29382" title="Tavish Scott" label="Tavish Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581473" start="29441" end="29454" title="Willie Rennie" label="Willie Rennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="29500" end="29535" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="referendum on Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="30356" end="30377" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="deputy first minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q467112" start="30408" end="30423" title="Nicola Sturgeon" label="Nicola Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q333702" start="30526" end="30536" title="Jim Murphy" label="Jim Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740370" start="30712" end="30725" title="Kezia Dugdale" label="Kezia Dugdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039896" start="30839" end="30854" title="Richard Leonard" label="Richard Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q478812" start="30911" end="30922" title="Anas Sarwar" label="Anas Sarwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="31035" end="31043" title="devolved" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="31044" end="31055" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="31059" end="31064" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406079" start="31166" end="31187" title="Members of the Senedd" label="Members of the Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="31249" end="31274" title="Mixed-member proportional representation" label="additional members system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970524" start="31312" end="31326" title="Senedd constituencies and electoral regions" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="31342" end="31351" title="Plurality voting" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970524" start="31376" end="31398" title="Senedd constituencies and electoral regions" label="five electoral regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q337866" start="31409" end="31428" title="d&amp;#x27;Hondt method" label="d&amp;#x27;Hondt method"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="31432" end="31459" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540463" start="31502" end="31530" title="Government of Wales Act 1998" label="Government of Wales Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689863" start="31549" end="31559" title="1997 Welsh devolution referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q515268" start="31612" end="31624" title="Welsh Office" label="Welsh Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846384" start="31629" end="31657" title="Secretary of State for Wales" label="Secretary of State for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q128693670" start="31719" end="31738" title="primary legislation" label="primary legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398140" start="31795" end="31823" title="Government of Wales Act 2006" label="Government of Wales Act 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982023" start="31897" end="31907" title="2011 Welsh devolution referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="32002" end="32012" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846384" start="32022" end="32050" title="Secretary of State for Wales" label="Secretary of State for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="32196" end="32217" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="32236" end="32261" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="32340" end="32364" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="32373" end="32400" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="32521" end="32529" title="Unionists (Ireland)" label="unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="32534" end="32545" title="Irish nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665914" start="32652" end="32678" title="Northern Ireland Executive" label="Northern Ireland Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175922" start="32701" end="32721" title="Parliament Buildings (Northern Ireland)" label="Parliament Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="32737" end="32744" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001000" start="32906" end="32931" title="Northern Ireland Act 1998" label="Northern Ireland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="33465" end="33498" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="33732" end="33749" title="Orders-in-Council" label="Orders-in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="33935" end="33944" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="33953" end="33978" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280915" start="34025" end="34070" title="Demographics and politics of Northern Ireland" label="Demographics and politics of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="34248" end="34263" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005600" start="34375" end="34389" title="systems of law" label="systems of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="34391" end="34402" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178760" start="34404" end="34424" title="Courts of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="34429" end="34438" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="34480" end="34515" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="34616" end="34630" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="34636" end="34675" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="34950" end="34967" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178760" start="34973" end="34993" title="Courts of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="35007" end="35017" title="common-law" label="common-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="35079" end="35084" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="35150" end="35165" title="legal precedent" label="legal precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="35173" end="35186" title="stare decisis" label="stare decisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q614305" start="35224" end="35251" title="Courts of England and Wales" label="Courts of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137751" start="35324" end="35339" title="Court of Appeal (England and Wales)" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="35345" end="35366" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q203895" start="35393" end="35404" title="Crown Court" label="Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="35431" end="35466" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="35537" end="35544" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="35546" end="35551" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="35557" end="35573" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="35723" end="35732" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="35756" end="35764" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="35791" end="35807" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128540" start="35834" end="35858" title="High Court of Justiciary" label="High Court of Justiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494979" start="36201" end="36214" title="Sheriff court" label="Sheriff court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494999" start="36290" end="36300" title="Sheriffdom" label="Sheriffdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="36380" end="36399" title="first-past-the-post" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215622" start="36419" end="36436" title="List of United Kingdom general elections" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="36444" end="36460" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q853171" start="36479" end="36495" title="Local government in the United Kingdom" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="36509" end="36526" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746726" start="36907" end="36932" title="plurality-at-large voting" label="plurality-at-large voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="37149" end="37173" title="additional-member system" label="additional-member system"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="37203" end="37222" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="37224" end="37230" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="37236" end="37251" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="37689" end="37713" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="37732" end="37748" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="37762" end="37787" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="37809" end="37843" title="Members of the European Parliament" label="Members of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="38480" end="38496" title="alternative vote" label="alternative vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="38532" end="38555" title="Local government in Scotland" label="Scottish local councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q337866" start="39112" end="39131" title="D&amp;#x27;Hondt method" label="D&amp;#x27;Hondt method"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="39135" end="39173" title="party-list proportional representation" label="party-list proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128324" start="39187" end="39216" title="European Parliament elections" label="European Parliament elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851815" start="39257" end="39261" title="1999 European Parliament election" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999180" start="39266" end="39270" title="2019 European Parliament election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="39308" end="39314" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165370" start="39329" end="39347" title="supplementary vote" label="supplementary vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797886" start="39366" end="39389" title="Mayors in England" label="directly elected mayors"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="39416" end="39431" title="mayor of London" label="mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q107583727" start="39439" end="39443" title="Elections Act 2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="39711" end="39720" title="Plurality (voting)" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="39781" end="39798" title="absolute majority" label="absolute majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q637376" start="39898" end="39917" title="Duverger&amp;#x27;s law" label="Duverger&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="39923" end="39940" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q105210" start="39941" end="39950" title="Law (principle)" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="39968" end="39991" title="plurality voting system" label="plurality voting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="40058" end="40074" title="two-party system" label="two-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350504" start="40146" end="40173" title="two-and-a-half party system" label="two-and-a-half party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="40457" end="40468" title="nationalist" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784906" start="40769" end="40794" title="Third National Government" label="Third National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="40798" end="40813" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q918378" start="40817" end="40821" title="1935 United Kingdom general election" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="40846" end="40858" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="40861" end="40865" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="40870" end="40883" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="February 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356385" start="40978" end="40994" title="Electoral reform" label="Electoral reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177586" start="41702" end="41720" title="Jenkins Commission (UK)" label="Jenkins Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736601" start="41771" end="41794" title="Alternative Vote Top-up" label="Alternative Vote Top-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="41949" end="41965" title="alternative vote" label="alternative vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084904" start="41984" end="42002" title="Additional-member system" label="additional members"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355003" start="42192" end="42216" title="Electoral Reform Society" label="Electoral Reform Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="42454" end="42475" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="42490" end="42505" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="42628" end="42640" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="42690" end="42712" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="February 1974 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="42935" end="42959" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="new coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="42971" end="42984" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163113" start="43009" end="43028" title="Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition agreement" label="coalition agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788922" start="43075" end="43097" title="2011 United Kingdom Alternative Vote referendum" label="referendum in May 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="43251" end="43278" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="43789" end="43805" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="43815" end="43846" title="Conservative and Unionist Party" label="Conservative and Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="43855" end="43867" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="43873" end="43896" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="44109" end="44113" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="44372" end="44385" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q40052" start="44394" end="44417" title="Social Democratic Party (UK)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389478" start="44541" end="44561" title="SDP–Liberal Alliance" label="SDP–Liberal Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="44663" end="44667" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687668" start="44779" end="44786" title="Radicals (UK)" label="Radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633397" start="44791" end="44798" title="Peelite" label="Peelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="44998" end="45002" title="Left-wing politics" label="left"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="45253" end="45257" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="45320" end="45341" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="45354" end="45375" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="45557" end="45580" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="45675" end="45696" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="45787" end="45806" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="45814" end="45833" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="45849" end="45870" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="45966" end="45987" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="46077" end="46086" title="Reform UK" label="Reform UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="46269" end="46302" title="United Kingdom Independence Party" label="United Kingdom Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="46311" end="46322" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670915" start="46348" end="46365" title="Welsh nationalist" label="Welsh nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="46561" end="46567" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q832685" start="46575" end="46587" title="Welsh Labour" label="Welsh Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981882" start="46597" end="46616" title="Welsh Conservatives" label="Welsh Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="46622" end="46638" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="46730" end="46739" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="46799" end="46818" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="46925" end="46933" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="46934" end="46959" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="47017" end="47027" title="Irish republicanism" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="47076" end="47087" title="Irish nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q175443" start="47088" end="47122" title="Social Democratic and Labour Party" label="Social Democratic and Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q244927" start="47183" end="47217" title="Alliance Party of Northern Ireland" label="Alliance Party of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="47275" end="47296" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580111" start="47480" end="47493" title="abstentionism" label="abstentionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="47603" end="47624" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="47759" end="47784" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="47787" end="47823" title="The Green Party of England and Wales" label="The Green Party of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="47855" end="47866" title="Independent politician" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="47883" end="47890" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q689660" start="47892" end="47905" title="Lindsay Hoyle" label="Lindsay Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q59590311" start="47951" end="47972" title="2019 Speaker of the British House of Commons election" label="2019 Speaker election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="48212" end="48236" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="general election in 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="48288" end="48309" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="48404" end="48425" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="48551" end="48572" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="48663" end="48684" title="confidence and supply" label="confidence and supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="48699" end="48724" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49210" end="49227" title="English Civil War#Aftermath" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="49270" end="49276" title="Tories" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383566" start="49404" end="49420" title="Exclusion Crisis" label="Exclusion Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="49440" end="49445" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="49507" end="49519" title="James II of England" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687668" start="49854" end="49862" title="Radicals (UK)" label="Radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23444992" start="49941" end="49961" title="cooperative movement" label="cooperative movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="50057" end="50066" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="50231" end="50242" title="Robert Peel" label="Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q661123" start="50316" end="50334" title="Tamworth Manifesto" label="Tamworth Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687668" start="50583" end="50591" title="Radical Party (UK)" label="Radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="50622" end="50635" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="50951" end="50968" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="50981" end="51008" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="51009" end="51019" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="51061" end="51082" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076606" start="51313" end="51317" title="1906 United Kingdom general election" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="51374" end="51395" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="51770" end="51783" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="51911" end="51922" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="52061" end="52074" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401913" start="52528" end="52544" title="British unionism" label="British unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="52687" end="52705" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="52713" end="52735" title="Liberal Unionist Party" label="Liberal Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="52777" end="52792" title="Irish home rule" label="Irish home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q21942488" start="53424" end="53455" title="Labour Representation Committee (1900)" label="Labour Representation Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118241" start="54089" end="54111" title="Churchill war ministry" label="Churchill war ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="54119" end="54131" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="54211" end="54225" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="khaki election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="54587" end="54604" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="54750" end="54770" title="economically liberal" label="economically liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="54785" end="54806" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="1979 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="54821" end="54836" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247283" start="54876" end="54896" title="Winter of Discontent" label="Winter of Discontent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="55000" end="55010" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="55031" end="55044" title="privatisation" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="55051" end="55062" title="trade-union" label="trade-union"/>
<link wikidata="Q373177" start="55084" end="55094" title="monetarism" label="monetarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q877530" start="55122" end="55133" title="Thatcherism" label="Thatcherism"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="55173" end="55185" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40052" start="55440" end="55463" title="Social Democratic Party (UK)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="55646" end="55650" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="55655" end="55659" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="56102" end="56123" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="1983 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="56129" end="56141" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="56177" end="56189" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314191" start="56249" end="56257" title="Militant tendency" label="Militant"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="56261" end="56270" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755592" start="56293" end="56301" title="entryism" label="entryism"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="56491" end="56495" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q11013932" start="56540" end="56574" title="Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332377" start="56576" end="56586" title="John Smith (Labour Party leader)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976591" start="56588" end="56609" title="Shadow Home Secretary" label="Shadow Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="56610" end="56620" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="56817" end="56822" title="trade union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="57022" end="57043" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q189280" start="57163" end="57183" title="democratic socialist" label="democratic socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="57195" end="57212" title="social democratic" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491460" start="57348" end="57370" title="Socialist Labour Party (UK)" label="Socialist Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467393" start="57410" end="57433" title="Labour and Co-operative" label="Labour and Co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q388602" start="57468" end="57486" title="electoral alliance" label="electoral alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q211931" start="57520" end="57538" title="Co-operative Party" label="Co-operative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971307" start="57566" end="57595" title="British co-operative movement" label="British co-operative movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="57604" end="57625" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="57655" end="57665" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="57741" end="57751" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q477072" start="57862" end="57878" title="Human Rights Act 1998" label="Human Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974345" start="57883" end="57908" title="National Minimum Wage Act" label="National Minimum Wage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="58305" end="58318" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788922" start="58762" end="58809" title="2011 United Kingdom Alternative Vote referendum" label="2011 United Kingdom Alternative Vote referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19119578" start="59131" end="59144" title="pupil premium" label="pupil premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033330" start="59258" end="59275" title="Same-sex marriage in the United Kingdom" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308200" start="59295" end="59305" title="Income Tax in the United Kingdom" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="59388" end="59401" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="59411" end="59431" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q189947" start="59437" end="59447" title="Nick Clegg" label="Nick Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="60587" end="60606" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="60612" end="60624" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="60628" end="60642" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969168" start="60885" end="60918" title="2021 Scottish Parliament election" label="2021 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="61184" end="61209" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q296597" start="61283" end="61294" title="Ian Paisley" label="Ian Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="61346" end="61354" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="61376" end="61392" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="61621" end="61642" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q985076" start="61644" end="61670" title="Traditional Unionist Voice" label="Traditional Unionist Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q244927" start="61687" end="61701" title="Alliance Party of Northern Ireland" label="Alliance Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q175443" start="61724" end="61728" title="SDLP" label="SDLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q111715" start="61951" end="61980" title="2007 National Assembly for Wales election" label="2007 Welsh Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="62226" end="62258" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green Party of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9670" start="62276" end="62290" title="Caroline Lucas" label="Caroline Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="62553" end="62568" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="62621" end="62633" title="Brexit Party" label="Brexit Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q318471" start="62675" end="62687" title="Nigel Farage" label="Nigel Farage"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001091" start="62800" end="62855" title="2019 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2019 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="63086" end="63098" title="Reform UK" label="Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="63190" end="63212" title="independent politician" label="independent politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q333499" start="63514" end="63525" title="Martin Bell" label="Martin Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q988027" start="63542" end="63548" title="Tatton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Tatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="63565" end="63573" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126946405" start="63604" end="63611" title="Tatton in the 1997 general election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337819" start="63697" end="63710" title="Neil Hamilton (politician)" label="Neil Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="63720" end="63723" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q334322" start="63881" end="63895" title="Richard Taylor (British politician)" label="Richard Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q750781" start="63919" end="63930" title="Wyre Forest (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Wyre Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297754" start="64035" end="64049" title="Health Concern" label="Health Concern"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64203" end="64220" title="List of political parties in the United Kingdom#Minor parties in the United Kingdom" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="64275" end="64296" title="UK Independence Party" label="UK Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="64335" end="64354" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="64424" end="64449" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="64567" end="64588" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412950" start="64649" end="64672" title="2014 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2014 European elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q269322" start="64755" end="64771" title="Douglas Carswell" label="Douglas Carswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986514" start="64779" end="64803" title="2014 Clacton by-election" label="2014 Clacton by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005196" start="64853" end="64864" title="Modern immigration to the United Kingdom" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="64869" end="64882" title="Brexit" label="EU withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q287031" start="64918" end="64925" title="Respect Party" label="Respect"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="64935" end="64944" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="64972" end="64989" title="anti-war movement" label="anti-war movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q332483" start="65007" end="65022" title="George Galloway" label="George Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q61751194" start="65076" end="65085" title="Change UK" label="Change UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969168" start="65240" end="65273" title="2021 Scottish Parliament election" label="2021 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="65278" end="65293" title="Scottish Greens" label="Scottish Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="65313" end="65332" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096979" start="65425" end="65456" title="Green Party in Northern Ireland" label="Green Party in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="65488" end="65513" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q891900" start="65561" end="65585" title="Scottish Socialist Party" label="Scottish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269950" start="65645" end="65678" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election" label="1999 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q683800" start="65687" end="65720" title="2003 Scottish Parliament election" label="2003 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="65928" end="65961" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="2007 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q161269" start="66058" end="66080" title="British National Party" label="British National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861053" start="66125" end="66167" title="2006 Barking and Dagenham Council election" label="2006 Barking and Dagenham Council election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669844" start="66187" end="66216" title="2008 London Assembly election" label="2008 London Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q528608" start="66235" end="66258" title="2009 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2009 European elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="66313" end="66334" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969878" start="66530" end="66554" title="British Democratic Party" label="British Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q162395" start="66584" end="66596" title="Andrew Brons" label="Andrew Brons"/>
<link wikidata="Q52701679" start="66879" end="66891" title="Aspire (political party)" label="Aspire Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648714" start="66954" end="66981" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Equality Party" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Equality Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388144" start="67066" end="67101" title="2019 United Kingdom local elections" label="2019 United Kingdom local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000778" start="67140" end="67162" title="Congleton Town Council" label="Congleton Town Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997368" start="67249" end="67266" title="Libertarian Party (UK)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479228" start="67430" end="67447" title="English Democrats" label="English Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491460" start="67662" end="67689" title="Socialist Labour Party (UK)" label="Socialist Labour Party (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631453" start="67695" end="67727" title="Socialist Party of Great Britain" label="Socialist Party of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120576" start="67733" end="67759" title="Communist Party of Britain" label="Communist Party of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q367894" start="67765" end="67800" title="Socialist Party (England and Wales)" label="Socialist Party (England and Wales)"/>
<link wikidata="Q405492" start="67806" end="67829" title="Socialist Workers Party (UK)" label="Socialist Workers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360801" start="67835" end="67848" title="Liberal Party (UK, 1989)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q161957" start="67850" end="67863" title="Mebyon Kernow" label="Mebyon Kernow"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059489" start="67911" end="67926" title="Yorkshire Party" label="Yorkshire Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972995" start="67949" end="67977" title="National Health Action Party" label="National Health Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574974" start="67983" end="67998" title="Pirate Party UK" label="Pirate Party UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239012" start="68253" end="68276" title="Bedford Borough Council" label="Bedford Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485453" start="68317" end="68331" title="Frank Branston" label="Frank Branston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297754" start="68365" end="68379" title="Health Concern" label="Health Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315470" start="68462" end="68471" title="Jury Team" label="Jury Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421227" start="68628" end="68663" title="Official Monster Raving Loony Party" label="Official Monster Raving Loony Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q46337" start="68754" end="68763" title="manifesto" label="manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225114" start="68936" end="68961" title="political satire" label="satirical political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="69089" end="69102" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="69147" end="69160" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="69351" end="69361" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23057883" start="69598" end="69620" title="EU referendum campaign" label="EU referendum campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="69720" end="69733" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q20970375" start="69850" end="69864" title="Shadow Cabinet of Jeremy Corbyn" label="Shadow Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184760" start="69880" end="69899" title="2016 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q302763" start="69917" end="69929" title="Angela Eagle" label="Angela Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068024" start="69942" end="69973" title="First Secretary of State" label="Shadow First Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039982" start="69978" end="70039" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q390690" start="70107" end="70117" title="Owen Smith" label="Owen Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444357" start="70130" end="70177" title="Secretary of State for Work and Pensions" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Work and Pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q318471" start="70286" end="70298" title="Nigel Farage" label="Nigel Farage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462898" start="70494" end="70510" title="Jonathan Bartley" label="Jonathan Bartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9670" start="70515" end="70529" title="Caroline Lucas" label="Caroline Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687594" start="70740" end="70760" title="Progressive alliance (UK)" label="progressive alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="70820" end="70824" title="UKIP" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205126" start="70831" end="70842" title="Arron Banks" label="Arron Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="70874" end="70885" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="71093" end="71106" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="71189" end="71192" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="DUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="71209" end="71222" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="71418" end="71430" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044147" start="71435" end="71443" title="Prorogation in the United Kingdom" label="prorogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="71448" end="71466" title="British parliament" label="British parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550193" start="71554" end="71573" title="State Opening of Parliament" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q68544129" start="71591" end="71608" title="2019 British prorogation controversy" label="great controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="71859" end="71865" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q65086242" start="72026" end="72040" title="no-deal Brexit" label="no-deal Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q29077263" start="72156" end="72175" title="Brexit negotiations" label="Brexit negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="72347" end="72363" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="72397" end="72407" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="72445" end="72455" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178760" start="72467" end="72497" title="High Court in Northern Ireland" label="High Court in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="72593" end="72605" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15915170" start="72639" end="72660" title="elective dictatorship" label="elective dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q750061" start="73108" end="73119" title="Phillip Lee (politician)" label="Phillip Lee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73120" end="73137" title="Crossing the floor#Changing parties" label="crossed the floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="73241" end="73244" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="DUP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73579" end="73583" title="Whip (politics)#United Kingdom" label="whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="73595" end="73604" title="10 Downing Street" label="Number 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="73880" end="73896" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="73902" end="73920" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="73929" end="73942" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="73974" end="73987" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="74014" end="74026" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q327790" start="74028" end="74038" title="Jo Swinson" label="Jo Swinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="74051" end="74058" title="Lib Dem" label="Lib Dem"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476704" start="74119" end="74146" title="Brexit withdrawal agreement" label="Brexit withdrawal agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="74376" end="74388" title="Keir Starmer" label="Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="74589" end="74608" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="75058" end="75068" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376030" start="75753" end="75764" title="David Evans (political official)" label="David Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="76009" end="76012" title="Scottish National Party" label="SNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="76021" end="76036" title="Scottish Greens" label="Scottish Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q467112" start="76251" end="76269" title="Nicola Sturgeon" label="FM Nicola Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="76524" end="76545" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="76598" end="76613" title="Scottish Labour" label="Scottish Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="76699" end="76714" title="Democracy Index" label="Democracy Index"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76751" end="76765" title="Democracy Index#Definitions" label="full democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="76853" end="76876" title="V-Dem Democracy Indices" label="V-Dem Democracy Indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="77915" end="77936" title="UK Independence Party" label="UK Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="78119" end="78139" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="78168" end="78180" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="78196" end="78208" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="78239" end="78253" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="78371" end="78378" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="members"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="78404" end="78423" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="78427" end="78435" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="78440" end="78450" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="78830" end="78842" title="Eurosceptics" label="Eurosceptics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="79224" end="79228" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="79314" end="79334" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="79374" end="79395" title="UK Independence Party" label="UK Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704885" start="79413" end="79447" title="2004 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2004 European Parliament elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="79551" end="79561" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="79589" end="79602" title="Lisbon Treaty" label="Lisbon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454840" start="79686" end="79706" title="United Kingdom European Constitution referendum" label="to hold a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="79734" end="79757" title="Constitution for Europe" label="Constitution for Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="79835" end="79845" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="80069" end="80083" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q14214" start="80099" end="80119" title="Secretary of State (United Kingdom)" label="Secretaries of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375091" start="80133" end="80150" title="Royal prerogative in the United Kingdom" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="80158" end="80168" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677783" start="80178" end="80197" title="Act of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="primary legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="80233" end="80247" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="80249" end="80260" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="80370" end="80383" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225002" start="80393" end="80408" title="R (Miller) v Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union" label="the Miller case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="80486" end="80503" title="act of parliament" label="act of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530648" start="80681" end="80733" title="European Union (Notification of Withdrawal) Act 2017" label="European Union (Notification of Withdrawal) Act 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="80811" end="80823" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078496" start="80930" end="80944" title="Sir Tim Barrow" label="Sir Tim Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244867" start="80950" end="81018" title="Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the European Union" label="Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="81081" end="81092" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q946" start="81096" end="81107" title="Donald Tusk" label="Donald Tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q735587" start="81113" end="81146" title="President of the European Council" label="President of the European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="81190" end="81204" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8919" start="81243" end="81275" title="European Atomic Energy Community" label="European Atomic Energy Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q30192" start="81696" end="81699" title="GMT" label="GMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q104469222" start="81903" end="81940" title="EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement" label="EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="82097" end="82115" title="European Union law" label="European Union law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="82161" end="82177" title="EU Customs Union" label="EU Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="82187" end="82209" title="European single market" label="European single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q30192" start="82219" end="82222" title="GMT" label="GMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="82292" end="82316" title="African Development Bank" label="African Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="82318" end="82340" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q782942" start="82342" end="82357" title="Australia Group" label="Australia Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="82359" end="82393" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="Bank for International Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="82395" end="82418" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772571" start="82420" end="82446" title="Caribbean Development Bank" label="Caribbean Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="82463" end="82480" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="82482" end="82486" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="82488" end="82521" title="Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council" label="Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="82523" end="82571" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q192247" start="82573" end="82597" title="European Investment Bank" label="European Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="82599" end="82620" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="82622" end="82655" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720495" start="82657" end="82659" title="Group of Five" label="G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="82661" end="82663" title="G7" label="G6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="82665" end="82667" title="G7" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q37143" start="82669" end="82671" title="G8" label="G8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411881" start="82673" end="82676" title="Group of Ten (IMF)" label="G10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666759" start="82678" end="82686" title="International Mobile Satellite Organization" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153087" start="82688" end="82719" title="Inter-American Development Bank" label="Inter-American Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="82721" end="82755" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="82757" end="82810" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="82812" end="82853" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q848633" start="82855" end="82888" title="International Chamber of Commerce" label="International Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138589" start="82890" end="82938" title="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions" label="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="82940" end="82968" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="82970" end="83023" title="International Criminal Police Organization – Interpol" label="International Criminal Police Organization – Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="83025" end="83062" title="International Development Association" label="International Development Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="83064" end="83091" title="International Energy Agency" label="International Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="83093" end="83157" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="83159" end="83192" title="International Finance Corporation" label="International Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="83194" end="83241" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="International Fund for Agricultural Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="83243" end="83282" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="International Hydrographic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="83284" end="83317" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="83319" end="83354" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="83356" end="83383" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="83385" end="83416" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="83424" end="83464" title="International Organization for Migration" label="International Organization for Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="83483" end="83529" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="83537" end="83586" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15546770" start="83588" end="83643" title="International Telecommunications Satellite Organization" label="International Telecommunications Satellite Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="83656" end="83693" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="83701" end="83733" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501987" start="83735" end="83740" title="MONUC" label="MONUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="83742" end="83762" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="83778" end="83812" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q369760" start="83821" end="83842" title="Nuclear Energy Agency" label="Nuclear Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480793" start="83850" end="83873" title="Nuclear Suppliers Group" label="Nuclear Suppliers Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="83881" end="83935" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="83937" end="83989" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="83991" end="84043" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="84052" end="84083" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="84107" end="84124" title="Pacific Community" label="Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="84132" end="84162" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="Permanent Court of Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="84164" end="84170" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="84172" end="84186" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="84188" end="84238" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="84249" end="84294" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q659012" start="84308" end="84353" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Europe" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q32874" start="84355" end="84425" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142901" start="84427" end="84497" title="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific" label="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="84499" end="84544" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="84554" end="84604" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="United Nations Industrial Development Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q504557" start="84614" end="84669" title="United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo" label="United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064062" start="84679" end="84725" title="United Nations Iraq–Kuwait Observation Mission" label="United Nations Iraq–Kuwait Observation Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q487377" start="84736" end="84784" title="United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="84795" end="84833" title="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone" label="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q118922" start="84845" end="84887" title="United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia" label="United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q694772" start="84898" end="84941" title="United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus" label="United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q846656" start="84953" end="85031" title="United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East" label="United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="85041" end="85072" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="85093" end="85115" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q332358" start="85123" end="85129" title="UNTAET" label="UNTAET"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="85131" end="85153" title="Western European Union" label="Western European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q595208" start="85155" end="85184" title="World Confederation of Labour" label="World Confederation of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="85186" end="85212" title="World Customs Organization" label="World Customs Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="85214" end="85239" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="85241" end="85281" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="World Intellectual Property Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="85283" end="85316" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="85318" end="85342" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q146905" start="85344" end="85361" title="Zangger Committee" label="Zangger Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225235" start="85377" end="85396" title="Politics of England" label="Politics of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280915" start="85399" end="85427" title="Politics of Northern Ireland" label="Politics of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280749" start="85430" end="85450" title="Politics of Scotland" label="Politics of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280918" start="85453" end="85470" title="Politics of Wales" label="Politics of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903793" start="85473" end="85504" title="Anarchism in the United Kingdom" label="Anarchism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971390" start="85507" end="85519" title="British left" label="British left"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163013" start="85522" end="85556" title="Conservatism in the United Kingdom" label="Conservatism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11872677" start="85559" end="85591" title="Corruption in the United Kingdom" label="Corruption in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q111915429" start="85594" end="85637" title="Constitutional reform in the United Kingdom" label="Constitutional reform in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356385" start="85640" end="85656" title="Electoral reform" label="Electoral reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356438" start="85659" end="85703" title="Electoral registration in the United Kingdom" label="Electoral registration in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q126908821" start="85706" end="85762" title="Endorsements in the 2024 United Kingdom general election" label="Endorsements in the 2024 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225246" start="85765" end="85804" title="Far-left politics in the United Kingdom" label="Far-left politics in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399405" start="85807" end="85847" title="Far-right politics in the United Kingdom" label="Far-right politics in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969559" start="85850" end="85880" title="Islamism in the United Kingdom" label="Islamism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="85883" end="85895" title="Anti-fascism" label="Anti-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q278364" start="85898" end="85928" title="Post–World War II anti-fascism" label="Post–World War II anti-fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="85931" end="85970" title="Labour Party leadership of Keir Starmer" label="Labour Party leadership of Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969734" start="85973" end="86005" title="Liberalism in the United Kingdom" label="Liberalism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12754545" start="86008" end="86044" title="Libertarianism in the United Kingdom" label="Libertarianism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565025" start="86047" end="86109" title="List of British politicians who have acknowledged cannabis use" label="List of British politicians who have acknowledged cannabis use"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565026" start="86112" end="86182" title="List of elected British politicians who have changed party affiliation" label="List of elected British politicians who have changed party affiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225108" start="86185" end="86233" title="List of political scandals in the United Kingdom" label="List of political scandals in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634864" start="86236" end="86281" title="List of pressure groups in the United Kingdom" label="List of pressure groups in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663603" start="86284" end="86314" title="Lobbying in the United Kingdom" label="Lobbying in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134174" start="86317" end="86334" title="Make Votes Matter" label="Make Votes Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18922819" start="86337" end="86361" title="Parliament in the Making" label="Parliament in the Making"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280467" start="86364" end="86377" title="Radical Whigs" label="Radical Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307172" start="86380" end="86413" title="Referendums in the United Kingdom" label="Referendums in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307387" start="86416" end="86427" title="Reform Acts" label="Reform Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276646" start="86430" end="86461" title="Socialism in the United Kingdom" label="Socialism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357485" start="86464" end="86504" title="United Kingdom common framework policies" label="United Kingdom common framework policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q85729173" start="86533" end="86574" title="2010s in United Kingdom political history" label="2010s in United Kingdom political history"/>
<link wikidata="Q85737803" start="86577" end="86618" title="2020s in United Kingdom political history" label="2020s in United Kingdom political history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9367460" start="86621" end="86671" title="Politics of the United Kingdom in the 19th century" label="Politics of the United Kingdom in the 19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240397" start="86674" end="86706" title="Premiership of Margaret Thatcher" label="Premiership of Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841193" start="86709" end="86734" title="Premiership of John Major" label="Premiership of John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240404" start="86737" end="86762" title="Premiership of Tony Blair" label="Premiership of Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240395" start="86765" end="86792" title="Premiership of Gordon Brown" label="Premiership of Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240391" start="86795" end="86823" title="Premiership of David Cameron" label="Premiership of David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q27629645" start="86826" end="86852" title="Premiership of Theresa May" label="Premiership of Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q68630590" start="86855" end="86883" title="Premiership of Boris Johnson" label="Premiership of Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q114069870" start="86886" end="86910" title="Premiership of Liz Truss" label="Premiership of Liz Truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q114841869" start="86913" end="86939" title="Premiership of Rishi Sunak" label="Premiership of Rishi Sunak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="86984" end="87023" title="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography" label="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q973500" start="88113" end="88131" title="Jonathan Freedland" label="Jonathan Freedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q328892" start="88177" end="88189" title="Rory Stewart" label="Rory Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="88268" end="88296" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="88401" end="88405" title="Tory" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23660653" start="88447" end="88458" title="Never Trump" label="Never Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="88479" end="88495" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="88517" end="88522" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="88558" end="88571" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35874" start="88611" end="88616" title="humor" label="humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="88679" end="88684" title="Donald Trump" label="Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q131138" start="89015" end="89019" title="joke" label="joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="89244" end="89246" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824073" start="89281" end="89286" title="Media (communication)" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="89379" end="89387" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925193" start="89422" end="89425" title="lie" label="lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q118157" start="89750" end="89758" title="charisma" label="charisma"/>
<link wikidata="Q39078678" start="90432" end="90444" title="Martin Pugh (author)" label="Pugh, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="90452" end="90505" title="Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party" label="Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31727" wikidata="Q323138" url="?curid=31727" title="Economy of the United Kingdom">
<text>The United Kingdom has a highly developed social market economy. It is the sixth-largest national economy in the world measured by nominal gross domestic product (GDP), tenth-largest by purchasing power parity (PPP), and twentieth by nominal GDP per capita, constituting 3.1% of nominal world GDP.&lt;ref name=&quot;pwc.com/gx-projections&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The United Kingdom constituted 2.17% of world GDP by purchasing power parity (PPP) in 2024 estimates.
The United Kingdom has one of the most globalised economies and comprises England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. In 2022, the United Kingdom was the fifth-largest exporter in the world and the fourth-largest importer. It also had the fourth-largest outward foreign direct investment, and the fifteenth-largest inward foreign direct investment. In 2022, the United Kingdom&#x27;s trade with the European Union accounted for 42% of the country&#x27;s exports and 48% of its imports. The United Kingdom has a highly efficient and strong social security system, which comprises roughly 24.5% of GDP. 
The service sector dominates, contributing 82% of GDP; the financial services industry is particularly important, and London is the second-largest financial centre in the world. Edinburgh was ranked 17th in the world, and 6th in Europe for its financial services industry in 2021. The United Kingdom&#x27;s technology sector is valued at US$1 trillion, third behind the United States and China. The aerospace industry in the United Kingdom is the second-largest national aerospace industry. Its pharmaceutical industry, the tenth-largest in the world, plays an important role in the economy. Of the world&#x27;s 500 largest companies, 18 are headquartered in the UK. The economy is boosted by North Sea oil and gas production; its reserves were estimated at 2.5 billion barrels in 2021, although it has been a net importer of oil since 2005. There are significant regional variations in prosperity, with South East England and North East Scotland being the richest areas per capita. The size of London&#x27;s economy makes it the wealthiest city by GDP per capita in Europe. In 2021, the UK spent around 2.9% of GDP on research and development. 
In the 18th century, Britain was the first nation to industrialise. During the 19th century, through its expansive colonial empire and technological superiority, Britain had a preeminent role in the global economy, accounting for 9.1% of the world&#x27;s GDP in 1870. The Second Industrial Revolution was also taking place rapidly in the United States and the German Empire; this presented an increasing economic challenge for the UK, leading into the 20th century. The cost of fighting both the First and Second World Wars further weakened the UK&#x27;s relative position. Despite a relative decline in its global dominance, in the 21st century the UK retains the ability to project significant power and influence around the world.

Government involvement is primarily exercised by His Majesty&#x27;s Treasury, headed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and the Department for Business and Trade. Since 1979, management of the economy has followed a broadly laissez-faire approach. The Bank of England is the UK&#x27;s central bank, and since 1997 its Monetary Policy Committee has been responsible for setting interest rates, quantitative easing, and forward guidance.

==History==
===1945 to 1979===
The WWII net losses in British national wealth amounted to 18.6% (£4.595 billion) of the prewar wealth (£24.68 billion), at 1938 prices. After the Second World War, a new Labour government fully nationalised the Bank of England, civil aviation, telephone networks, railways, gas, electricity, and the coal, iron and steel industries, affecting 2.3 million workers. Post-war, the United Kingdom enjoyed a long period without a major recession; there was a rapid growth in prosperity in the 1950s and 1960s, with unemployment staying low and not exceeding 3.5% until the early 1970s. The annual rate of growth between 1960 and 1973 averaged 2.9%, although this figure was far behind some other European countries such as France, West Germany and Italy.

Deindustrialisation meant the closure of operations in mining, heavy industry, and manufacturing, resulting in the loss of highly paid working-class jobs. The UK&#x27;s share of manufacturing output had risen from 9.5% in 1830 during the Industrial Revolution to 22.9% in the 1870s. It fell to 13.6% by 1913, 10.7% by 1938, and 4.9% by 1973. Overseas competition, lack of innovation, trade unionism, the welfare state, loss of the British Empire, and cultural attitudes have all been put forward as explanations. It reached crisis point in the 1970s against the backdrop of a worldwide energy crisis, high inflation, and a dramatic influx of low-cost manufactured goods from Asia.

During the 1973 oil crisis (which saw oil prices quadruple), the 1973–74 stock market crash, and the secondary banking crisis of 1973–75, the British economy fell into the 1973–75 recession and the government of Edward Heath was ousted by the Labour Party under Harold Wilson, which had previously governed from 1964 to 1970. Wilson formed a minority government in March 1974 after the general election on 28 February ended in a hung parliament. Wilson secured a three-seat overall majority in a second election in October that year. The UK recorded weaker growth than many other European nations in the 1970s; even after the recession, the economy was blighted by rising unemployment and double-digit inflation, which exceeded 20% more than once and was rarely below 10% after 1973.

In 1976, the UK was forced to apply for a loan of £2.3 billion from the International Monetary Fund. Denis Healey, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, was required to implement public spending cuts and other economic reforms in order to secure the loan, and for a while the British economy improved, with growth of 4.3% in early 1979. Following the discovery of large North Sea oil reserves, the UK became a net exporter of oil by the end of the 1970s, which contributed to a massive appreciation of the pound, making exports in general more expensive and imports cheaper. Oil prices doubled between 1979 and 1980, further reducing manufacturing profitability. After the Winter of Discontent, when the UK was hit by numerous public sector strikes, the government of James Callaghan lost a vote of no confidence in March 1979. This triggered the general election on 3 May 1979 which resulted in Margaret Thatcher&#x27;s Conservative Party forming a new government.

===1979 to 1997===
A new period of neo-liberal economics began with this election. During the 1980s, many state-owned industries and utilities were privatised, taxes cut, trade union reforms passed and markets deregulated. GDP fell by 5.9% initially, but growth subsequently returned and rose to an annual rate of 5% at its peak in 1988, one of the highest rates of any country in Europe.

Thatcher&#x27;s modernisation of the economy was far from trouble-free; her battle with inflation, which in 1980 had risen to 21.9%, resulted in a substantial increase in unemployment from 5.3% in 1979 to over 10.4% by the start of 1982, peaking at nearly 11.9% in 1984 – a level not seen in Britain since the Great Depression. The rise in unemployment coincided with the early 1980s global recession, after which UK GDP did not reach its pre-recession rate until 1983. In spite of this, Thatcher was re-elected in June 1983 with a landslide majority. Inflation had fallen to 3.7%, while interest rates were relatively high at 9.56%. The increase in unemployment was largely due to the government&#x27;s economic policy which resulted in the closure of outdated factories and coal pits. Manufacturing in England and Wales declined from around 38% of jobs in 1961 to around 22% in 1981. This trend continued for most of the 1980s, with newer industries and the service sector enjoying significant growth. Many jobs were also lost as manufacturing became more efficient and fewer people were required to work in the sector. Unemployment had fallen below 3 million by the time of Thatcher&#x27;s third successive election victory in June 1987; and by the end of 1989 it was down to 1.6 million.

Britain&#x27;s economy slid into another global recession in late 1990; it shrank by a total of 6% from peak to trough, and unemployment increased from around 6.9% in spring 1990 to nearly 10.7% by the end of 1993. However, inflation dropped from 10.9% in 1990 to 1.3% three years later. The subsequent economic recovery was extremely strong, and unlike after the early 1980s recession, the recovery saw a rapid and substantial fall in unemployment, which was down to 7.2% by 1997, although the popularity of the Conservative government had failed to improve with the economic upturn. The government won a fourth successive election in 1992 under John Major, who had succeeded Thatcher in November 1990, but soon afterwards came Black Wednesday, which damaged the Conservative government&#x27;s reputation for economic competence, and from that stage onwards, the Labour Party was ascendant in the opinion polls, particularly in the immediate aftermath of Tony Blair&#x27;s election as party leader in July 1994 after the sudden death of his predecessor John Smith.

Despite two recessions, wages grew consistently by around 2% per year in real terms from 1980 until 1997, and continued to grow until 2008.

===1997 to 2009===
In May 1997, Labour, led by Tony Blair, won the general election after 18 years of Conservative government. The Labour Government inherited a strong economy with low inflation, falling unemployment, and a current account surplus. Blair ran on a platform of New Labour which was characterised largely by the continuation of neo-liberal economic policies, but also supporting a strong welfare state. In Britain it was largely viewed as a combination of socialist and capitalist policies, being dubbed &#x27;Third Way&#x27;. Four days after the election, Gordon Brown, the new Chancellor of the Exchequer, gave the Bank of England the freedom to control monetary policy, which until then had been directed by the government.

During Blair&#x27;s 10 years in office there were 40 successive quarters of economic growth, lasting until the second quarter of 2008. GDP growth, which had briefly reached 4% per year in the early 1990s, gently declining thereafter, was relatively anaemic compared to prior decades, such as the 6.5% per year peak in the early 1970s, although growth was smoother and more consistent. Annual growth rates averaged 2.68% between 1992 and 2007, with the finance sector accounting for a greater part than previously. The period saw one of the highest GDP growth rates of any developed economy and the strongest of any European nation. At the same time, household debt rose from £420 billion in 1994 to £1 trillion in 2004 and £1.46 trillion in 2008 – more than the entire GDP of the UK.

This extended period of growth ended in Q2 of 2008 when the United Kingdom entered the Great Recession brought about by the 2007–2008 financial crisis. The UK was particularly vulnerable to the crisis because its financial sector was the most highly leveraged of any major economy. Beginning with the collapse of Northern Rock, which was taken into public ownership in February 2008, other banks had to be partly nationalised. The Royal Bank of Scotland Group, at its peak the fifth-largest bank in the world by market capitalisation, was effectively nationalised in October 2008. By mid-2009, HM Treasury had a 70.33% controlling shareholding in RBS, and a 43% shareholding, through the UK Financial Investments Limited, in Lloyds Banking Group. The Great Recession, as it came to be known, saw unemployment rise from just over 1.6 million in January 2008 to nearly 2.5 million by October 2009.

In August 2008 the IMF warned that the country&#x27;s outlook had worsened due to a twin shock: financial turmoil and rising commodity prices. Both developments harmed the UK more than most developed countries, as it obtained revenue from exporting financial services while running deficits in goods and commodities, including food. In 2007, the UK had the world&#x27;s third largest current account deficit, due mainly to a large deficit in manufactured goods. In May 2008, the IMF advised the UK government to broaden the scope of fiscal policy to promote external balance. The UK&#x27;s output per hour worked was on a par with the average for the &quot;old&quot; EU-15 countries.

===2009 to 2020===
In March 2009, the Bank of England (BoE) cut interest rates to a then-historic low of 0.5% and began quantitative easing (QE) to boost lending and shore up the economy. The UK exited the Great Recession in Q4 of 2009 having experienced six consecutive quarters of negative growth, shrinking by 6.03% from peak to trough, making it the longest recession since records began and the deepest since World War II. Support for Labour slumped during the recession, and the general election of 2010 resulted in a coalition government being formed by the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats.

In 2011, household, financial, and business debts stood at 420% of GDP in the UK. As the world&#x27;s most indebted country, spending and investment were held back after the recession, creating economic malaise. However, it was recognised that government borrowing, which rose from 52% to 76% of GDP, had helped to avoid a 1930s-style depression. Within three years of the general election, government cuts aimed at reducing the budget deficit had led to public sector job losses well into six figures, but the private sector enjoyed strong jobs growth.

The 10 years following the Great Recession were characterised by extremes. In 2015, employment was at its highest since records began, and GDP growth had become the fastest in the Group of Seven (G7) and Europe, but workforce productivity was the worst since the 1820s, with any growth attributed to a fall in working hours. Output per hour worked was 18% below the average for the rest of the G7. Real wage growth was the worst since the 1860s, and the Governor of the Bank of England described it as a lost decade. Wages fell by 10% in real terms in the eight years to 2016, whilst they grew across the OECD by an average of 6.7%. For 2015 as a whole, the current account deficit rose to a record high of 5.2% of GDP (£96.2bn), the highest in the developed world. In Q4 2015, it exceeded 7%, a level not witnessed during peacetime since records began in 1772. The UK relied on foreign investors to plug the shortfall in its balance of payments. Homes had become less affordable, a problem exacerbated by QE, without which house prices would have fallen by 22%, according to the BoE&#x27;s own analysis.

A rise in unsecured household debt added to questions over the sustainability of the economic recovery in 2016. The BoE insisted there was no cause for alarm, despite having said two years earlier that the recovery was &quot;neither balanced nor sustainable&quot;. Following the UK&#x27;s 2016 decision to leave the European Union, the BoE cut interest rates to a new historic low of 0.25% for just over a year. It also increased the amount of QE since the start of the Great Recession to £435bn. By Q4 2018 net borrowing in the UK was the highest in the OECD at 5% of GDP. Households had been in deficit for an unprecedented nine quarters in a row. Since the Great Recession, the country was no longer making a profit on its foreign investments.

===2020 to present===

In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a temporary ban was imposed on non-essential business and travel in the UK. The BoE cut the interest rate to 0.1%. Economic growth had been weak before the crisis, with zero growth in Q4 2019. By May, 23% of the British workforce was furloughed (temporarily laid off). Government schemes were launched to help affected workers. In the first half of 2020, GDP shrank by 22.6%, the deepest recession in UK history and worse than any other G7 or European country. During 2020 the BoE purchased £450 billion of government bonds, taking the amount of quantitative easing since the start of the Great Recession to £895 billion. Overall, GDP shrank by 9.9% in 2020, making it the worst contraction since the Great Frost paralysed the economy in 1709.

In 2021 consumer price inflation (CPI) began rising sharply due to higher energy and transport costs. With annual inflation approaching 11%, the BoE gradually increased the base rate to 2.25% during the first nine months of 2022. The UK was not alone: global inflation rates were the highest in 40 years owing to the pandemic and Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine, though , the country had the highest domestic electricity prices and amongst the highest gas prices in Europe, contributing to a cost of living crisis. In February 2022 the BoE began quantitative tightening (a reversal of QE) by not renewing mature government bonds and in November started offloading bonds to private investors, signalling the end to an era of easy borrowing. In October 2022 year-on-year CPI was at 11.1%, the worst for 41 years, food price inflation was 16.2%, gas prices 130% and electricity 66%. 

In August 2023, the ONS revised its analysis of Britain&#x27;s economic performance and said that Britain&#x27;s GDP had surpassed its pre-COVID-19 size in the final quarter of 2021, a much earlier recovery from the pandemic than previously estimated and ahead of other big European countries. The British economy was 0.6% larger in the fourth quarter of 2021 than in the final quarter of 2019, compared with an earlier estimate that it was 1.2% smaller.

== Economic charts ==
==Government spending and economic management==
Government involvement in the economy is primarily exercised by HM Treasury, headed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. In recent years, the UK economy has been managed in accordance with principles of market liberalisation and low taxation and regulation. Since 1997, the Bank of England&#x27;s Monetary Policy Committee, headed by the Governor of the Bank of England, has been responsible for setting interest rates at the level necessary to achieve the overall inflation target for the economy that is set by the Chancellor each year. The Scottish Government, subject to the approval of the Scottish Parliament, has the power to vary the basic rate of income tax payable in Scotland by plus or minus 3 pence in the pound, though this power has not yet been exercised.

In the 20-year period from 1986/87 to 2006/07 government spending in the UK averaged around 40% of GDP. In July 2007, the UK had government debt at 35.5% of GDP. As a result of the 2007–2010 financial crisis and the late-2000s global recession, government spending increased to a historically high level of 48% of GDP in 2009–10, partly as a result of the cost of a series of bank bailouts. In terms of net government debt as a percentage of GDP, at the end of June 2014 public sector net debt excluding financial sector interventions was £1304.6 billion, equivalent to 77.3% of GDP. For the financial year of 2013–2014 public sector net borrowing was £93.7 billion. This was £13.0 billion higher than in the financial year of 2012–2013.

Taxation in the United Kingdom may involve payments to at least two different levels of government: local government and central government (HM Revenue &amp; Customs). Local government is financed by grants from central government funds, business rates, council tax, and, increasingly, fees and charges such as those from on-street parking. Central government revenues are mainly from income tax, national insurance contributions, value added tax, corporation tax and fuel duty.

==Sectors==

The UK&#x27;s Office for National Statistics&#x27; Blue Book divides the UK economy into 10 broad categories, to list their contribution to the UK economy in terms of Gross value added and employment income (as measured by employee compensation). These are

===Agriculture===
Agriculture in the UK is intensive, highly mechanised, and efficient by European standards. The country produces around 65% of its food needs. The self-sufficiency level was just under 50% in the 1950s, peaking at 80% in the 1980s, before declining to its present level at the turn of the 21st century. 

Agriculture added gross value of £12.18 billion to the economy in 2018, and around 467,000 people were employed in agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing. It contributes around 0.5% of the UK&#x27;s national GDP. Around two-thirds of production by value is devoted to livestock, and one-third to arable crops. The agri-food sector as a whole (agriculture and food manufacturing, wholesale, catering, and retail) was worth £120 billion and accounts for 4 million jobs in the UK.

===Construction===

The construction industry of the United Kingdom employed around 2.3 million people and contributed gross value of £123.2 billion to the economy in 2019.

One of the largest construction projects in the UK in recent years was Crossrail, costing an estimated £19 billion. It was the largest construction project in Europe. Opened in 2022, it is a new railway line running east to west through London and into the surrounding area, with a branch to Heathrow Airport. The main feature of the project is construction of 42 km (26 mi) of new tunnels connecting stations in central London. High Speed 2 between London and the West Midlands is one of Europe&#x27;s largest infrastructure projects. Crossrail 2 is a proposed rail route in the South East of England.

===Production industries===
====Electricity, gas and water====

This sector added gross value of £51.4 billion to the economy in 2018. The United Kingdom is expected to launch the building of new nuclear reactors to replace existing generators and to boost the UK&#x27;s energy reserves.

====Manufacturing====
In the 1970s, manufacturing accounted for 25 per cent of the economy. Total employment in manufacturing fell from 7.1 million in 1979 to 4.5 million in 1992 and only 2.7 million in 2016, when it accounted for 10% of the economy.

In 2023 according to the office of national statistics the manufacturing industry was worth £451.6 billion or $588 billion to the UK economy. 

Manufacturing has increased in 36 of the last 50 years and was twice in 2007 what it was in 1958.

In 2011 the UK manufacturing sector generated approximately £140.5 billion in gross value added and employed around 2.6 million people. Of the approximately £16 billion invested in R&amp;D by UK businesses in 2008, approximately £12 billion was by manufacturing businesses. In 2008, the UK was the sixth-largest manufacturer in the world measured by value of output.

In 2008 around 180,000 people in the UK were directly employed in the UK automotive manufacturing sector. In that year the sector had a turnover of £52.5 billion, generated £26.6 billion of exports and produced around 1.45 million passenger vehicles and 203,000 commercial vehicles. The UK is a major centre for engine manufacturing, and in 2008 around 3.16 million engines were produced in the country.

The aerospace industry of the UK is the second largest aerospace industry in the world (after the United States) and the largest in Europe. The industry employs around 113,000 people directly and around 276,000 indirectly and has an annual turnover of around £20 billion. British companies with a major presence in the industry include BAE Systems and Rolls-Royce (the world&#x27;s second-largest aircraft engine maker). European aerospace companies active in the UK include Airbus, whose commercial aircraft, space, helicopter and defence divisions employ over 13,500 people across more than 25 UK sites.

The pharmaceutical industry employs around 67,000 people in the UK and in 2007 contributed £8.4 billion to the UK&#x27;s GDP and invested a total of £3.9 billion in research and development. In 2007 exports of pharmaceutical products from the UK totalled £14.6 billion, creating a trade surplus in pharmaceutical products of £4.3 billion. The UK is home to GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca, respectively the world&#x27;s third- and seventh-largest pharmaceutical companies.

====Mining, quarrying and hydrocarbons====

The Blue Book 2013 reports that this sector added gross value of £31.4 billion to the UK economy in 2011. In 2007 the UK had a total energy output of 9.5 quadrillion Btus (10 exajoules), of which the composition was oil (38%), natural gas (36%), coal (13%), nuclear (11%) and other renewables (2%). In 2009, the UK produced 1.5 million barrels per day (bbl/d) of oil and consumed 1.7 million bbl/d. Production is now in decline and the UK has been a net importer of oil since 2005. As of 2010 the UK has around 3.1 billion barrels of proven crude oil reserves, the largest of any EU member state.

In 2009 the UK was the 13th largest producer of natural gas in the world and the largest producer in the EU. Production is now in decline and the UK has been a net importer of natural gas since 2004. In 2009 the UK produced 19.7 million tons of coal and consumed 60.2 million tons. In 2005 it had proven recoverable coal reserves of 171 million tons. It has been estimated that identified onshore areas have the potential to produce between 7 billion tonnes and 16 billion tonnes of coal through underground coal gasification (UCG). Based on current UK coal consumption, these volumes represent reserves that could last the UK between 200 and 400 years.

The UK is home to a number of large energy companies, including two of the six oil and gas &quot;supermajors&quot; – BP and Shell plc. The UK is also rich in a number of natural resources including coal, tin, limestone, iron ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum, lead and silica.

===Service industries===
The service sector is the dominant sector of the UK economy, and it accounted for 82% of GDP in 2023.

====Creative industries====
The creative industries accounted for 7% of gross value added (GVA) in 2005 and grew at an average of 6% per annum between 1997 and 2005. Key areas include London and the North West of England, which are the two largest creative industry clusters in Europe. According to the British Fashion Council, the fashion industry&#x27;s contribution to the UK economy in 2014 is £26 billion, up from £21 billion in 2009. The UK is home to the world&#x27;s largest advertising company, WPP.

====Education, health and social work====

According to The Blue Book 2013 the education sector added a gross value of £84.6 billion in 2011 whilst human health and social work activities added £104.0 billion in 2011.

In the UK the majority of the healthcare sector consists of the state funded and operated National Health Service (NHS), which accounts for over 80% of all healthcare spending in the UK and has a workforce of around 1.7 million, making it the largest employer in Europe, and putting it amongst the largest employers in the world. The NHS operates independently in each of the four constituent countries of the UK. The NHS in England is by far the largest of the four parts and had a turnover of £92.5 billion in 2008.

In 2007/08 higher education institutions in the UK had a total income of £23 billion and employed a total of 169,995 staff. In 2007/08 there were 2,306,000 higher education students in the UK (1,922,180 in England, 210,180 in Scotland, 125,540 in Wales and 48,200 in Northern Ireland).

====Financial and business services====

The UK financial services industry added gross value of £116.4 billion to the UK economy in 2011. The UK&#x27;s exports of financial and business services make a significant positive contribution towards the country&#x27;s balance of payments.

London is a major centre for international business and commerce and is one of the three &quot;command centres&quot; of the global economy (alongside New York City and Tokyo). 

There are over 500 banks with offices in London, and it is the leading international centre for banking, insurance, Eurobonds, transactions in foreign currencies and energy futures. London&#x27;s financial services industry is primarily based in the City of London and Canary Wharf. The City houses the London Stock Exchange, the London Metal Exchange, Lloyd&#x27;s of London, and the Bank of England. Canary Wharf began development in the 1980s and is now home to major financial institutions such as Barclays Bank, Citigroup and HSBC, as well as the UK Financial Services Authority. London is also a major centre for other business and professional services, and four of the six largest law firms in the world are headquartered there.

Several other major UK cities have large financial sectors and related services. Edinburgh has one of the largest financial centres in Europe and is home to the headquarters of Lloyds Banking Group, NatWest Group and Standard Life. Leeds is the UK&#x27;s largest centre for business and financial services outside London, and the largest centre for legal services in the UK after London.

According to a series of research papers and reports published in the mid-2010s, Britain&#x27;s financial firms provide sophisticated methods to launder billions of pounds annually, including money from the proceeds of corruption around the world as well as the world&#x27;s drug trade, thus making the city a global hub for illicit finance. According to a Deutsche Bank study published in March 2015, Britain was attracting circa one billion pounds of capital inflows a month not recorded by official statistics, up to 40 per cent probably originating from Russia, which implies misreporting by financial institutions, sophisticated tax avoidance, and the UK&#x27;s &quot;safe-haven&quot; reputation.

====Hotels and restaurants====
The Blue Book 2013 reports that this industry added gross value of £36.6 billion to the UK economy in 2011. InterContinental Hotels Group (IHG), headquartered in Denham, Buckinghamshire, is currently the world&#x27;s largest hotelier, owning and operating hotel brands such as InterContinental, Holiday Inn and Crowne Plaza.

==== Informal ==== 
A study in 2014 found that sex work and associated services added over £5 billion to the economy each year.

====Public administration and defence====
The Blue Book 2013 reports that this sector added gross value of £70.4 billion to the UK economy in 2011.

====Real estate and renting activities====
Notable real estate companies in the United Kingdom include British Land, Landsec and the Peel Group. The UK property market boomed for the seven years up to 2008, and in some areas property trebled in value over that period. The increase in property prices had a number of causes: low interest rates, credit growth, economic growth, rapid growth in buy-to-let property investment, foreign property investment in London and planning restrictions on the supply of new housing. 

In England and Wales between 1997 and 2016, average house prices increased by 259%, while earnings increased by 68%. An average home cost 3.6 times annual earnings in 1997 compared to 7.6 in 2016. Rent has nearly doubled as a share of GDP since 1985, and is now larger than the manufacturing sector. In 2014, rent and imputed rent – an estimate of how much home-owners would pay if they rented their home – accounted for 12.3% of GDP.

====Tourism====
With over 40 million visits in 2019, inbound tourism contributed £28.5 billion to the British economy, although just over half of that money was spent in London, which was the third most visited city in the world (21.7 million), behind second-placed Bangkok and first-placed Hong Kong.

The UK&#x27;s 10 most significant inbound tourism markets in 2019:

===== Effects of the COVID-19 pandemic =====
The travel restrictions and lockdowns necessitated by the pandemic negatively affected the entire hospitality/tourism section in 2020 with a 76% reduction in &quot;inbound tourism&quot; to the UK that year according to VisitBritain. The January 2021 forecast for the year indicated an estimate that visits from other nations would be up &quot;21% on 2020 but only 29% of the 2019 level&quot;. Some increase was expected during 2021, slowly at first; the tourism authority concluded that the number of visits was not expected to come &quot;even close to normal levels&quot;.

The same VisitBritain report also discussed the effects of the pandemic on domestic travel within the UK in 2020, citing a significant reduction in spending, for an estimated decline of 62% over the previous year. As of January 2021, the forecast for the year suggested that spending would increase by 79% over the previous year and that &quot;the value of spending will be back to 84% of 2019 levels&quot; by the end of 2021.

Some of the &quot;COVID-19 restrictions&quot; on domestic travel were to be loosened on 12 April 2021 and the UK planned to begin relaxing some restrictions on travel from other nations in mid May. The latter plan became less certain as of 8 April 2021 when sources in the European Union stated on that a &quot;third wave of the pandemic [was sweeping] the continent&quot;; the B117 variant was of particular concern. Two days earlier, PM Boris Johnson had made it clear that &quot;We don&#x27;t want to see the virus being reimported into this country from abroad&quot;. All travel restrictions ended on 18 March 2022.

====Transport, storage and communication====
The transport and storage industry added a gross value of £59.2 billion to the UK economy in 2011 and the telecommunication industry added a gross value of £25.1 billion in the same year.

The UK has a total road network of with of major roads, including of motorway. The railway infrastructure, in Great Britain, is owned by Network Rail which has of railway lines, of which is open for traffic. There are a further of track in Northern Ireland, owned and operated by Northern Ireland Railways. 

The government is to spend £56 billion on a new high-speed railway line, HS2, with the first phase from London to Birmingham costing £27 billion. Crossrail (later branded the Elizabeth line), which was completed and officially opened in 2022, is Europe&#x27;s largest infrastructure project with a £15 billion projected cost.

National Highways is the government-owned company responsible for trunk roads and motorways in England apart from the privately owned and operated M6 Toll. 

In the year from February 2017 to January 2018, UK airports handled a total of 284.8 million passengers. In that period the three largest airports were London Heathrow Airport (78.0 million passengers), Gatwick Airport (45.6 million passengers) and Manchester Airport (27.8 million passengers). Heathrow, located west of the capital, has the most international passenger traffic of any airport in the world. It is the hub for the UK flag carrier British Airways and Virgin Atlantic. London&#x27;s six commercial airports form the world&#x27;s largest city airport system measured by passenger traffic with 171 million passengers in 2017.

====Wholesale and retail trade====
This sector includes the motor trade, auto repairs, personal and household goods industries. The Blue Book 2013 reports that this sector added gross value of £151.8 billion to the UK economy in 2011.

As of 2016, high-street retail spending accounted for about 33% of consumer spending and 20% of GDP. Because 75% of goods bought in the United Kingdom are made overseas, the sector only accounts for 5.7% of gross value added to the British economy. Online sales account for 22% of retail spending in the UK, third highest in the world after China and South Korea, and double that of the United States.

The UK grocery market is dominated by four companies: Tesco (26.9% market share), Sainsbury&#x27;s (14.8%), Asda (14.3%) and Morrisons (8.8%) in March 2023, these supermarkets are known as the &quot;Big Four&quot;. However discount supermarkets such as Aldi and Lidl have grown in popularity, with Aldi&#x27;s market share now worth 9.9%.

London is a major retail centre and in 2010 had the highest non-food retail sales of any city in the world, with a total spend of around £64.2 billion. Outside of London, Manchester and Birmingham are also major retail destinations, the UK is also home to many large out of town shopping centres like Meadowhall, away from the main high streets in town and city centres. Whilst the big international names dominate most towns and cities have streets or areas with many often quirky independent businesses. The UK-based Tesco is the fourth-largest retailer in Europe measured by turnover (after Swartz, Aldi, and Carrefour in 2019).

==Currency==

London is the world capital for foreign exchange trading, with a global market share of 43.1% in 2019 of the daily $6.6 trillion global turnover. The highest daily volume, counted in trillions of US dollars, is reached when New York enters the trade.

Sterling is the currency of the UK, with its main unit, the pound, represented by the symbol &quot;£&#x27;. The Bank of England is the central bank, responsible for issuing currency. Banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland retain the right to issue their own notes, subject to retaining enough Bank of England notes in reserve to cover the issue. Sterling is also used as a reserve currency by other governments and institutions, and is the third-largest after the US dollar and the euro.

The UK chose not to join the euro at the currency&#x27;s launch. The government of former Prime Minister Tony Blair had pledged to hold a referendum to decide on membership should &quot;five economic tests&quot; be met. Until relatively recently there had been debate over whether or not the UK should abolish its currency and adopt the euro. In 2007 the Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, pledged to hold a public referendum based on certain tests he set as Chancellor of the Exchequer. When assessing the tests, Brown concluded that while the decision was close, the United Kingdom should not yet join the euro. He ruled out membership for the foreseeable future, saying that the decision not to join had been right for the UK and for Europe. In particular, he cited fluctuations in house prices as a barrier to immediate entry. Public opinion polls have shown that a majority of Britons have been opposed to joining the single currency for some considerable time, and this position has hardened further in the last few years. In 2005, more than half (55%) of the UK were against adopting the currency, while 30% were in favour. The possibility of joining the euro has become a non-issue since the referendum decision to withdraw from the European Union in 2016 and subsequent withdrawal in 2020.

===Exchange rates===
Average for each year, in US dollars and euros per pound; and inversely: £ per US$ and €. (Synthetic Euro XEU before 1999). These averages conceal wide intra-year spreads. The coefficient of variation gives an indication of this. It also shows the extent to which the pound tracks the euro or the dollar. Note the effect of Black Wednesday in late 1992 by comparing the averages for 1992 and for 1993.



: For consistency and comparison purposes, coefficient of variation is measured on both the &quot;per £&quot; ratios, although it is conventional to show the forex rates as dollars per £ and £ per euro.

==Economic variation within the United Kingdom==
=== Gross domestic product (2022) ===
Within the United Kingdom, England has the largest constituent economy measured by gross domestic product (GDP) according to the figures provided by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) for the year 2022, whilst Northern Ireland has the smallest, which is also in line with their respective population sizes. England also has the highest level of GDP per capita within the UK, whilst Wales has the lowest.
==== By English region ====

England constitutes the vast majority of the total UK population (84.3%) and an even larger proportion of the GDP (86.25%). Therefore a large part of the regional variation in the UK economy occurs within England itself. London, which is the capital of both the UK and England, has the largest regional economy in England as well as the highest GDP per capita, whilst North East England has both the smallest economy out of the regions as measured by total nominal GDP, as well as the lowest GDP per capita in England. 

Below is a list of the Regions of England by GDP and GDP per capita, also provided by the ONS for the year 2022. 
=== Gross value added (2020) ===
Excluding the effects of North Sea oil and gas (which is classified in official statistics as extra-regio), England has the highest gross value added (GVA) and Wales the lowest of the UK&#x27;s countries.

==== By English region ====
Within England, GVA per capita is highest in London. The following table shows the GVA per capita of the nine statistical regions of England.

==Trade==
The trade deficit (goods and services) narrowed £0.2 billion to £7.9 billion in the three months to November 2018 as both goods and services exports each increased £0.1 billion more than their respective imports.

Excluding erratic commodities (mainly aircraft) the total trade deficit widened £1.2 billion to £9.5 billion in the three months to November 2018.

Large increases in export prices of oil and aircraft drove the narrowing of the total trade deficit; removing the effect of inflation, the total trade deficit widened £0.3 billion to £6.5 billion in the three months to November 2018.

The trade in goods deficit widened £0.8 billion with EU countries and narrowed £0.9 billion with non-EU countries in the three months to November 2018, due mainly to increases in imports from EU countries and exports to non-EU countries.

The total trade deficit widened £4.1 billion in the 12 months to November 2018 due mainly to a £4.4 billion narrowing in the trade in services surplus.

After the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union, the negotiation of a trade deal between the UK and the European Union including her 27 member states might have the same status than third countries for statistics related to imports and exports with the UK:
* According to OEC World 2017 data, the EU-27-2020 could become/stay one of the notable partners of the UK, with exports from the UK reaching near $200B, close from the United States ($45B, and China $21B).
* According to OEC World 2017 data, the EU-27-2020 could become/stay one of the notable partners of the UK, with imports to the UK reaching near $330B, close from the United States ($46B, and China $58B).
UK economy received £1 billion to boost through innovative trade digitalisation act in July 2023. 

Trade deals being negotiated
* Canada–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement
* India–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement
* Gulf Cooperation Council–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement
* United Kingdom–United States Free Trade Agreement
* Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership
* * Accession of the United Kingdom to CPTPP

 Other Trade Deals 
* Free trade agreements of the United Kingdom

==Investment==
In 2013 the UK was the leading country in Europe for inward foreign direct investment (FDI) with $26.51bn. This gave it a 19.31% market share in Europe. In contrast, the UK was second in Europe for outward FDI, with $42.59bn, giving a 17.24% share of the European market.

In October 2017, the ONS revised the UK&#x27;s balance of payments, changing the net international investment position from a surplus of £469bn to a deficit of £22bn. Deeper analysis of outward investment revealed that much of what was thought to be foreign debt securities owned by British companies were actually loans to British citizens. Inward investment also dropped, from a surplus of £120bn in the first half of 2016 to a deficit of £25bn in the same period of 2017. The UK had been relying on a surplus of inward investment to make up for its long-term current account deficit. In April 2021, Lord Grimstone established the UK Investment Council to enhance UK inward investment and inform the trade policy of the UK by providing a forum for global investors to offer high-level advice to the government.

According to the Office for National Statistics, the UK is the biggest investor in America, and the second biggest in China.

== Mergers and acquisitions ==

Since 1985 103,430 deals with UK participation have been announced. There have been three major waves of increased M&amp;A activity (2000, 2007 and 2017; see graph &quot;M&amp;A in the UK&quot;). 1999 however, was the year with the highest cumulated value of deals (£490 bil, which is about 50% more than the current peak of 2017). The Finance industry and Energy &amp; Power made up most of the value from 2000 until 2018 (both about 15%).

Here is a list of the top 10 deals including UK companies. The Vodafone - Mannesmann deal is still the biggest deal in global history.
* In most cases both the acquiring and target companies have/had shareholders spread throughout the world, not only in the stated countries.

==European Union membership==
The proportion of the country&#x27;s exports going to the EU has fallen from 54 per cent to 47 per cent over the past decade. The total value of exports however, has increased in the same period from £130 billion (€160 billion) to £240 billion (€275 billion).

In June 2016 the UK voted to leave the EU in a national referendum on its membership of the EU. After the activation of Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty, the UK had been set to leave on Friday 29 March 2019. However the leave date was extended to Friday 12 April 2019 and then extended again to Thursday 31 October 2019, and then extended again until Friday 31 January 2020 with the ability to exit earlier. The future relationship between the UK and EU was under negotiation until the end of October 2019. UK economic growth slowed during 2019, with uncertainty over Brexit and a world economic slowdown blamed.

The UK left the EU in January 2020. On 16 July 2020, the government of UK affirmed that businesses across the United Kingdom, after the transition period ends, will continue to enjoy internal trade and jobs would remain protected against uncertain environment . From 1 January 2021, the powers which were previously exercised at an EU level in at least 70 policy areas were to directly transfer to the devolved administrations in Edinburgh, Cardiff and Belfast for the first time.

==Poverty==

The United Kingdom is a developed country with social welfare infrastructure, thus discussions surrounding poverty tend to use a relatively high minimum income compared to developing countries. Eurostat figures show that the numbers of Britons at risk of poverty has fallen to 15.9% in 2014, down from 17.1% in 2010 and 19% in 2005 (after social transfers were taken into account).
Poverty is countered in United Kingdom with the welfare state.

The poverty line in the UK is commonly defined as being 60% of the median household income. In 2007–2008, this was calculated to be £115 per week for single adults with no dependent children; £199 per week for couples with no dependent children; £195 per week for single adults with two dependent children under 14; and £279 per week for couples with two dependent children under 14. In 2007–2008, 13.5 million people, or 22% of the population, lived below this line. This is a higher level of relative poverty than all but four EU members. In the same year, 4.0 million children, 31% of the total, lived in households below the poverty line, after housing costs were taken into account. This is a decrease of 400,000 children since 1998–1999.

== Economic impacts of climate change ==
== Data ==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022–2027). Inflation below 5% is in green.

==See also==
* Economy of England 
* Economy of Scotland
* Economy of Wales
* Economy of Northern Ireland 
* Jobseeker&#x27;s Allowance 
* Universal Credit 
* Welfare state in the United Kingdom 
* Universal basic income in the United Kingdom 
* National Wealth Fund (United Kingdom)

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==

==Further reading==
* Gregg, Pauline. &quot;A Social and Economic History of Britain: 1760–1950&quot; (1950) online

==External links==
* Economy at the Office for National Statistics
* UK profile at the CIA World Factbook
* UK profile at The World Bank</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4" end="18" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="25" end="41" title="Developed country" label="highly developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="42" end="63" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="75" end="105" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="sixth-largest national economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="139" end="161" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="169" end="182" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="tenth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="186" end="209" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="221" end="230" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="twentieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="234" end="256" title="nominal GDP per capita" label="nominal GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q473750" start="287" end="296" title="world GDP" label="world GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235001" start="502" end="512" title="Trade-to-GDP ratio" label="globalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333670" start="537" end="544" title="Economy of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175225" start="546" end="554" title="Economy of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398585" start="556" end="561" title="Economy of Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405102" start="566" end="582" title="Economy of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q383715" start="620" end="642" title="List of countries by exports" label="fifth-largest exporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053969" start="664" end="687" title="List of countries by imports" label="fourth-largest importer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322611" start="720" end="727" title="List of countries by FDI abroad" label="outward"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="728" end="753" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072186" start="781" end="787" title="List of countries by received FDI" label="inward"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="865" end="879" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="1005" end="1027" title="Welfare state in the United Kingdom" label="social security system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1045" end="1065" title="Welfare state#Effects" label="roughly 24.5% of GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="1072" end="1086" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980748" start="1127" end="1154" title="Financial services industry of the United Kingdom" label="financial services industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1186" end="1192" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="1215" end="1231" title="financial centre" label="financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="1246" end="1255" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688454" start="1467" end="1507" title="aerospace industry in the United Kingdom" label="aerospace industry in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180755" start="1563" end="1586" title="Pharmaceutical industry in the United Kingdom" label="pharmaceutical industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998660" start="1761" end="1782" title="North Sea oil" label="North Sea oil and gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="1972" end="1990" title="South East England" label="South East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647853" start="1995" end="2014" title="North East Scotland (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="North East Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530359" start="2063" end="2084" title="Economy of London" label="London&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82370" start="2165" end="2183" title="List of sovereign states by research and development spending" label="around 2.9% of GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="2187" end="2211" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="2267" end="2280" title="industrialise" label="industrialise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="2329" end="2344" title="British Empire" label="colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217200" start="2486" end="2514" title="Second Industrial Revolution" label="Second Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="2574" end="2587" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="2710" end="2737" title="World war" label="First and Second World Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="2998" end="3025" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Treasury" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="3041" end="3068" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116726347" start="3078" end="3111" title="Department for Business and Trade" label="Department for Business and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="3174" end="3187" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="3202" end="3217" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="3235" end="3247" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q846262" start="3268" end="3293" title="Monetary Policy Committee (United Kingdom)" label="Monetary Policy Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q113581545" start="3327" end="3341" title="official bank rate" label="interest rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q874727" start="3343" end="3362" title="quantitative easing" label="quantitative easing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556980" start="3368" end="3384" title="forward guidance" label="forward guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724649" start="3583" end="3606" title="Attlee ministry" label="a new Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="3630" end="3645" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q69829" start="4137" end="4143" title="French Fourth Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="4145" end="4157" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4162" end="4167" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="4408" end="4429" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="4601" end="4615" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="4863" end="4878" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119313" start="4917" end="4943" title="1973–74 stock market crash" label="1973–74 stock market crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031773" start="4953" end="4988" title="secondary banking crisis of 1973–75" label="secondary banking crisis of 1973–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560230" start="5024" end="5041" title="1973–75 recession" label="1973–75 recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="5064" end="5076" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="5095" end="5107" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="5114" end="5127" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="5194" end="5213" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q119524" start="5238" end="5269" title="February 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="general election on 28 February"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="5281" end="5296" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="5348" end="5363" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="second election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="5709" end="5736" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q332360" start="5738" end="5750" title="Denis Healey" label="Denis Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="5757" end="5784" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="6003" end="6012" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247283" start="6306" end="6326" title="Winter of Discontent" label="Winter of Discontent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="6401" end="6416" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="6480" end="6510" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="general election on 3 May 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="6529" end="6546" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="6635" end="6646" title="neo-liberal" label="neo-liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="6748" end="6758" title="privatised" label="privatised"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="7300" end="7316" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326569" start="7362" end="7390" title="early 1980s recession" label="early 1980s global recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q918466" start="7487" end="7501" title="1983 United Kingdom general election" label="was re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q582577" start="7694" end="7709" title="economic policy" label="economic policy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7766" end="7775" title="Coal mining in the United Kingdom#Decline in volume" label="coal pits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394220" start="8316" end="8340" title="Early 1990s recession" label="another global recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="8930" end="8940" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q400500" start="9012" end="9027" title="Black Wednesday" label="Black Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="9147" end="9159" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="9239" end="9249" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q332377" start="9337" end="9347" title="John Smith (Labour Party leader)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="9423" end="9433" title="real terms" label="real terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q746687" start="9715" end="9730" title="Current account (balance of payments)" label="current account"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="9767" end="9777" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q494792" start="10015" end="10024" title="Third Way" label="Third Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="10062" end="10074" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="10161" end="10176" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769689" start="10618" end="10636" title="Annual growth rate" label="Annual growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164798" start="10883" end="10897" title="household debt" label="household debt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11058" end="11060" title="Calendar year#Quarters" label="Q2"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="11105" end="11120" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="11142" end="11168" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148384" start="11268" end="11277" title="leveraged" label="leveraged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130757" start="11331" end="11344" title="Northern Rock" label="Northern Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="11367" end="11383" title="public ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218598" start="11449" end="11477" title="Royal Bank of Scotland Group" label="Royal Bank of Scotland Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="11530" end="11551" title="market capitalisation" label="market capitalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="11612" end="11623" title="HM Treasury" label="HM Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11251919" start="11706" end="11738" title="UK Financial Investments Limited" label="UK Financial Investments Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152764" start="11743" end="11763" title="Lloyds Banking Group" label="Lloyds Banking Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095372" start="12299" end="12322" title="List of countries by current account balance" label="current account deficit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12582" end="12587" title="Statistics relating to enlargement of the European Union#1995 enlargement" label="EU-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q874727" start="12720" end="12739" title="quantitative easing" label="quantitative easing"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="12806" end="12821" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13014" end="13026" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="13085" end="13109" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="general election of 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="13122" end="13144" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="a coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="13187" end="13204" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164798" start="13216" end="13225" title="Household debt" label="household"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433120" start="13309" end="13330" title="Heavily indebted poor countries" label="most indebted country"/>
<link wikidata="Q874884" start="13401" end="13417" title="economic malaise" label="economic malaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="13451" end="13471" title="government borrowing" label="government borrowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599058" start="13530" end="13552" title="Great Depression in the United Kingdom" label="1930s-style depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="13662" end="13675" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="13718" end="13732" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="13942" end="13961" title="Group of Seven (G7)" label="Group of Seven (G7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q628895" start="13978" end="14000" title="workforce productivity" label="workforce productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579905" start="14216" end="14247" title="Governor of the Bank of England" label="Governor of the Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q746687" start="14420" end="14435" title="Current account (balance of payments)" label="current account"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="14688" end="14707" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689027" start="14726" end="14741" title="affordability of housing in the United Kingdom" label="less affordable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14931" end="14945" title="Sustainability#Economic sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625286" start="14953" end="14970" title="economic recovery" label="economic recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="15147" end="15170" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="UK&amp;#x27;s 2016 decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="15184" end="15198" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="15673" end="15690" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="16129" end="16131" title="G7" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324820" start="16199" end="16215" title="government bonds" label="government bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q600402" start="16393" end="16404" title="Great Frost" label="Great Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="16767" end="16800" title="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q112741811" start="16929" end="16952" title="2021–present United Kingdom cost of living crisis" label="a cost of living crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630916" start="16985" end="17008" title="quantitative tightening" label="quantitative tightening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="17341" end="17344" title="Office for National Statistics" label="ONS"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="17911" end="17922" title="HM Treasury" label="HM Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q846262" start="18143" end="18168" title="Monetary Policy Committee (United Kingdom)" label="Monetary Policy Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q113581545" start="18250" end="18264" title="official bank rate" label="interest rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="18748" end="18763" title="government debt" label="government debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="18776" end="18779" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="18800" end="18826" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2010 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18835" end="18862" title="Late-2000s recession in Europe#United Kingdom" label="late-2000s global recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391288" start="18985" end="19008" title="2008 United Kingdom bank rescue package" label="series of bank bailouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559695" start="19022" end="19064" title="Debt-to-GDP ratio" label="net government debt as a percentage of GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308200" start="19358" end="19388" title="Taxation in the United Kingdom" label="Taxation in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q166559" start="19499" end="19523" title="HM Revenue &amp;amp; Customs" label="HM Revenue &amp;amp; Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066108" start="19596" end="19610" title="business rates" label="business rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q322148" start="19612" end="19623" title="council tax" label="council tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q334379" start="19680" end="19697" title="decriminalised parking enforcement" label="on-street parking"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="19743" end="19753" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q647883" start="19755" end="19773" title="national insurance" label="national insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912726" start="19789" end="19804" title="Value Added Tax (United Kingdom)" label="value added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149560" start="19806" end="19821" title="United Kingdom corporation tax" label="corporation tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954672" start="19826" end="19835" title="fuel duty" label="fuel duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="19865" end="19895" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19902" end="19911" title="United_Kingdom_National_Accounts_%E2%80%93_The_Blue_Book" label="Blue Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q994873" start="20018" end="20035" title="Gross value added" label="Gross value added"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="20152" end="20161" title="intensive agriculture" label="intensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520981" start="20170" end="20180" title="mechanised agriculture" label="mechanised"/>
<link wikidata="Q173113" start="20732" end="20738" title="agronomy" label="arable"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="21160" end="21169" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="21381" end="21397" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q798868" start="21518" end="21530" title="High Speed 2" label="High Speed 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q802096" start="21625" end="21636" title="Crossrail 2" label="Crossrail 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056338" start="22915" end="22949" title="Automotive industry in the United Kingdom" label="UK automotive manufacturing sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688454" start="23254" end="23282" title="aerospace industry of the UK" label="aerospace industry of the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="23586" end="23597" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q243278" start="23602" end="23613" title="Rolls-Royce plc" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="23725" end="23731" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180755" start="23861" end="23884" title="Pharmaceutical industry in the United Kingdom" label="pharmaceutical industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="23978" end="23981" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="24022" end="24046" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q212322" start="24214" end="24229" title="GlaxoSmithKline" label="GlaxoSmithKline"/>
<link wikidata="Q731938" start="24234" end="24245" title="AstraZeneca" label="AstraZeneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q211580" start="24541" end="24545" title="British thermal unit" label="Btus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571404" start="25469" end="25504" title="Underground coal gasification" label="underground coal gasification (UCG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330390" start="25725" end="25735" title="supermajor" label="supermajor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="25745" end="25747" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="25752" end="25761" title="Shell plc" label="Shell plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="25932" end="25946" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="26063" end="26082" title="creative industries" label="creative industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="26230" end="26251" title="North West of England" label="North West of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318049" start="26535" end="26538" title="WPP plc" label="WPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="26850" end="26873" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="27141" end="27162" title="Countries of the United Kingdom" label="constituent countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251481" start="27178" end="27192" title="NHS in England" label="NHS in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980748" start="27611" end="27641" title="Financial services industry of the United Kingdom" label="UK financial services industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="27830" end="27849" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3681519" start="27881" end="27903" title="international business" label="international business"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="28002" end="28015" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="28020" end="28025" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068725" start="28146" end="28154" title="Eurobond (international)" label="Eurobond"/>
<link wikidata="Q15214531" start="28196" end="28210" title="International Petroleum Exchange" label="energy futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="28280" end="28294" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q124377" start="28299" end="28311" title="Canary Wharf" label="Canary Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="28333" end="28354" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q952937" start="28360" end="28381" title="London Metal Exchange" label="London Metal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430712" start="28383" end="28405" title="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London" label="Lloyd&amp;#x27;s of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="28532" end="28545" title="Barclays Bank" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="28547" end="28556" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q190464" start="28561" end="28565" title="HSBC" label="HSBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q638053" start="28585" end="28613" title="Financial Services Authority" label="Financial Services Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="28849" end="28858" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152764" start="28945" end="28965" title="Lloyds Banking Group" label="Lloyds Banking Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218598" start="28967" end="28980" title="NatWest Group" label="NatWest Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q471958" start="28985" end="28998" title="Standard Life" label="Standard Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="29000" end="29005" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="29302" end="29309" title="Money laundering" label="launder"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="29376" end="29386" title="corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="29432" end="29442" title="Illegal drug trade" label="drug trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="29715" end="29721" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424962" start="29999" end="30028" title="InterContinental Hotels Group" label="InterContinental Hotels Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825730" start="30168" end="30184" title="InterContinental" label="InterContinental"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717882" start="30186" end="30197" title="Holiday Inn" label="Holiday Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746220" start="30202" end="30214" title="Crowne Plaza" label="Crowne Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q919646" start="30598" end="30610" title="British Land" label="British Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q506160" start="30612" end="30619" title="Landsec" label="Landsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756466" start="30628" end="30638" title="Peel Group" label="Peel Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003341" start="30899" end="30918" title="buy-to-let" label="property investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571373" start="30962" end="30983" title="planning restrictions" label="planning restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008068" start="31334" end="31346" title="imputed rent" label="imputed rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366507" start="32087" end="32099" title="VisitBritain" label="VisitBritain"/>
<link wikidata="Q104376647" start="33249" end="33261" title="Lineage B.1.1.7" label="B117 variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="33310" end="33323" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="33863" end="33875" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="33966" end="33982" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="34006" end="34031" title="Northern Ireland Railways" label="Northern Ireland Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q798868" start="34108" end="34111" title="HS2" label="HS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="34149" end="34159" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="34181" end="34190" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="34210" end="34224" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760006" start="34362" end="34379" title="National Highways" label="National Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="34387" end="34411" title="government-owned company" label="government-owned company"/>
<link wikidata="Q458051" start="34509" end="34516" title="M6 Toll" label="M6 Toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="34672" end="34695" title="London Heathrow Airport" label="London Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="34723" end="34738" title="Gatwick Airport" label="Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694" start="34769" end="34787" title="Manchester Airport" label="Manchester Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="34966" end="34981" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q32277" start="34986" end="35001" title="Virgin Atlantic" label="Virgin Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434924" start="35608" end="35619" title="value added" label="value added"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="35852" end="35857" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q152096" start="35880" end="35896" title="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s" label="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q297410" start="35906" end="35910" title="Asda" label="Asda"/>
<link wikidata="Q922344" start="35923" end="35932" title="Morrisons" label="Morrisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q125054" start="36051" end="36055" title="Aldi" label="Aldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q151954" start="36060" end="36064" title="Lidl" label="Lidl"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="36309" end="36319" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="36324" end="36334" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915446" start="36439" end="36449" title="Meadowhall Shopping Centre" label="Meadowhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q712034" start="36732" end="36738" title="Schwarz Gruppe" label="Swartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q125054" start="36740" end="36744" title="Aldi" label="Aldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q217599" start="36750" end="36759" title="Carrefour" label="Carrefour"/>
<link wikidata="Q66076" start="36817" end="36833" title="foreign exchange" label="foreign exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="36981" end="36991" title="US dollars" label="US dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="37009" end="37017" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="37037" end="37045" title="pound sterling" label="Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q249306" start="37136" end="37137" title="£" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q756202" start="37410" end="37426" title="reserve currency" label="reserve currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="37555" end="37559" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="37631" end="37641" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="37664" end="37674" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3677292" start="37712" end="37731" title="five economic tests" label="five economic tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q49958" start="38359" end="38371" title="opinion poll" label="opinion poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q221828" start="38933" end="38951" title="XEU" label="Synthetic Euro XEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q623738" start="39018" end="39042" title="coefficient of variation" label="coefficient of variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q400500" start="39166" end="39181" title="Black Wednesday" label="Black Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333670" start="39565" end="39572" title="Economy of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="39621" end="39643" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="39691" end="39721" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405102" start="39754" end="39770" title="Economy of Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398585" start="39926" end="39931" title="Economy of Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q48091" start="40521" end="40539" title="Regions of England" label="Regions of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q994873" start="40777" end="40794" title="gross value added" label="gross value added"/>
<link wikidata="Q994873" start="40895" end="40898" title="Gross value added" label="GVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="40924" end="40930" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q48091" start="40989" end="41019" title="statistical regions of England" label="statistical regions of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q124077718" start="42840" end="42882" title="Canada–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement" label="Canada–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q124048162" start="42885" end="42926" title="India–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement" label="India–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q124260343" start="42929" end="42989" title="Gulf Cooperation Council–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement" label="Gulf Cooperation Council–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357767" start="42992" end="43041" title="United Kingdom–United States Free Trade Agreement" label="United Kingdom–United States Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q48852287" start="43044" end="43113" title="Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership" label="Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q118273748" start="43118" end="43158" title="Accession of the United Kingdom to CPTPP" label="Accession of the United Kingdom to CPTPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357827" start="43182" end="43225" title="Free trade agreements of the United Kingdom" label="Free trade agreements of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="43302" end="43327" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="43562" end="43581" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q779297" start="43596" end="43633" title="net international investment position" label="net international investment position"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="43773" end="43788" title="debt securities" label="debt securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q746687" start="44077" end="44092" title="Current account (balance of payments)" label="current account"/>
<link wikidata="Q23887856" start="44117" end="44131" title="Gerry Grimstone, Baron Grimstone of Boscobel" label="Lord Grimstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q127163550" start="44148" end="44169" title="UK Investment Council" label="UK Investment Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="44346" end="44376" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="46442" end="46444" title="EU" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="46540" end="46549" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="46551" end="46558" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="46563" end="46570" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="46629" end="46646" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="46799" end="46807" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="47035" end="47048" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333670" start="48005" end="48023" title="Economy of England" label="Economy of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175225" start="48027" end="48046" title="Economy of Scotland" label="Economy of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398585" start="48049" end="48065" title="Economy of Wales" label="Economy of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405102" start="48068" end="48095" title="Economy of Northern Ireland" label="Economy of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11232643" start="48099" end="48125" title="Jobseeker&amp;#x27;s Allowance" label="Jobseeker&amp;#x27;s Allowance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893931" start="48129" end="48145" title="Universal Credit" label="Universal Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="48149" end="48184" title="Welfare state in the United Kingdom" label="Welfare state in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10509130" start="48188" end="48232" title="Universal basic income in the United Kingdom" label="Universal basic income in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q110921497" start="48236" end="48273" title="National Wealth Fund (United Kingdom)" label="National Wealth Fund (United Kingdom)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155026" start="48340" end="48354" title="Gregg, Pauline" label="Gregg, Pauline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="48471" end="48501" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="48522" end="48540" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="48557" end="48571" title="The World Bank" label="The World Bank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31728" wikidata="Q7696083" url="?curid=31728" title="Telecommunications in the United Kingdom">
<text>Telecommunications in the United Kingdom have evolved from the early days of the telegraph to modern fibre broadband and high-speed 5G networks.

==History==

National Telephone Company (NTC) was a British telephone company from 1881 until 1911, which brought together smaller local companies in the early years of the telephone. Under the Telephone Transfer Act 1911 it was taken over by the General Post Office (GPO) in 1912.

The telephone service in the United Kingdom was originally provided by private companies and local city councils, but by 1912–13 all except the telephone service of Kingston upon Hull, Yorkshire and Guernsey had been bought out by the General Post Office. Post Office Telephones also operated telephone services in Jersey and the Isle of Man until 1969 when the islands took over responsibility for their own postal and telephone services. Post Office Telephones was reorganised in 1980–81 as &quot;British Telecommunications&quot; (&quot;British Telecom&quot;, or &quot;BT&quot;), and was the first nationalised industry to be privatised by the Conservative government. The civil telecoms monopoly ended when Mercury Communications arrived in 1983.

Broadcasting of radio and television was a duopoly of the BBC and Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA): these two organisations controlled all broadcast services, and directly owned and operated the broadcast transmitter sites. Mobile phone and Internet services did not then exist. Broadcast transmitters, which belonged to the BBC and IBA, were privatised during the 1990s and now belong to Babcock International and Arqiva. 

British Rail Telecommunications was created in 1992 by British Rail (BR). It was the largest private telecoms network in Britain, consisting of 17,000 route kilometres of fibre optic and copper cable which connected every major city and town in the country and provided links to continental Europe through the Channel Tunnel. BR also operated its own national trunked radio network providing dedicated train-to-shore mobile communications, and in the early 1980s BR helped establish Mercury Communications&#x27;, now C&amp;WC, core infrastructure by laying a resilient &#x27;figure-of-eight&#x27; fibre optic network alongside Britain&#x27;s railway lines, spanning London, Bristol, Birmingham, Leeds and Manchester.

Regulation of communications has changed many times during the same period, and most of the bodies have been merged into Ofcom, the independent regulator and competition authority for the UK communications industries.

==Infrastructure==

===Domestic trunk infrastructure===
All communications trunks are now digital. Most are carried via national optical fibre networks. There are several companies with national fibre networks, including BT, Level 3 Communications, Virgin Media, Cable &amp; Wireless, Easynet and Thus. Microwave links are used up to the 155 Mbit/s level, but are seldom cost-effective at higher bit rates.

===International trunks===
The UK is a focal point for many of the world&#x27;s submarine communications cables, which are now mostly digital optical fibre cables.

===Broadcast transmission===
Arqiva provide services for content contribution, coding and multiplexing, distribution to the transmitter sites as well as maintaining the national transmitter network itself for television.

Arqiva&#x27;s radio network transmits 380 analogue and 300 digital radio stations across the UK via 1,450 radio transmitter sites. They operate the two commercial national multiplexes – Digital One and Sound Digital – and provide transmission services to the BBC for their national DAB (Digital Audio Broadcasting) multiplex as well as spectrum planning expertise for small-scale DAB license applicants. They also provide managed transmission services (MTS) and network access (NA) services for both analogue and digital channels from over 1,450 sites across the UK and they also provide contribution, coding and multiplexing and distribution for national and local DAB multiplexes.

== Services ==

===Television and radio broadcasting===

====Radio====
In 1998, there were 663 radio broadcast stations: 219 on AM, 431 on FM and 3 on shortwave. There were 84.5 million radio receiver sets (1997). Today there are around 600 licensed radio stations in the UK. 

====Television====
Currently, the United Kingdom has a collection of free-to-air, free-to-view and subscription services over a variety of distribution media, through which there are hundreds of channels for consumers as well as on-demand content. 

Since 24 October 2012, all television broadcasts in the United Kingdom have been in a digital format, following the end of analogue transmissions in Northern Ireland. Digital content is delivered via terrestrial, satellite and cable, as well as over IP. 

===Internet===
The country code top-level domain for United Kingdom web pages is codice_1. Nominet UK is the codice_2. Network Information Centre and second-level domains must be used.

At the end of 2004, 52% of households (12.6 million) were reported to have access to the internet (Source: Office for National Statistics Omnibus Survey). broadband connections accounted for 50.7% of all internet connections in July 2005, with one broadband connection being created every ten seconds. Broadband connections grew by nearly 80% in 2004. In 1999, there were 364 Internet service providers (ISPs). Public libraries also provide access to the internet, sometimes for a fee.

In 2017, 90% of households were reported to have access to an internet connection. This percentage shows an increase in internet access from 80% in 2012 and 61% in 2007.

== Mobile telephony ==

===Mobile phone networks===
;Timeline

====First generation networks====
* Cellnet was originally jointly owned by British Telecom and Securicor. BT eventually bought out Securicor&#x27;s stake. The network became BT Cellnet and was then demerged to become O2.

* Vodafone.

Both companies ran ETACS analogue mobile phone networks.

====2G====
2G is being phased out and replaced with 4G and 5G. The four mobile network operators have agreed to switch off their 2G networks by 2033.

====3G====
The four 2G companies all won 3G licences in a competitive auction, as did a new entrant known as Hutchison 3G, which branded its network as 3. 

3G networks were rolled-out during the early 2000s. They made it possible to access the internet through a mobile phone for the first time.

Mobile network operators are in the process of switching off their 3G networks. EE, Vodafone and Three have completed their switch-offs, with O2 expected to follow in 2025, starting with the City of Durham in April.

====4G====
4G/Long-term evolution (LTE) services are extensive. EE launched their 4G network in October 2012, using part of their existing 1800 MHz spectrum. O2 launched its 4G network on 29 August 2013, initially in London, Leeds and Bradford with a further 13 cities added by the end of 2013. Vodafone commenced its 4G services on 29 August 2013, initially in London with 12 more cities added by the end of 2013. Three commenced 4G services in London, Birmingham, Manchester, Reading, Wolverhampton and the Black country in December 2013 albeit with a limited number of subscribers to evaluate its implementation. Full rollout to remaining subscribers commenced on 5 February 2014 on a phased basis via a silent SIM update. As a condition of acquiring part of EE&#x27;s 1800MHz spectrum for 4G use, Three were unable to use it until October 2013.

====5G====
5G is currently being rolled-out by mobile network operators. The first commercial networks went live in major UK cities in 2019.

EE was the first to launch their 5G network, initially in London, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Belfast, Birmingham and Manchester on 30 May 2019, followed by Vodafone in Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Glasgow, Manchester, Liverpool and London on 3 July 2019. Three launched their 5G service on 19 August 2019, initially for broadband customers in London. O2 was the last network to launch a 5G network; the rollout of which began in October 2019, starting with Belfast, Cardiff, Edinburgh, London, Slough and Leeds.

==== Numbers ====
When mobile cellular networks were first rolled out, there were various numbers beginning 03 through 09 in use, these being interspersed between the various existing geographic area codes. As part of the Big Number Change, all mobile (as well as pager and personal) numbers were brought together under the 07 range. The table below shows the initial ranges of numbers that were allocated as part of the new 07 range, which began on 30 September 1999.
=== Mobile phone services ===

There are four mobile network operators in the United Kingdom - O2, EE, Vodafone, and Three.

The number of active mobile subscriptions (excluding M2M) was 89.6 million at the end of Q2 2024, up 2.1 million (2.4%) from the year before.

In 2011 there were 82 million subscriptions in the UK. There were 76 million in 2008 and 55 million in January 2005.

All of the mobile network operators sell mobile phone services directly. In addition, there are a large number of mobile virtual network operators (MVNOs). Examples include Tesco Mobile, spusu, Lebara, and SMARTY. 

== Fixed telephony ==

===Landlines===
BT is still the main provider of fixed telephone lines and it has a universal service obligation, although companies can contract Openreach to install a phone line on their behalf, rather than telling the customer to get BT to install it, then transfer over.

Sky is the second biggest player in the residential telephone line market. Other companies provide fixed telephone services such as Virgin Media, Vodafone and EE.

In Q2 2024, the total number of fixed voice lines (including PSTN, ISDN and VoIP) was 25.4 million, a fall of 2.6% compared to the previous year. Total fixed-originated call volumes decreased by 1.22 billion minutes (21.5%) to 4.46 billion minutes.

The switched telephone network (both PSTN and ISDN) is due to be turned off on 31 January 2027, after customers are moved to voice over IP services.

====Numbering====
There is a set numbering plan for phone numbers within the United Kingdom, which is regulated by the Office of Communications (Ofcom), which replaced the Office of Telecommunications (Oftel) in 2003. Each number consists of an area code – one for each of the large towns and cities and their surroundings – and a subscriber number – the individual number.
== Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies==
* Telecommunications in Anguilla
* Telecommunications in Antarctica (including the British Antarctic Territory)
* Telecommunications in Bermuda
* Telecommunications in the British Indian Ocean Territory
* Telecommunications in the British Virgin Islands
* Telecommunications in the Cayman Islands
* Telecommunications in the Falkland Islands
* Telecommunications in Gibraltar
* Telecommunications in Guernsey
* Telecommunications in the Isle of Man
* Telecommunications in Jersey
* Telecommunications in Montserrat
* Telecommunications in the Pitcairn Islands
* Telecommunications in Saint Helena, Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha
* Telecommunications in South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
* Telecommunications in the Turks and Caicos Islands

==See also==
* BBC
* British and Irish Magnetic Telegraph Company
* British Telegraph Company
* BT Group, formerly British Telecom 
* Electric Telegraph Company
* Electrical telegraphy in the United Kingdom
* Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA)
* Institute of Telecommunications Professionals
* List of dialling codes in the United Kingdom
* List of postcode areas in the United Kingdom (about 120)
* List of postcode districts in the United Kingdom (about 2900)
* List of telephone operating companies
* London District Telegraph Company
* National Telephone Company (NTC), 1881 to 1911 
* Telegraph Act 1868
* Telephone Transfer Act 1911 
** General Post Office (GPO)
** Post Office Telecommunications
* United Kingdom Telegraph Company

==References==
==Bibliography==
* CIA World Factbook

==Further reading==
* Cave, Martin. &quot;The evolution of telecommunications regulation in the UK.&quot; &quot;European Economic Review&quot; 41.3-5 (1997): 691–699.
* Cave, Martin. &quot;40 years on: An account of innovation in the regulation of UK telecommunications, in 3½ chapters.&quot; &quot;Telecommunications Policy&quot; 41.10 (2017): 904–915.
* Cave, Martin, and Peter Williamson. &quot;Entry, competition, and regulation in UK telecommunications.&quot; &quot;Oxford Review of Economic Policy&quot; 12.4 (1996): 100–121.
* Green, James R., and David J. Teece. &quot;Four approaches to telecommunications deregulation and competition: the USA, the UK, Australia and New Zealand.&quot; &quot;Industrial and Corporate Change&quot; 7.4 (1998): 623–635.
* Hindmarch-Watson, Katie. &quot;Embodying Telegraphy in Late Victorian London.&quot; &quot;Information &amp; Culture&quot; 55#1 (2020): 10–29. online
* Hindmarch-Watson, Katie. &quot;Serving a Wired World: London&#x27;s Telecommunications Workers and the Making of an Information Capital&quot; (2020).
* Morris, Robert C. &quot;Between the Lines: A Personal History of the British Public Telephone and Telecommunications Service 1870–1990&quot; (1994), we;; illustrated.
* Potter, Simon J. &quot;Broadcasting Empire: The BBC and the British World, 1922-1970&quot; (2012)
* Scannell, Paddy, and David Cardiff. &quot;A Social History of British Broadcasting: Volume 1 – 1922–1939, Serving the Nation&quot; (1991)
* Solomon, Jonathan H. &quot;Telecommunications Evolution in the UK.&quot; &quot;Telecommunications Policy&quot; 10.3 (1986): 186–192.
* Spiller, Pablo T., and Ingo Vogelsang. &quot;The institutional foundations of regulatory commitment in the UK: the case of telecommunications.&quot; &quot;Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics (JITE)/Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft&quot; (1997): 607–629.
* Starr, Paul. &quot;The creation of the media: Political origins of modern communications&quot; (2004).
* Standage, Tom. &quot;The Victorian Internet: The remarkable story of the telegraph and the nineteenth century&#x27;s online pioneers&quot; (Phoenix, 1998) online

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696083" start="0" end="40" title="Telecommunications in the United Kingdom" label="Telecommunications in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="81" end="90" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978890" start="159" end="185" title="National Telephone Company" label="National Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696484" start="340" end="367" title="Telephone Transfer Act 1911" label="Telephone Transfer Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="393" end="418" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office (GPO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="458" end="472" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="594" end="612" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="614" end="623" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="628" end="636" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="664" end="683" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="744" end="750" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="759" end="770" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="968" end="983" title="British Telecom" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818605" start="1139" end="1161" title="Mercury Communications" label="Mercury Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1238" end="1241" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016439" start="1246" end="1280" title="Independent Broadcasting Authority" label="Independent Broadcasting Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q385426" start="1577" end="1598" title="Babcock International" label="Babcock International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795774" start="1603" end="1609" title="Arqiva" label="Arqiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970938" start="1613" end="1644" title="British Rail Telecommunications" label="British Rail Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="1668" end="1680" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="1784" end="1795" title="optical fiber" label="fibre optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="1800" end="1806" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1904" end="1910" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="1923" end="1937" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="2452" end="2457" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020782" start="2625" end="2631" title="trunk (telecommunications)" label="trunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="2640" end="2647" title="Digital data" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="2679" end="2692" title="optical fiber" label="optical fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="2771" end="2773" title="BT Group" label="BT"/>
<link wikidata="Q322320" start="2775" end="2797" title="Level 3 Communications" label="Level 3 Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199764" start="2799" end="2811" title="Virgin Media" label="Virgin Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507083" start="2813" end="2833" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Worldwide" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046634" start="2835" end="2842" title="Easynet" label="Easynet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799478" start="2847" end="2851" title="Thus (company)" label="Thus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971141" start="2853" end="2862" title="British Telecom microwave network" label="Microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351621" start="2892" end="2898" title="Mbit/s" label="Mbit/s"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="2946" end="2954" title="bit rate" label="bit rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="3038" end="3068" title="submarine communications cable" label="submarine communications cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="3100" end="3113" title="optical fiber" label="optical fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795774" start="3152" end="3158" title="Arqiva" label="Arqiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q222903" start="3213" end="3225" title="multiplexing" label="multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795774" start="3345" end="3358" title="Arqiva" label="Arqiva&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275940" start="3531" end="3542" title="Digital One" label="Digital One"/>
<link wikidata="Q25022034" start="3547" end="3560" title="Sound Digital" label="Sound Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3604" end="3607" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q815830" start="3632" end="3658" title="Digital Audio Broadcasting" label="Digital Audio Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="4157" end="4159" title="Amplitude modulation" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="4168" end="4170" title="Frequency modulation" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q848981" start="4376" end="4387" title="free-to-air" label="free-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421111" start="4389" end="4401" title="free-to-view" label="free-to-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="4406" end="4418" title="Pay television" label="subscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="4832" end="4861" title="country code top-level domain" label="country code top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343226" start="4904" end="4914" title="Nominet UK" label="Nominet UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067653" start="4932" end="4958" title="Network Information Centre" label="Network Information Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q903444" start="4963" end="4982" title="second-level domain" label="second-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="5088" end="5096" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="5106" end="5136" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098279" start="5137" end="5151" title="Opinions (Omnibus) Survey" label="Omnibus Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="5154" end="5163" title="Broadband Internet access" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="5375" end="5400" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="5410" end="5426" title="Public libraries" label="Public libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="5796" end="5811" title="BT Group" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264100" start="5816" end="5825" title="Securicor" label="Securicor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072245" start="5938" end="5940" title="O2 (United Kingdom)" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939294" start="5945" end="5953" title="Vodafone UK" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783276" start="5975" end="5980" title="ETACS" label="ETACS"/>
<link wikidata="Q407009" start="6274" end="6286" title="Hutchison 3G" label="Hutchison 3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840922" start="6317" end="6318" title="Three UK" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q179815" start="6654" end="6668" title="Durham, England" label="City of Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="6715" end="6718" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322942" start="6744" end="6746" title="EE (telecommunications)" label="EE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072245" start="6838" end="6840" title="O2 (UK)" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6897" end="6903" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="6905" end="6910" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="6915" end="6923" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7126" end="7132" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="7134" end="7144" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="7146" end="7156" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="7158" end="7165" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="7167" end="7180" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="7394" end="7397" title="Subscriber identity module" label="SIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906083" start="8401" end="8418" title="Big Number Change" label="Big Number Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="8694" end="8718" title="Mobile network operator" label="mobile network operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072245" start="8743" end="8745" title="O2 (UK)" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322942" start="8747" end="8749" title="EE (telecommunications)" label="EE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939294" start="8751" end="8759" title="Vodafone UK" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840922" start="8765" end="8770" title="Three UK" label="Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q251072" start="8826" end="8829" title="Machine to machine" label="M2M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="9148" end="9180" title="Mobile virtual network operator" label="mobile virtual network operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q12777405" start="9207" end="9219" title="Tesco Mobile" label="Tesco Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q51074647" start="9221" end="9226" title="spusu" label="spusu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428816" start="9228" end="9234" title="Lebara" label="Lebara"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508568" start="9240" end="9246" title="SMARTY" label="SMARTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480510" start="9357" end="9385" title="universal service" label="universal service obligation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096543" start="9419" end="9428" title="Openreach" label="Openreach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="9549" end="9552" title="Sky UK" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199764" start="9681" end="9693" title="Virgin Media" label="Virgin Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939294" start="9695" end="9703" title="Vodafone UK" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322942" start="9708" end="9710" title="EE (telecommunications)" label="EE"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="9774" end="9778" title="Public switched telephone network" label="PSTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q170397" start="9780" end="9784" title="ISDN" label="ISDN"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="9789" end="9793" title="Voice over IP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="10000" end="10004" title="PSTN" label="PSTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q170397" start="10009" end="10013" title="ISDN" label="ISDN"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="10088" end="10101" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="10258" end="10263" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079777" start="10315" end="10320" title="Oftel" label="Oftel"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="10490" end="10510" title="British Overseas Territories" label="Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="10515" end="10533" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695884" start="10538" end="10568" title="Telecommunications in Anguilla" label="Telecommunications in Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120401" start="10571" end="10603" title="Telecommunications in Antarctica" label="Telecommunications in Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q165783" start="10619" end="10646" title="British Antarctic Territory" label="British Antarctic Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695901" start="10650" end="10679" title="Telecommunications in Bermuda" label="Telecommunications in Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q43448" start="10682" end="10738" title="Telecommunications in the British Indian Ocean Territory" label="Telecommunications in the British Indian Ocean Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696063" start="10741" end="10789" title="Telecommunications in the British Virgin Islands" label="Telecommunications in the British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696064" start="10792" end="10832" title="Telecommunications in the Cayman Islands" label="Telecommunications in the Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696070" start="10835" end="10877" title="Telecommunications in the Falkland Islands" label="Telecommunications in the Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154201" start="10880" end="10911" title="Telecommunications in Gibraltar" label="Telecommunications in Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q111943081" start="10914" end="10944" title="Telecommunications in Guernsey" label="Telecommunications in Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154217" start="10947" end="10984" title="Telecommunications in the Isle of Man" label="Telecommunications in the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695958" start="10987" end="11015" title="Telecommunications in Jersey" label="Telecommunications in Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695986" start="11018" end="11050" title="Telecommunications in Montserrat" label="Telecommunications in Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="11053" end="11095" title="Telecommunications in the Pitcairn Islands" label="Telecommunications in the Pitcairn Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154211" start="11098" end="11171" title="Communications in Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha" label="Telecommunications in Saint Helena, Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha"/>
<link wikidata="Q35086" start="11174" end="11240" title="Telecommunications in South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands" label="Telecommunications in South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696080" start="11243" end="11293" title="Telecommunications in the Turks and Caicos Islands" label="Telecommunications in the Turks and Caicos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="11310" end="11313" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117620" start="11316" end="11360" title="British and Irish Magnetic Telegraph Company" label="British and Irish Magnetic Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083277" start="11363" end="11388" title="British Telegraph Company" label="British Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="11391" end="11399" title="BT Group" label="BT Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357511" start="11429" end="11455" title="Electric Telegraph Company" label="Electric Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083277" start="11458" end="11501" title="Electrical telegraphy in the United Kingdom" label="Electrical telegraphy in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016439" start="11504" end="11538" title="Independent Broadcasting Authority" label="Independent Broadcasting Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q123266171" start="11547" end="11592" title="Institute of Telecommunications Professionals" label="Institute of Telecommunications Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q13458428" start="11595" end="11639" title="List of dialling codes in the United Kingdom" label="List of dialling codes in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805183" start="11642" end="11686" title="List of postcode areas in the United Kingdom" label="List of postcode areas in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634569" start="11701" end="11749" title="List of postcode districts in the United Kingdom" label="List of postcode districts in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q666926" start="11765" end="11802" title="List of telephone operating companies" label="List of telephone operating companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671067" start="11805" end="11838" title="London District Telegraph Company" label="London District Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978890" start="11841" end="11867" title="National Telephone Company" label="National Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696220" start="11891" end="11909" title="Telegraph Act 1868" label="Telegraph Act 1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696484" start="11912" end="11939" title="Telephone Transfer Act 1911" label="Telephone Transfer Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="11944" end="11969" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office (GPO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="11973" end="12003" title="Post Office Telecommunications" label="Post Office Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083277" start="12006" end="12038" title="United Kingdom Telegraph Company" label="United Kingdom Telegraph Company"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="31729" wikidata="Q1365401" url="?curid=31729" title="Transport in the United Kingdom">
<text>Transport in the United Kingdom is facilitated by road, rail, air and water networks. Some aspects of transport are a devolved matter, with each of the countries of the United Kingdom having separate systems under separate governments. 

A radial road network totals of main roads, of motorways and of paved roads. The National Rail network of 10,072 route miles (16,116 km) in Great Britain and 189 route miles (303 route km) in Northern Ireland carries over 18,000 passenger and 1,000 freight trains daily. Urban rail networks exist in all cities and towns with dense bus and light rail networks. There are many regional and international airports, with Heathrow Airport in London being the second busiest in the world and busiest in Europe. UK ports handled of goods in 2019.

==Transport trends==
Since 1952 (the earliest date for which comparable figures are available), the United Kingdom saw a growth of car use, which increased its modal share, while the use of buses declined, and railway use has grown. However, since the 1990s, rail has started increasing its modal share at the expense of cars, increasing from 5% to 10% of passenger-kilometres travelled. This coincided with the privatisation of British Rail. In 1952, 27% of distance travelled was by car or taxi; with 42% being by bus or coach and 18% by rail. A further 11% was by bicycle and 3% by motorcycle. The distance travelled by air was negligible.

Passenger transport continues to grow strongly. Figures from the Department for Transport show in 2018 people made 4.8 billion local bus passenger journeys, 58% of all public transport journeys. There were 1.8 billion rail passenger journeys in the United Kingdom. Light rail and tram travel also continued to grow, to the highest level (0.3 million journeys) since comparable records began in 1983. In 2018/19, there was £18.1bn of public expenditure on railways, an increase of 12% (£1.9bn). The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transport in London and Manchester is 10 minutes.

Freight transport has undergone similar changes, increasing in volume and shifting from railways onto the road. In 1953 89 billion tonne kilometres of goods were moved, with rail accounting for 42%, road 36% and water 22%. By 2010 the volume of freight moved had more than doubled to 222 billion tonne kilometres, of which 9% was moved by rail, 19% by water, 5% by pipeline and 68% by road. Despite the growth in tonne kilometres, the environmental external costs of trucks and lorries in the UK have reportedly decreased. Between 1990 and 2000, there has been a move to heavier goods vehicles due to major changes in the haulage industry including a shift in sales to larger articulated vehicles. A larger than average fleet turnover has ensured a swift introduction of new and cleaner vehicles in the UK.

The adoption of plug-in electric vehicles is widely supported by the British government through the plug-in car and van grants schemes and other incentives. About 745,000 light-duty plug-in electric vehicles had been registered in the UK up until December 2021, consisting of 395,000 all-electric vehicles and 350,000 plug-in hybrids. In 2019, the UK had the second largest European stock of light-duty plug-in vehicles in use after Norway.

===Greenhouse gas emissions===
A critical issue for the transport sector is its contribution to climate change emissions. Transport became the largest sector of greenhouse gas emissions in 2016. Since 1990 carbon dioxide emissions from transport in the UK have reduced by just 4% compared with an economy-wide reduction of 43%. Emissions from surface transport accounted for 22% of carbon dioxide emissions in the UK in 2019 with cars being responsible for over half of that. The Climate Change Committee has suggested that transport will need to cut its emissions to zero by a mix of demand reduction, the adoption of more efficient combustion engine vehicles, changing to non-car based modes and electrification of the fleet.

==Air transport==

There are 471 airports and airfields in the UK. There are also 11 heliports. Heathrow Airport is the largest airport by traffic volume in the country, is owned by Heathrow Airport Holdings, and also one of the top 10 world&#x27;s busiest airports by passenger numbers. Gatwick Airport is the second largest airport, is owned by Global Infrastructure Partners, and the third largest is Manchester Airport, which is run by Manchester Airport Group, which also owns various other airports.

Other major airports include Stansted Airport in Essex and Luton Airport in Bedfordshire, both about north of London, Birmingham Airport in Solihull, Newcastle Airport, Liverpool Airport, and Bristol Airport.

Outside England, Cardiff, Edinburgh and Belfast, are the busiest airports serving Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland respectively.

The largest airline in the United Kingdom by passenger traffic is easyJet, whereas British Airways is largest by fleet size and international destinations. Others include Jet2, TUI Airways and Virgin Atlantic.

==Rail transport==
The rail network in the United Kingdom consists of two independent parts, that of Northern Ireland and that of Great Britain. Since 1994, the latter has been connected to mainland Europe via the Channel Tunnel. The network of Northern Ireland is connected to that of the Republic of Ireland. The National Rail network of in Great Britain and 189 route miles (303 route km) in Northern Ireland carries 1.7 billion passengers and 110 million tonnes of freight annually. 

Urban rail networks are also well developed in London and several other cities. There were once over of rail network in the UK. The UK was ranked eighth among national European rail systems in the 2017 European Railway Performance Index assessing intensity of use, quality of service and safety. 

=== Great Britain ===
The rail network in Great Britain is the oldest such network in the world. The system consists of five high-speed main lines (the West Coast, East Coast, Midland, Great Western and Great Eastern), which radiate from London and other major cities to the rest of the country, augmented by regional rail lines and dense commuter networks within cities and other high-speed lines. High Speed 1 is operationally separate from the rest of the network, and is built to the same standard as the TGV system in France.

The world&#x27;s first passenger railway running on steam was the Stockton and Darlington Railway, opened on 27 September 1825. Just under five years later the world&#x27;s first intercity railway was the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, designed by George Stephenson and opened by the Prime Minister, the Duke of Wellington on 15 September 1830. The network grew rapidly as a patchwork of literally hundreds of separate companies during the Victorian era, which eventually was consolidated into just four by 1922, as the boom in railways ended and they began to lose money. 

Eventually, the entire system came under state control in 1948, under the British Transport Commission&#x27;s Railway Executive. After 1962 it came under the control of the British Railways Board; then British Railways (later British Rail), and the network was reduced to less than half of its original size by the infamous Beeching cuts of the 1960s when many unprofitable branch lines were closed. Several stations and lines have since been reopened in England and Wales.

In 1994 and 1995, British Rail was split into infrastructure, maintenance, rolling stock, passenger and freight companies, which were privatised from 1996 to 1997. The privatisation has delivered very mixed results, with healthy passenger growth, mass refurbishment of infrastructure, investment in new rolling stock, and safety improvements being offset by concerns over network capacity and the overall cost to the taxpayer, which has increased due to growth in passenger numbers. While the price of anytime and off-peak tickets has increased, the price of Advance tickets has dramatically decreased in real terms: the average Advance ticket in 1995 cost £9.14 (in 2014 prices) compared to £5.17 in 2014.

In Great Britain, the infrastructure (track, stations, depots and signalling chiefly) is owned and maintained by Network Rail, a body of the Department for Transport. Passenger services are operated by mostly public train-operating companies (TOCs), with private franchises awarded by the Department for Transport (in England), Transport Scotland, and Transport for Wales. Examples include Avanti West Coast, Great Western Railway and East Midlands Railway. Some other passenger TOCs make use of open-access contracts or concessionary contracts for their operations, such as Hull Trains or Merseyrail, respectively. Freight trains are operated by freight operating companies, such as DB Cargo UK, which are commercial operations unsupported by the government. Most train operating companies do not own the locomotives and coaches that they use to operate passenger services. Instead, they are required to lease these from the three rolling stock companies (ROSCOs), with train maintenance carried out by companies such as Bombardier and Alstom.

Rail passenger revenue in 2018/19 increased in real terms year-on-year. In 2018/19, there was £18.1bn of public expenditure on railways, an increase of 12%. There were 1.8 billion rail passenger journeys in England. Light rail and tram travel also continued to grow, to the highest level (0.3 million journeys) since comparable records began in 1983.

In Great Britain there are of gauge track, reduced from a historic peak of over . Of this, is electrified and is double or multiple tracks. The maximum scheduled speed on the regular network has historically been around on the InterCity lines. On High Speed 1, trains are now able to reach the speeds of French TGVs. High Speed 2, under construction, is a wide high-speed line connecting London with Birmingham Curzon Street. The Network North programme consists of hundreds of transport projects mostly in Northern England and Midlands, including new high-speed lines linking up major cities and railway improvements. To cope with increasing passenger numbers, there is a large ongoing programme of upgrades to the network, including Thameslink, Crossrail, electrification of lines, in-cab signalling, new inter-city trains and high-speed lines. Great British Railways is a planned state-owned public body that will oversee rail transport in Great Britain. The Office of Rail and Road is responsible for the economic and safety regulation of the UK&#x27;s railways.

===Northern Ireland===

In Northern Ireland, Northern Ireland Railways (NIR) both owns the infrastructure and operates passenger rail services. The Northern Ireland rail network is one of the few networks in Europe that carry no freight. It is publicly owned. NIR was united in 1996 with Northern Ireland&#x27;s two publicly owned bus operators – Ulsterbus and Metro (formally Citybus) – under the brand Translink. In Northern Ireland there is of track at gauge. of it is double track.

===International rail services===

Eurostar operates trains via the Channel Tunnel to France, Belgium and The Netherlands. The Enterprise which is a joint venture Northern Ireland Railways and Iarnród Éireann operates the cross boarder link between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.

===Rapid transit===
Three cities in the United Kingdom have rapid transit systems. The most well known is the London Underground (commonly known as the Tube), the oldest rapid transit system in the world which opened 1863. 

Another system also in London is the separate Docklands Light Railway. Although this is more of an elevated light metro system due to its lower passenger capacities; further, it is integrated with the Underground in many ways. Outside London, there is the Glasgow Subway which is the third oldest rapid transit system in the world. One other system, the Tyne &amp; Wear Metro (opened 1980), serves Newcastle, Gateshead, Sunderland, North Tyneside and South Tyneside, and has many similarities to a rapid transit system including underground stations, but is sometimes considered to be light rail. The Liverpool Overhead Railway (opened 1893) was one of the first metros in the world but was dismantled 1956-1958 after years of neglect because nobody was willing or able to provide the funds for maintenance and repairs.

===Urban rail===
Urban commuter rail networks are focused on many of the country&#x27;s major cities:
*Belfast – Belfast Suburban Rail
*Birmingham – West Midlands Railway
*Bristol – Great Western Railway 
*Cardiff – Valley Lines 
*Edinburgh – ScotRail
*Exeter – Great Western Railway 
*Glasgow – ScotRail
*Leeds – MetroTrain
*Liverpool – Merseyrail
*London – London Underground, London Overground, and Elizabeth line
*Manchester – Northern and TransPennine Express
*Newcastle – Tyne &amp; Wear Metro

They consist of several railway lines connecting city centre stations of major cities to suburbs and surrounding towns. Train services and ticketing are fully integrated with the national rail network and are not considered separate. In London, a route for Crossrail 2 has been safeguarded.

===Trams and light rail===
Tram systems were popular in the United Kingdom in the late 19th and early 20th century. However, with the rise of the car they began to be widely dismantled in the 1950s. By 1962 only the Blackpool tramway and the Glasgow Corporation Tramways remained; the final Glasgow service was withdrawn on 4 September 1962. Recent years have seen a revival the United Kingdom, as in other countries, of trams together with light rail systems.

Since the 1990s, a second generation of tram networks have been built and have started operating in Manchester in 1992, Sheffield in 1994, the West Midlands in 1999, South London in 2000, Nottingham in 2004 and Edinburgh in 2014, whilst the original trams in Blackpool were upgraded to second generation vehicles in 2012.

Four light rapid transit lines are opening in the Welsh Capital of Cardiff as part of the current South Wales Metro plan Phase 1 in 2023, which will reach as far out of the capital as Hirwaun, a town 31 miles (50 km) from Cardiff Bay, as well as three new lines planned to open by 2026.
==Road transport==
The road network in Great Britain, in 2006, consisted of of trunk roads (including of motorway), of principal roads (including of motorway), of &quot;B&quot; and &quot;C&quot; roads, and of unclassified roads (mainly local streets and access roads) – totalling .

Road is the most popular method of transport in the United Kingdom, carrying over 90% of motorised passenger travel and 65% of domestic freight. The major motorways and trunk roads, many of which are dual carriageway, form the trunk network which links all cities and major towns. These carry about one third of the nation&#x27;s traffic, and occupy about 0.16% of its land area.

The motorway system, which was constructed from the 1950s onwards. National Highways (a UK government-owned company) is responsible for maintaining motorways and trunk roads in England. Other English roads are maintained by local authorities. In Scotland and Wales roads are the responsibility of Transport Scotland, an executive agency of the Scottish Government, and the North and Mid Wales Trunk Road Agent and South Wales Trunk Road Agent on behalf of the Welsh Government respectively. Northern Ireland&#x27;s roads are overseen by the Department for Infrastructure Roads (DfI Roads). In London, Transport for London is responsible for all trunk roads and other major roads, which are part of the Transport for London Road Network.
Toll roads are rare in the United Kingdom, though there are a number of toll bridges. Road traffic congestion has been identified as a key concern for the future prosperity of the United Kingdom, and policies and measures are being investigated and developed by the government to reduce congestion. In 2003, the United Kingdom&#x27;s first toll motorway, the M6 Toll, opened in the West Midlands area to relieve the congested M6 motorway. Rod Eddington, in his 2006 report &quot;Transport&#x27;s role in sustaining the UK&#x27;s productivity and competitiveness&quot;, recommended that the congestion problem should be tackled with a &quot;sophisticated policy mix&quot; of congestion-targeted road pricing and improving the capacity and performance of the transport network through infrastructure investment and better use of the existing network. Congestion charging systems do operate in the cities of London and Durham and on the Dartford Crossing.

Driving is on the left. The usual maximum speed limit for cars and motorcycles is on motorways and dual carriageways. On 29 April 2015, the UK Supreme Court ruled that the government must take immediate action to cut air pollution, following a case brought by environmental lawyers at ClientEarth.

===Cycle infrastructure===

The National Cycle Network, created by the charity Sustrans, is the UK&#x27;s major network of signed routes for cycling. It uses dedicated bike paths as well as roads with minimal traffic, and covers , passing within a mile of half of all homes. Other cycling routes such as The National Byway, the Sea to Sea Cycle Route and local cycleways can be found across the country.

Segregated cycle paths are being installed in some cities in the UK such as London, Glasgow, Manchester, Bristol, Cardiff. In London, Transport for London has installed Cycleways.

==Road passenger transport==
===Buses===

Bus transport is widespread and local bus services cover the whole country. Since deregulation the majority (80% by the late 1990s) of these local bus companies have been taken over by one of the &quot;Big Five&quot; private transport companies: Arriva, FirstGroup, Go-Ahead Group, Mobico Group and Stagecoach Group. In Northern Ireland, coach, bus (and rail) services remain state-owned and are provided by Translink. Cities and regions such as Manchester and Nottingham have publicity owned bus networks and other transport.

===Coaches===

Coaches provide long-distance links throughout the UK: in England and Wales the majority of coach services are provided by National Express. Flixbus and Megabus run no-frills coach services in competition with National Express, the latter&#x27;s services in Scotland are operated in co-operation with Scottish Citylink. BlaBlaBus also operate to France and the Low Countries from London.

==Road freight transport==
In 2014, there were around 285,000 HGV drivers in the UK and in 2013 the trucking industry moved 1.6 billion tonnes of goods, generating £22.9 billion in revenue.

==Water transport==
Due to the United Kingdom&#x27;s island location, before the Channel Tunnel the only way to enter or leave the country (apart from air travel) was on water, except at the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.

===Ports and harbours===
About 95% of freight enters the United Kingdom by sea (75% by value). UK ports handled of goods in 2019.
, the five major ports that handled the most freight traffic were:
*Port of London, on the River Thames.
*Grimsby &amp; Immingham on the east coast
*Milford Haven, in south-west Wales
*Port of Liverpool on the west coast
*Port of Southampton, on the south coast

There are many other ports and harbours around the United Kingdom, including:

Aberdeen, Avonmouth, Barrow, Barry, Belfast, Boston, Bristol, Cairnryan, Cardiff, Dover, Edinburgh/Leith, Falmouth, Felixstowe, Fishguard, Glasgow, Gloucester, Grangemouth, Grimsby, Harwich, Heysham, Holyhead, Hull, Kirkwall, Larne, Liverpool, Londonderry, Manchester, Oban, Pembroke Dock, Peterhead, Plymouth, Poole, Port Talbot, Portishead, Portsmouth, Scapa Flow, Stornoway, Stranraer, Sullom Voe, Swansea, Tees (Middlesbrough), Tyne (Newcastle).

===Merchant marine===

For long periods of recent history, Britain had the largest registered merchant fleet in the world, but it has slipped down the rankings partly due to the use of flags of convenience. There are 429 ships of or over, making a total of (). These are split into the following types: bulk carrier 18, cargo ship 55, chemical tanker 48, container ship 134, liquefied gas 11, passenger ship 12, passenger/cargo ship 64, petroleum tanker 40, refrigerated cargo ship 19, roll-on/roll-off 25, vehicle carrier 3. 

===Ferries===

Ferries, both passenger only and passengers and vehicles, operate within the United Kingdom across rivers and stretches of water. In east London the Woolwich Ferry links the North and South Circular Roads. Gosport and Portsmouth are linked by the Gosport Ferry; Southampton and Isle of Wight are linked by ferry and fast Catamaran ferries; North Shields and South Shields on Tyneside are linked by the Shields Ferry; and the Mersey has the Mersey Ferry.

In Scotland, Caledonian MacBrayne provides passenger and RO-RO ferry services in the Firth of Clyde, to various islands of the Inner and Outer Hebrides from Oban and other ports. Orkney Ferries provides services within the Orkney Isles; and NorthLink Ferries provides services from the Scottish mainland to Orkney and Shetland, mainly from Aberdeen although other ports are also used. Ferries operate to Northern Ireland from Stranraer and Cairnryan to Larne and Belfast.

Holyhead, Pembroke Dock and Fishguard are the principal ports for ferries between Wales and Ireland. Heysham and Liverpool/Birkenhead have ferry services to the Isle of Man.

Passenger ferries operate internationally to nearby countries such as France, the Republic of Ireland, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Spain. Ferries usually originate from one of the following:
*Dover with services to Calais operated by P&amp;O Ferries, My Ferry Link and DFDS Seaways.
*Portsmouth International Port is the main hub for longer services on the Western Channel to Ouistreham, Le Havre, Cherbourg and Saint Malo in France, and Santander and Bilbao in Spain. Most services are operated by French company Brittany Ferries with some to Cherbourg and Le Havre by Condor Ferries and DFDS Seaways.
*Services from Plymouth operate to Santander (Spain) and Roscoff (France) with Brittany Ferries.
*Services from Weymouth and Poole operate to the Channel Islands with Condor Ferries and to Cherbourg (from Poole) with Brittany Ferries.
*Holyhead is the principal ferry port for services to Ireland, operated by Irish Ferries and Stena Line with some services originating from Pembroke.
*Hull and Harwich are the main hubs for services to the Netherlands.

More services from Ramsgate, Newhaven, Southampton, and Lymington operate to France, Belgium and the Isle of Wight.

Waterbuses operate on rivers in some of the country&#x27;s largest cities such as London (London River Services and Thames Clippers), Cardiff (Cardiff Waterbus) and Bristol (Bristol Ferry Boat).

===Other shipping===

Cruise ships depart from the United Kingdom for destinations worldwide, many heading for ports around the Mediterranean and Caribbean.The Cunard Line still offer a scheduled transatlantic service between Southampton and New York City with . The Solent is a world centre for yachting and home to largest number of private yachts in the world.
===Inland waterways===
Major canal building began in the United Kingdom after the onset of the Industrial Revolution in the 18th century. A large canal network was built and it became the primary method of transporting goods throughout the country; however, by the 1830s with the development of the railways, the canal network began to go into decline. There are currently of waterways in the United Kingdom and the primary use is recreational. is used for commerce and leisure.

==Education and professional development==
The United Kingdom also has a well-developed network of organisations offering education and professional development in the transport and logistics sectors. A number of universities offer degree programmes in transport, usually covering transport planning, engineering of transport infrastructure, and management of transport and logistics services. The Institute for Transport Studies at the University of Leeds is one such organisation.

Pupils in England and Wales can study transport and logistics in apprenticeship studies at further education and sixth form colleges. Professional development for those working in the transport and logistics sectors is provided by a number of Professional Institutes representing specific sectors. These include:

* Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport (CILT(UK))
* Chartered Institution of Highways and Transportation (CIHT)
* Chartered Institution of Railway Operators
* Transport Planning Society (TPS)

Through these professional bodies, transport planners and engineers can train for a number of professional qualifications, including:
* Chartered engineer
* Incorporated engineer
* Transport planning professional

==See also==
* British Royal Train
* British Transport Police
* List of closed railway lines in the United Kingdom
* Rail transport in Great Britain 
* Transport in England
* Transport in London
* Transport in Northern Ireland
* Transport in Scotland
* Transport in Wales

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1365401" start="0" end="31" title="Transport in the United Kingdom" label="Transport in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="118" end="126" title="Devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="152" end="183" title="countries of the United Kingdom" label="countries of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="319" end="332" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="656" end="672" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413618" start="940" end="951" title="modal share" label="modal share"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404257" start="1192" end="1221" title="privatisation of British Rail" label="privatisation of British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="1489" end="1513" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205234" start="3030" end="3055" title="Plug-in electric vehicle" label="plug-in electric vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483388" start="3166" end="3180" title="plug-in hybrid" label="plug-in hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022098" start="3281" end="3287" title="Plug-in electric vehicles in Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153040" start="3770" end="3794" title="Climate Change Committee" label="Climate Change Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q502074" start="4104" end="4112" title="heliport" label="heliport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="4115" end="4131" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q795363" start="4201" end="4226" title="Heathrow Airport Holdings" label="Heathrow Airport Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396578" start="4255" end="4283" title="world&amp;#x27;s busiest airport" label="world&amp;#x27;s busiest airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="4307" end="4322" title="Gatwick Airport" label="Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570413" start="4366" end="4396" title="Global Infrastructure Partners" label="Global Infrastructure Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694" start="4423" end="4441" title="Manchester Airport" label="Manchester Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747270" start="4459" end="4483" title="Manchester Airport Group" label="Manchester Airport Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8709" start="4555" end="4571" title="Stansted Airport" label="Stansted Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="4575" end="4580" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8712" start="4585" end="4598" title="Luton Airport" label="Luton Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="4602" end="4614" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8719" start="4644" end="4662" title="Birmingham Airport" label="Birmingham Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925858" start="4666" end="4674" title="Metropolitan Borough of Solihull" label="Solihull"/>
<link wikidata="Q8975" start="4676" end="4693" title="Newcastle International Airport" label="Newcastle Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8727" start="4695" end="4712" title="Liverpool John Lennon Airport" label="Liverpool Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8725" start="4718" end="4733" title="Bristol Airport" label="Bristol Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8994" start="4753" end="4760" title="Cardiff Airport" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8716" start="4762" end="4771" title="Edinburgh Airport" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8979" start="4776" end="4783" title="Belfast International Airport" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="4936" end="4943" title="easyJet" label="easyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="4953" end="4968" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140807" start="5041" end="5045" title="Jet2" label="Jet2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156859" start="5047" end="5058" title="TUI Airways" label="TUI Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q32277" start="5063" end="5078" title="Virgin Atlantic" label="Virgin Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="5271" end="5286" title="mainland Europe" label="mainland Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="5295" end="5309" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="5371" end="5390" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="5476" end="5492" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19889" start="6020" end="6030" title="West Coast Main Line" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q672271" start="6032" end="6042" title="East Coast Main Line" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931975" start="6044" end="6051" title="Midland Main Line" label="Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415063" start="6053" end="6066" title="Great Western Main Line" label="Great Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502917" start="6071" end="6084" title="Great Eastern Main Line" label="Great Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q277604" start="6267" end="6279" title="High Speed 1" label="High Speed 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q129337" start="6377" end="6380" title="TGV" label="TGV"/>
<link wikidata="Q375044" start="6466" end="6497" title="Stockton and Darlington Railway" label="Stockton and Darlington Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398696" start="6605" end="6637" title="Liverpool and Manchester Railway" label="Liverpool and Manchester Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q133614" start="6651" end="6668" title="George Stephenson" label="George Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="6707" end="6725" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="6843" end="6856" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246355" start="7052" end="7080" title="British Transport Commission" label="British Transport Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q920016" start="7151" end="7173" title="British Railways Board" label="British Railways Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="7204" end="7216" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q814018" start="7302" end="7315" title="Beeching cuts" label="Beeching cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q118206787" start="7445" end="7450" title="Rail transport in Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404257" start="7587" end="7597" title="Privatisation of British Rail" label="privatised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="8274" end="8286" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="8302" end="8326" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102188" start="8377" end="8402" title="train operating company" label="train-operating companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="8450" end="8474" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834896" start="8489" end="8507" title="Transport Scotland" label="Transport Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740007" start="8513" end="8532" title="Transport for Wales" label="Transport for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q68441695" start="8551" end="8568" title="Avanti West Coast" label="Avanti West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419438" start="8570" end="8591" title="Great Western Railway (train operating company)" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090907" start="8596" end="8617" title="East Midlands Railway" label="East Midlands Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096309" start="8657" end="8678" title="Open-access operator" label="open-access contracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q327209" start="8682" end="8705" title="Concession (contract)" label="concessionary contracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q779893" start="8736" end="8747" title="Hull Trains" label="Hull Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922100" start="8751" end="8761" title="Merseyrail" label="Merseyrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283931" start="8808" end="8835" title="freight operating company" label="freight operating companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q472941" start="8845" end="8856" title="DB Cargo UK" label="DB Cargo UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361255" start="9093" end="9116" title="Rolling stock company" label="rolling stock companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="9183" end="9193" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier"/>
<link wikidata="Q309084" start="9198" end="9204" title="Alstom" label="Alstom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="9589" end="9594" title="Standard gauge" label="gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q962977" start="9672" end="9678" title="Double track" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858578" start="9786" end="9795" title="InterCity (British Rail)" label="InterCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q277604" start="9806" end="9818" title="High Speed 1" label="High Speed 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q129337" start="9870" end="9873" title="TGV" label="TGV"/>
<link wikidata="Q798868" start="9876" end="9888" title="High Speed 2" label="High Speed 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q55136918" start="9959" end="9983" title="Birmingham Curzon Street railway station" label="Birmingham Curzon Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="10066" end="10082" title="Northern England" label="Northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="10087" end="10095" title="Midlands" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10246" end="10267" title="History of rail transport in Great Britain 1995 to date#Timeline of improvements" label="programme of upgrades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709968" start="10294" end="10304" title="Thameslink Programme" label="Thameslink"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="10306" end="10315" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284242" start="10317" end="10341" title="Railway electrification in Great Britain" label="electrification of lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908256" start="10343" end="10360" title="European Rail Traffic Management System in Great Britain" label="in-cab signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q655431" start="10366" end="10383" title="Intercity Express Programme" label="inter-city trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q798868" start="10388" end="10404" title="High Speed 2" label="high-speed lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q106910077" start="10406" end="10428" title="Great British Railways" label="Great British Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="10442" end="10453" title="State ownership" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q699386" start="10454" end="10465" title="public body" label="public body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505124" start="10484" end="10515" title="rail transport in Great Britain" label="rail transport in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349587" start="10521" end="10544" title="Office of Rail and Road" label="Office of Rail and Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="10672" end="10703" title="Northern Ireland Railways" label="Northern Ireland Railways (NIR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880069" start="10974" end="10983" title="Ulsterbus" label="Ulsterbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824449" start="11004" end="11011" title="Metro (Belfast)" label="Citybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180707" start="11031" end="11040" title="Translink (Northern Ireland)" label="Translink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071527" start="11083" end="11088" title="Irish gauge" label="gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q156013" start="11149" end="11157" title="Eurostar" label="Eurostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="11182" end="11196" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267580" start="11208" end="11215" title="Transport in Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="11220" end="11235" title="Netherlands" label="The Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q488724" start="11241" end="11251" title="Enterprise (train service)" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="11277" end="11302" title="Northern Ireland Railways" label="Northern Ireland Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="11307" end="11322" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q670200" start="11336" end="11349" title="Republic of Ireland–United Kingdom border" label="cross boarder"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="11363" end="11379" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="11388" end="11407" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="11470" end="11483" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="11520" end="11538" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="11681" end="11704" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q207842" start="11743" end="11754" title="light metro" label="light metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q506290" start="11891" end="11905" title="Glasgow Subway" label="Glasgow Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q541027" start="11989" end="12010" title="Tyne &amp;amp; Wear Metro" label="Tyne &amp;amp; Wear Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="12220" end="12230" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q386424" start="12236" end="12262" title="Liverpool Overhead Railway" label="Liverpool Overhead Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="12559" end="12566" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882342" start="12569" end="12590" title="Belfast Suburban Rail" label="Belfast Suburban Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="12592" end="12602" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12605" end="12626" title="West Midlands Trains#West Midlands Railway" label="West Midlands Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="12628" end="12635" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12638" end="12659" title="Great Western Railway (train operating company)#Commuter routes" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="12662" end="12669" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912388" start="12672" end="12684" title="Valley Lines" label="Valley Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="12687" end="12696" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980329" start="12699" end="12707" title="ScotRail" label="ScotRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="12709" end="12715" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12718" end="12739" title="Great Western Railway (train operating company)#Commuter routes" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="12742" end="12749" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980329" start="12752" end="12760" title="ScotRail" label="ScotRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="12762" end="12767" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12770" end="12780" title="West Yorkshire Metro#MetroTrain" label="MetroTrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="12782" end="12791" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922100" start="12794" end="12804" title="Merseyrail" label="Merseyrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="12806" end="12812" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="12815" end="12833" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="12835" end="12852" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="12858" end="12872" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="12874" end="12884" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12887" end="12895" title="Northern (train operating company)#Routes" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q119806220" start="12900" end="12920" title="TransPennine Express" label="TransPennine Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="12922" end="12931" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q541027" start="12934" end="12955" title="Tyne &amp;amp; Wear Metro" label="Tyne &amp;amp; Wear Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q802096" start="13214" end="13225" title="Crossrail 2" label="Crossrail 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="13395" end="13398" title="automobile" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881383" start="13465" end="13482" title="Blackpool tramway" label="Blackpool tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969737" start="13491" end="13519" title="Glasgow Corporation Tramways" label="Glasgow Corporation Tramways"/>
<link wikidata="Q18548" start="13811" end="13821" title="Manchester Metrolink" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q63589" start="13831" end="13840" title="Sheffield Supertram" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q973287" start="13854" end="13867" title="West Midlands Metro" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q786032" start="13877" end="13889" title="Tramlink" label="South London"/>
<link wikidata="Q64138" start="13899" end="13909" title="Nottingham Express Transit" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299624" start="13922" end="13931" title="Edinburgh Trams" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="14101" end="14108" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017970" start="14132" end="14149" title="South Wales Metro" label="South Wales Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q517034" start="14344" end="14373" title="List of motorways in the United Kingdom" label="road network in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145163" start="14773" end="14784" title="trunk roads" label="trunk roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="14804" end="14820" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760006" start="15052" end="15069" title="National Highways" label="National Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="15076" end="15100" title="government-owned company" label="government-owned company"/>
<link wikidata="Q853171" start="15209" end="15226" title="Local government in the United Kingdom" label="local authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834896" start="15282" end="15300" title="Transport Scotland" label="Transport Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="15329" end="15348" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625449" start="15358" end="15394" title="North and Mid Wales Trunk Road Agent" label="North and Mid Wales Trunk Road Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055316" start="15399" end="15427" title="South Wales Trunk Road Agent" label="South Wales Trunk Road Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="15445" end="15461" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339632" start="15526" end="15561" title="Department for Infrastructure Roads" label="Department for Infrastructure Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="15586" end="15606" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559422" start="15687" end="15720" title="Transport for London Road Network" label="Transport for London Road Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="15722" end="15731" title="Toll road" label="Toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814330" start="15794" end="15805" title="toll bridge" label="toll bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q458051" start="16081" end="16088" title="M6 Toll" label="M6 Toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q48038" start="16104" end="16117" title="West Midlands (region)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881041" start="16148" end="16159" title="M6 motorway" label="M6 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q13743387" start="16396" end="16428" title="congestion pricing" label="congestion-targeted road pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13743387" start="16571" end="16590" title="Congestion charging" label="Congestion charging"/>
<link wikidata="Q371759" start="16627" end="16633" title="London congestion charge" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316477" start="16638" end="16644" title="Durham city congestion charge" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166794" start="16656" end="16673" title="Dartford Crossing" label="Dartford Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="16816" end="16832" title="UK Supreme Court" label="UK Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248471" start="17007" end="17029" title="National Cycle Network" label="National Cycle Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q606877" start="17054" end="17062" title="Sustrans" label="Sustrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753151" start="17279" end="17297" title="The National Byway" label="The National Byway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440138" start="17303" end="17325" title="Sea to Sea Cycle Route" label="Sea to Sea Cycle Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q680991" start="17849" end="17855" title="Arriva" label="Arriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198156" start="17857" end="17867" title="FirstGroup" label="FirstGroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166056" start="17869" end="17883" title="Go-Ahead Group" label="Go-Ahead Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q60188" start="17885" end="17897" title="Mobico Group" label="Mobico Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q660261" start="17902" end="17918" title="Stagecoach Group" label="Stagecoach Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q180707" start="18011" end="18020" title="Translink (Northern Ireland)" label="Translink"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="18049" end="18059" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="18064" end="18074" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479582" start="18269" end="18285" title="National Express Coaches" label="National Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881378" start="18287" end="18294" title="Flixbus" label="Flixbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853911" start="18299" end="18306" title="Megabus (Europe)" label="Megabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476350" start="18447" end="18464" title="Scottish Citylink" label="Scottish Citylink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653380" start="18466" end="18475" title="BlaBlaBus" label="BlaBlaBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545354" start="19177" end="19191" title="Port of London" label="Port of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="19200" end="19212" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005218" start="19215" end="19238" title="Port of Immingham" label="Grimsby &amp;amp; Immingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q166885" start="19258" end="19271" title="Milford Haven Waterway" label="Milford Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398514" start="19294" end="19311" title="Port of Liverpool" label="Port of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231265" start="19331" end="19350" title="Port of Southampton" label="Port of Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="19451" end="19459" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792885" start="19461" end="19470" title="Avonmouth" label="Avonmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534748" start="19472" end="19478" title="Port of Barrow" label="Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q809009" start="19480" end="19485" title="Barry, Vale of Glamorgan" label="Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231086" start="19487" end="19494" title="Port of Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q311975" start="19496" end="19502" title="Boston, Lincolnshire" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231091" start="19504" end="19511" title="Port of Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250447" start="19513" end="19522" title="Cairnryan" label="Cairnryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038407" start="19524" end="19531" title="Cardiff Docks" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q739207" start="19533" end="19538" title="Port of Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="19550" end="19555" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q478029" start="19557" end="19565" title="Falmouth, Cornwall" label="Falmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398484" start="19567" end="19577" title="Port of Felixstowe" label="Felixstowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018730" start="19579" end="19588" title="Fishguard" label="Fishguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="19599" end="19609" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q617845" start="19611" end="19622" title="Grangemouth" label="Grangemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q179406" start="19624" end="19631" title="Grimsby" label="Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q990616" start="19633" end="19640" title="Harwich" label="Harwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617039" start="19642" end="19649" title="Heysham" label="Heysham"/>
<link wikidata="Q257446" start="19651" end="19659" title="Holyhead" label="Holyhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082135" start="19661" end="19665" title="Port of Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q208329" start="19667" end="19675" title="Kirkwall" label="Kirkwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q935686" start="19677" end="19682" title="Larne" label="Larne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398514" start="19684" end="19693" title="Port of Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294662" start="19695" end="19706" title="Port of Londonderry" label="Londonderry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231190" start="19708" end="19718" title="Port of Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="19720" end="19724" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q784824" start="19726" end="19739" title="Pembroke Dock" label="Pembroke Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016944" start="19741" end="19750" title="Peterhead" label="Peterhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858571" start="19752" end="19760" title="Millbay" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q203349" start="19762" end="19767" title="Poole" label="Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072019" start="19769" end="19780" title="Port Talbot" label="Port Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018157" start="19782" end="19792" title="Portishead, Somerset" label="Portishead"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="19794" end="19804" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="19806" end="19816" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q165845" start="19818" end="19827" title="Stornoway" label="Stornoway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001935" start="19829" end="19838" title="Stranraer" label="Stranraer"/>
<link wikidata="Q782412" start="19840" end="19850" title="Sullom Voe" label="Sullom Voe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653725" start="19852" end="19859" title="Swansea docks" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694565" start="19861" end="19865" title="Teesport" label="Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231289" start="19883" end="19887" title="Port of Tyne" label="Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q604097" start="20087" end="20107" title="Flag of convenience" label="flags of convenience"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276" start="20205" end="20217" title="bulk carrier" label="bulk carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="20222" end="20232" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15254" start="20237" end="20252" title="chemical tanker" label="chemical tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210" start="20257" end="20271" title="container ship" label="container ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15247" start="20277" end="20290" title="LNG carrier" label="liquefied gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055880" start="20295" end="20309" title="passenger ship" label="passenger ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="20324" end="20334" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="20339" end="20355" title="oil tanker" label="petroleum tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504307" start="20360" end="20383" title="Reefer ship" label="refrigerated cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="20388" end="20404" title="roll-on/roll-off" label="roll-on/roll-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593299" start="20594" end="20608" title="Woolwich Ferry" label="Woolwich Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800584" start="20619" end="20624" title="North Circular Road, London" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574872" start="20629" end="20634" title="South Circular Road, London" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q936263" start="20651" end="20658" title="Gosport" label="Gosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="20663" end="20673" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587445" start="20692" end="20705" title="Gosport Ferry" label="Gosport Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="20707" end="20718" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="20723" end="20736" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="20766" end="20775" title="Catamaran" label="Catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q746096" start="20785" end="20798" title="North Shields" label="North Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q279000" start="20803" end="20816" title="South Shields" label="South Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578988" start="20820" end="20828" title="Tyneside" label="Tyneside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496186" start="20847" end="20860" title="Shields Ferry" label="Shields Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820548" start="20885" end="20897" title="Mersey Ferry" label="Mersey Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026582" start="20913" end="20933" title="Caledonian MacBrayne" label="Caledonian MacBrayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="20957" end="20962" title="RO-RO" label="RO-RO"/>
<link wikidata="Q35654" start="20985" end="20999" title="Firth of Clyde" label="Firth of Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q81052" start="21027" end="21032" title="Inner Hebrides" label="Inner"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="21037" end="21051" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="21057" end="21061" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102954" start="21079" end="21093" title="Orkney Ferries" label="Orkney Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="21123" end="21135" title="Orkney Isles" label="Orkney Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783163" start="21141" end="21158" title="NorthLink Ferries" label="NorthLink Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="21218" end="21226" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="21240" end="21248" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282831" start="21326" end="21335" title="Stranraer Harbour railway station" label="Stranraer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250447" start="21340" end="21349" title="Cairnryan" label="Cairnryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q935686" start="21353" end="21358" title="Larne" label="Larne"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="21363" end="21370" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q257446" start="21373" end="21381" title="Holyhead" label="Holyhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q784824" start="21383" end="21396" title="Pembroke Dock" label="Pembroke Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018730" start="21401" end="21410" title="Fishguard" label="Fishguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617039" start="21474" end="21481" title="Heysham" label="Heysham"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="21486" end="21495" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q746718" start="21496" end="21506" title="Birkenhead" label="Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="21534" end="21545" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="21630" end="21649" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="21651" end="21658" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="21664" end="21675" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="21742" end="21747" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="21765" end="21771" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519829" start="21784" end="21799" title="P&amp;amp;O Ferries" label="P&amp;amp;O Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331170" start="21801" end="21814" title="My Ferry Link" label="My Ferry Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410089" start="21819" end="21831" title="DFDS Seaways" label="DFDS Seaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018120" start="21834" end="21863" title="Portsmouth International Port" label="Portsmouth International Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q274825" start="21926" end="21936" title="Ouistreham" label="Ouistreham"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="21938" end="21946" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667188" start="21948" end="21957" title="Cherbourg" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q163108" start="21962" end="21972" title="Saint Malo" label="Saint Malo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12233" start="21988" end="21997" title="Santander, Spain" label="Santander"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="22002" end="22008" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925773" start="22064" end="22080" title="Brittany Ferries" label="Brittany Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q387034" start="22120" end="22134" title="Condor Ferries" label="Condor Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="22168" end="22176" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q245297" start="22210" end="22217" title="Roscoff" label="Roscoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q661619" start="22265" end="22273" title="Weymouth, Dorset" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q203349" start="22278" end="22283" title="Poole" label="Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q387034" start="22320" end="22334" title="Condor Ferries" label="Condor Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q257446" start="22389" end="22397" title="Holyhead" label="Holyhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q997355" start="22463" end="22476" title="Irish Ferries" label="Irish Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q833903" start="22481" end="22491" title="Stena Line" label="Stena Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q784824" start="22528" end="22536" title="Pembroke Dock" label="Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082135" start="22539" end="22543" title="Port of Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q990616" start="22548" end="22555" title="Harwich" label="Harwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q736439" start="22627" end="22635" title="Ramsgate" label="Ramsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q573788" start="22637" end="22645" title="Newhaven, East Sussex" label="Newhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="22647" end="22658" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018133" start="22664" end="22673" title="Lymington" label="Lymington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643" start="22725" end="22733" title="Waterbus" label="Waterbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q371343" start="22815" end="22836" title="London River Services" label="London River Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474872" start="22841" end="22856" title="Thames Clippers" label="Thames Clippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="22859" end="22866" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038479" start="22868" end="22884" title="Cardiff Waterbus" label="Cardiff Waterbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="22890" end="22897" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968899" start="22899" end="22917" title="Bristol Ferry Boat" label="Bristol Ferry Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="22943" end="22954" title="Cruise ship" label="Cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="23049" end="23062" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="23067" end="23076" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q730587" start="23081" end="23092" title="Cunard Line" label="Cunard Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="23147" end="23158" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143832" start="23188" end="23194" title="Solent" label="Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="23314" end="23319" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="23380" end="23401" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974573" start="23661" end="23692" title="waterways in the United Kingdom" label="waterways in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039706" start="24163" end="24194" title="Institute for Transport Studies, University of Leeds" label="Institute for Transport Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q503424" start="24202" end="24221" title="University of Leeds" label="University of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q829080" start="24492" end="24515" title="Professional association" label="Professional Institutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086817" start="24565" end="24611" title="Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport" label="Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086837" start="24625" end="24677" title="Chartered Institution of Highways and Transportation" label="Chartered Institution of Highways and Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580790" start="24687" end="24729" title="Chartered Institution of Railway Operators" label="Chartered Institution of Railway Operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666805" start="24902" end="24920" title="Chartered Engineer (UK)" label="Chartered engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q688603" start="24923" end="24944" title="Incorporated engineer" label="Incorporated engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147991" start="24995" end="25014" title="British Royal Train" label="British Royal Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q174588" start="25017" end="25041" title="British Transport Police" label="British Transport Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864806" start="25044" end="25094" title="List of closed railway lines in the United Kingdom" label="List of closed railway lines in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505124" start="25097" end="25128" title="Rail transport in Great Britain" label="Rail transport in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834983" start="25132" end="25152" title="Transport in England" label="Transport in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q119100" start="25155" end="25174" title="Transport in London" label="Transport in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287964" start="25177" end="25206" title="Transport in Northern Ireland" label="Transport in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835072" start="25209" end="25230" title="Transport in Scotland" label="Transport in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835102" start="25233" end="25251" title="Transport in Wales" label="Transport in Wales"/>
</links>
</doc>
