<doc id="30552" wikidata="Q7689573" url="?curid=30552" title="Taxation in the United States">
<text>The United States has separate federal, state, and local governments with taxes imposed at each of these levels. Taxes are levied on income, payroll, property, sales, capital gains, dividends, imports, estates and gifts, as well as various fees. In 2020, taxes collected by federal, state, and local governments amounted to 25.5% of GDP, below the OECD average of 33.5% of GDP.

U.S. tax and transfer policies are progressive and therefore reduce effective income inequality, as rates of tax generally increase as taxable income increases. As a group, the lowest earning workers, especially those with dependents, pay no income taxes and may actually receive a small subsidy from the federal government (from child credits and the Earned Income Tax Credit). Taxes fall much more heavily on labor income than on capital income. Divergent taxes and subsidies for different forms of income and spending can also constitute a form of indirect taxation of some activities over others. Taxes are imposed on net income of individuals and corporations by the federal, most state, and some local governments. Citizens and residents are taxed on worldwide income and allowed a credit for foreign taxes. Income subject to tax is determined under tax accounting rules, not financial accounting principles, and includes almost all income from whatever source, except that as a result of the enactment of the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, large corporations are subject to a 15% minimum tax for which the starting point is annual financial statement income. 

Most business expenses reduce taxable income, though limits apply to a few expenses. Individuals are permitted to reduce taxable income by personal allowances and certain non-business expenses, including home mortgage interest, state and local taxes, charitable contributions, and medical and certain other expenses incurred above certain percentages of income.

State rules for determining taxable income often differ from federal rules. Federal marginal tax rates vary from 10% to 37% of taxable income. State and local tax rates vary widely by jurisdiction, from 0% to 13.30% of income, and many are graduated. State taxes are generally treated as a deductible expense for federal tax computation, although the 2017 tax law imposed a $10,000 limit on the state and local tax (&quot;SALT&quot;) deduction, which raised the effective tax rate on medium and high earners in high tax states. Prior to the SALT deduction limit, the average deduction exceeded $10,000 in most of the Midwest, and exceeded $11,000 in most of the Northeastern United States, as well as California and Oregon. The states impacted the most by the limit were the tri-state area (NY, NJ, and CT) and California; the average SALT deduction in those states was greater than $17,000 in 2014.

The United States is one of two countries in the world that taxes its non-resident citizens on worldwide income, in the same manner and rates as residents. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of imposition of such a tax in the case of &quot;Cook v. Tait&quot;. Nonetheless, the foreign earned income exclusion eliminates U.S. taxes on the first $120,000 of annual foreign source earned income of U.S. citizens and certain U.S. residents living and working abroad. (This is the inflation-adjusted amount for 2023.) Payroll taxes are imposed by the federal and all state governments. These include Social Security and Medicare taxes imposed on both employers and employees, at a combined rate of 15.3% (13.3% for 2011 and 2012). Social Security tax applies only to the first $132,900 of wages in 2019. There is an additional Medicare tax of 0.9% on wages above $200,000. Employers must withhold income taxes on wages. An unemployment tax and certain other levies apply to employers. Payroll taxes have dramatically increased as a share of federal revenue since the 1950s, while corporate income taxes have fallen as a share of revenue. (Corporate profits have not fallen as a share of GDP).

Property taxes are imposed by most local governments and many special purpose authorities based on the fair market value of property. School and other authorities are often separately governed, and impose separate taxes. Property tax is generally imposed only on realty, though some jurisdictions tax some forms of business property. Property tax rules and rates vary widely with annual median rates ranging from 0.2% to 1.9% of a property&#x27;s value depending on the state. Sales taxes are imposed by most states and some localities on the price at retail sale of many goods and some services. Sales tax rates vary widely among jurisdictions, from 0% to 16%, and may vary within a jurisdiction based on the particular goods or services taxed. Sales tax is collected by the seller at the time of sale, or remitted as use tax by buyers of taxable items who did not pay sales tax.

The United States imposes tariffs or customs duties on the import of many types of goods from many jurisdictions. These tariffs or duties must be paid before the goods can be legally imported. Rates of duty vary from 0% to more than 20%, based on the particular goods and country of origin. Estate and gift taxes are imposed by the federal and some state governments on the transfer of property inheritance, by will, or by lifetime donation. Similar to federal income taxes, federal estate and gift taxes are imposed on worldwide property of citizens and residents and allow a credit for foreign taxes.


==Levels and types of taxation==
The U.S. has an assortment of federal, state, local, and special-purpose governmental jurisdictions. Each imposes taxes to fully or partly fund its operations. These taxes may be imposed on the same income, property or activity, often without offset of one tax against another. The types of tax imposed at each level of government vary, in part due to constitutional restrictions. Income taxes are imposed at the federal and most state levels. Taxes on property are typically imposed only at the local level, although there may be multiple local jurisdictions that tax the same property. Other excise taxes are imposed by the federal and some state governments. Sales taxes are imposed by most states and many local governments. Customs duties or tariffs are only imposed by the federal government. A wide variety of user fees or license fees are also imposed.

==Types of taxpayers==
Taxes may be imposed on individuals (natural persons), business entities, estates, trusts, or other forms of organization. Taxes may be based on property, income, transactions, transfers, importations of goods, business activities, or a variety of factors, and are generally imposed on the type of taxpayer for whom such tax base is relevant. Thus, property taxes tend to be imposed on property owners. In addition, certain taxes, particularly income taxes, may be imposed on the members of a business or other entity based on the income of the entity. For example, a partner is taxed on the partner&#x27;s allocable share of the income of an entity that is or, under entity classification rules, is classified as a partnership. Another example relates to the grantors or beneficiaries of trusts. Yet another example relates to the United States shareholders of controlled foreign corporations.

With a few exceptions, one level of government does not impose tax on another level of government or its instrumentalities.

==Income tax==

Taxes based on income are imposed at the federal, most state, and some local levels within the United States. The tax systems within each jurisdiction may define taxable income separately. Many states refer to some extent to federal concepts for determining taxable income.

===History of the income tax===
The first income tax in the United States was implemented with the Revenue Act of 1861 by Abraham Lincoln during the Civil War. In 1895 the Supreme Court ruled that the U.S. federal income tax on interest income, dividend income and rental income was unconstitutional in &quot;Pollock v. Farmers&#x27; Loan &amp; Trust Co.&quot;, because it was a direct tax. The &quot;Pollock&quot; decision was overruled by the ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1913, and by subsequent U.S. Supreme Court decisions including &quot;Graves v. New York ex rel. O&#x27;Keefe,&quot; &quot;South Carolina v. Baker,&quot; and &quot;Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad Co.&quot;

===Basic concepts===

The U.S. income tax system imposes a tax based on income on individuals, corporations, estates, and trusts. The tax is taxable income, as defined, times a specified tax rate. This tax may be reduced by credits, some of which may be refunded if they exceed the tax calculated. Taxable income may differ from income for other purposes (such as for financial reporting). The definition of taxable income for federal purposes is used by many, but far from all states. Income and deductions are recognized under tax rules, and there are variations within the rules among the states. Book and tax income may differ. Income is divided into &quot;capital gains&quot;, which are taxed at a lower rate and only when the taxpayer chooses to &quot;realize&quot; them, and &quot;ordinary income&quot;, which is taxed at higher rates and on an annual basis. Because of this distinction, capital is taxed much more lightly than labor.

Under the U.S. system, individuals, corporations, estates, and trusts are subject to income tax. Partnerships are not taxed; rather, their partners are subject to income tax on their shares of income and deductions, and take their shares of credits. Some types of business entities may elect to be treated as corporations or as partnerships.
Taxpayers are required to file tax returns and self assess tax. Tax may be withheld from payments of income (&quot;e.g.&quot;, withholding of tax from wages). To the extent taxes are not covered by withholdings, taxpayers must make estimated tax payments, generally quarterly. Tax returns are subject to review and adjustment by taxing authorities, though far fewer than all returns are reviewed.

Taxable income is gross income less exemptions, deductions, and personal exemptions. Gross income includes &quot;all income from whatever source&quot;. Certain income, however, is subject to tax exemption at the federal or state levels. This income is reduced by tax deductions including most business and some nonbusiness expenses. Individuals are also allowed a deduction for personal exemptions, a fixed dollar allowance. The allowance of some nonbusiness deductions is phased out at higher income levels.

The U.S. federal and most state income tax systems tax the worldwide income of citizens and residents. A federal foreign tax credit is granted for foreign income taxes. Individuals residing abroad may also claim the foreign earned income exclusion. Individuals may be a citizen or resident of the United States but not a resident of a state. Many states grant a similar credit for taxes paid to other states. These credits are generally limited to the amount of tax on income from foreign (or other state) sources.

===Filing status===

Federal and state income tax is calculated, and returns filed, for each taxpayer. Two married individuals may calculate tax and file returns jointly or separately. In addition, unmarried individuals supporting children or certain other relatives may file a return as a head of household. Parent-subsidiary groups of companies may elect to file a consolidated return.

There are currently five filing statuses for filing federal individual income taxes: single, married filing jointly, married filing separately, head of household, and qualifying widow(er). The filing status used is important for determining which deductions and credits the taxpayer qualifies for. States may have different rules for determining a taxpayer&#x27;s filing status, especially for people in a domestic partnership.

===Graduated tax rates===
Income tax rates differ at the federal and state levels for corporations and individuals. Federal and many state income tax rates are higher (graduated) at higher levels of income. In addition, federal and many state individual income tax rate schedules differ based on the individual&#x27;s filing status. For example, the income level at which each rate starts generally is higher (&quot;i.e.&quot;, tax is lower) for married couples filing a joint return or single individuals filing as head of household.

Individuals are subject to federal graduated tax rates from 10% to 37%. Corporations are subject to a 21% federal rate of tax. Prior to 2018, the effective date of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, corporations were subject to federal graduated rates of tax from 15% to 35%; a rate of 34% applied to income from $335,000 to $15,000,000. State income tax rates, in states which have a tax on personal incomes, vary from 1% to 16%, including local income tax where applicable. Nine states do not have a tax on ordinary personal incomes. These include Alaska, Florida, Nevada, South Dakota, Texas, Washington, and Wyoming. State and local taxes are generally deductible in computing federal taxable income for taxpayers who itemize their deductions; however, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 limited the maximum amount of the deduction to $10,000 for individuals and married couples from 2018 through 2025.

===Income===

Taxable income is gross income less adjustments and allowable tax deductions. Gross income for federal and most states is receipts and gains from all sources less cost of goods sold. Gross income includes &quot;all income from whatever source&quot;, and is not limited to cash received. Income from illegal activities is taxable and must be reported to the IRS.

The amount of income recognized is generally the value received or which the taxpayer has a right to receive. Certain types of income are specifically excluded from gross income. The time at which gross income becomes taxable is determined under federal tax rules. This may differ in some cases from accounting rules.

Certain types of income are excluded from gross income (and therefore subject to tax exemption). The exclusions differ at federal and state levels. For federal income tax, interest income on state and local bonds is exempt, while few states exempt any interest income except from municipalities within that state. In addition, certain types of receipts, such as gifts and inheritances, and certain types of benefits, such as employer-provided health insurance, are excluded from income.

Foreign non-resident persons are taxed only on income from U.S. sources or from a U.S. business. Tax on foreign non-resident persons on non-business income is at 30% of the gross income, but reduced under many tax treaties.

These brackets are the taxable income plus the standard deduction for a joint return. That deduction is the first bracket. For example, a couple earning $88,600 by September owes $10,453; $1,865 for 10% of the income from $12,700 to $31,500, plus $8,588 for 15% of the income from $31,500 to $88,600. Now, for every $100 they earn, $25 is taxed until they reach the next bracket.

After making $400 more; going down to the 89,000 row the tax is $100 more. The next column is the tax divided by 89,000. The new law is the next column. This tax equals 10% of their income from $24,000 to $43,050 plus 12% from $43,050 to $89,000. The singles&#x27; sets of markers can be set up quickly. The brackets with its tax are cut in half.

Itemizers can figure the tax without moving the scale by taking the difference off the top. The couple above, having receipts for $22,700 in deductions, means that the last $10,000 of their income is tax free. After seven years the papers can be destroyed; if unchallenged.

Source and Method

===Deductions and exemptions===

The U.S. system allows reduction of taxable income for both business and some nonbusiness expenditures, called deductions. Businesses selling goods reduce gross income directly by the cost of goods sold. In addition, businesses may deduct most types of expenses incurred in the business. Some of these deductions are subject to limitations. For example, only 50% of the amount incurred for any meals or entertainment may be deducted. The amount and timing of deductions for business expenses is determined under the taxpayer&#x27;s tax accounting method, which may differ from methods used in accounting records.

Some types of business expenses are deductible over a period of years rather than when incurred. These include the cost of long lived assets such as buildings and equipment. The cost of such assets is recovered through deductions for depreciation or amortization.

In addition to business expenses, individuals may reduce income by an allowance for personal exemptions and either a fixed standard deduction or itemized deductions. One personal exemption is allowed per taxpayer, and additional such deductions are allowed for each child or certain other individuals supported by the taxpayer. The standard deduction amount varies by taxpayer filing status. Itemized deductions by individuals include home mortgage interest, state and local taxes, certain other taxes, contributions to recognized charities, medical expenses in excess of 7.5% of adjusted gross income, and certain other amounts.

Personal exemptions, the standard deduction, and itemized deductions are limited (phased out) above certain income levels.

===Business entities===

Corporations must pay tax on their taxable income independently of their shareholders. Shareholders are also subject to tax on dividends received from corporations. By contrast, partnerships are not subject to income tax, but their partners calculate their taxes by including their shares of partnership items. Corporations owned entirely by U.S. citizens or residents (S corporations) may elect to be treated similarly to partnerships. A limited liability company and certain other business entities may elect to be treated as corporations or as partnerships. States generally follow such characterization. Many states also allow corporations to elect S corporation status. Charitable organizations are subject to tax on business income.

Certain transactions of business entities are not subject to tax. These include many types of formation or reorganization.

===Credits===
A wide variety of tax credits may reduce income tax at the federal and state levels. Some credits are available only to individuals, such as the child tax credit for each dependent child, American Opportunity Tax Credit for education expenses, or the Earned Income Tax Credit for low income wage earners. Some credits, such as the Work Opportunity Tax Credit, are available to businesses, including various special industry incentives. A few credits, such as the foreign tax credit, are available to all types of taxpayers.

===Payment or withholding of taxes===
The United States federal and state income tax systems are self-assessment systems. Taxpayers must declare and pay tax without assessment by the taxing authority. Quarterly payments of tax estimated to be due are required to the extent taxes are not paid through withholdings. The second and fourth &quot;quarters&quot; are not a quarter of a year in length. The second &quot;quarter&quot; is two months (April and May) and the fourth is four months (September to December). (Estimated taxes used to be paid based on a calendar quarter, but in the 60&#x27;s the October due date was moved back to September to pull the third quarter cash receipts into the previous federal budget year which begins on October 1 every year, allowing the federal government to begin the year with a current influx of cash.) Employers must withhold income tax, as well as Social Security and Medicare taxes, from wages. Amounts to be withheld are computed by employers based on representations of tax status by employees on Form W-4, with limited government review.

===State variations===


Forty-three states and many localities in the U.S. impose an income tax on individuals. Forty-seven states and many localities impose a tax on the income of corporations. Tax rates vary by state and locality, and may be fixed or graduated. Most rates are the same for all types of income. State and local income taxes are imposed in addition to federal income tax. State income tax is allowed as a deduction in computing federal income, but is capped at $10,000 per household since the passage of the 2017 tax law. Prior to the change, the average deduction exceeded $10,000 in most of the Midwest, most of the Northeast, as well as California and Oregon.

State and local taxable income is determined under state law, and often is based on federal taxable income. Most states conform to many federal concepts and definitions, including defining income and business deductions and timing thereof. State rules vary widely regarding to individual itemized deductions. Most states do not allow a deduction for state income taxes for individuals or corporations, and impose tax on certain types of income exempt at the federal level.

Some states have alternative measures of taxable income, or alternative taxes, especially for corporations.

States imposing an income tax generally tax all income of corporations organized in the state and individuals residing in the state. Taxpayers from another state are subject to tax only on income earned in the state or apportioned to the state. Businesses are subject to income tax in a state only if they have sufficient nexus in (connection to) the state.

===Non-residents===
Foreign individuals and corporations not resident in the United States are subject to federal income tax only on income from a U.S. business and certain types of income from U.S. sources. States tax individuals resident outside the state and corporations organized outside the state only on wages or business income within the state. Payers of some types of income to non-residents must withhold federal or state income tax on the payment. Federal withholding of 30% on such income may be reduced under a tax treaty. Such treaties do not apply to state taxes.

===Alternative tax bases (AMT, states)===
An alternative minimum tax (AMT) is imposed at the federal level on a somewhat modified version of taxable income. The tax applies to individuals and corporations. The tax base is adjusted gross income reduced by a fixed deduction that varies by taxpayer filing status. Itemized deductions of individuals are limited to home mortgage interest, charitable contributions, and a portion of medical expenses. AMT is imposed at a rate of 26% or 28% for individuals and 20% for corporations, less the amount of regular tax. A credit against future regular income tax is allowed for such excess, with certain restrictions.

Many states impose minimum income taxes on corporations or a tax computed on an alternative tax base. These include taxes based on the capital of corporations and alternative measures of income for individuals. Details vary widely by state.

===Differences between book and taxable income for businesses===
In the United States, taxable income is computed under rules that differ materially from U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Since only publicly traded companies are required to prepare financial statements, many non-public companies opt to keep their financial records under tax rules. Corporations that present financial statements using other than tax rules must include a detailed reconciliation of their financial statement income to their taxable income as part of their tax returns. Key areas of difference include depreciation and amortization, timing of recognition of income or deductions, assumptions for cost of goods sold, and certain items (such as meals and entertainment) the tax deduction for which is limited.

===Reporting under self-assessment system===
Income taxes in the United States are self-assessed by taxpayers by filing required tax returns. Taxpayers, as well as certain non-tax-paying entities, like partnerships, must file annual tax returns at the federal and applicable state levels. These returns disclose a complete computation of taxable income under tax principles. Taxpayers compute all income, deductions, and credits themselves, and determine the amount of tax due after applying required prepayments and taxes withheld. Federal and state tax authorities provide preprinted forms that must be used to file tax returns. IRS Form 1040 series is required for individuals, Form 1120 series for corporations, Form 1065 for partnerships, and Form 990 series for tax exempt organizations.

The state forms vary widely, and rarely correspond to federal forms. Tax returns vary from the two-page (Form 1040EZ) used by nearly 70% of individual filers to thousands of pages of forms and attachments for large entities. Groups of corporations may elect to file consolidated returns at the federal level and with a few states. Electronic filing of federal and many state returns is widely encouraged and in some cases required, and many vendors offer computer software for use by taxpayers and paid return preparers to prepare and electronically file returns.

==Capital gains tax==

Individuals and corporations pay U.S. federal income tax on the net total of all their capital gains. The tax rate depends on both the investor&#x27;s tax bracket and the amount of time the investment was held. Short-term capital gains are taxed at the investor&#x27;s ordinary income tax rate and are defined as investments held for a year or less before being sold. Long-term capital gains, on dispositions of assets held for more than one year, are taxed at a lower rate.

==Payroll taxes==
In the United States, payroll taxes are assessed by the federal government, many states, the District of Columbia, and numerous cities. These taxes are imposed on employers and employees and on various compensation bases. They are collected and paid to the taxing jurisdiction by the employers. Most jurisdictions imposing payroll taxes require reporting quarterly and annually in most cases, and electronic reporting is generally required for all but small employers. Because payroll taxes are imposed only on wages and not on income from investments, taxes on labor income are much heavier than taxes on income from capital.

===Income tax withholding===
Federal, state, and local withholding taxes are required in those jurisdictions imposing an income tax. Employers having contact with the jurisdiction must withhold the tax from wages paid to their employees in those jurisdictions. Computation of the amount of tax to withhold is performed by the employer based on representations by the employee regarding his/her tax status on IRS Form W-4. Amounts of income tax so withheld must be paid to the taxing jurisdiction, and are available as refundable tax credits to the employees. Income taxes withheld from payroll are not final taxes, merely prepayments. Employees must still file income tax returns and self assess tax, claiming amounts withheld as payments.

===Social Security and Medicare taxes===
Federal social insurance taxes are imposed equally on employers and employees, consisting of a tax of 6.2% of wages up to an annual wage maximum ($132,900 in 2019) for Social Security plus a tax of 1.45% of total wages for Medicare. For 2011, the employee&#x27;s contribution was reduced to 4.2%, while the employer&#x27;s portion remained at 6.2%. There is an additional Medicare tax of 0.9% on wages over $200,000, to be paid only by the employee (reported separately on the employee&#x27;s tax return on Form 8959). To the extent an employee&#x27;s portion of the 6.2% tax exceeds the maximum by reason of multiple employers (each of whom will collect up to the annual wage maximum), the employee is entitled to a refundable tax credit upon filing an income tax return for the year.
===Unemployment taxes===
Employers are subject to unemployment taxes by the federal and all state governments. The tax is a percentage of taxable wages with a cap. The tax rate and cap vary by jurisdiction and by employer&#x27;s industry and experience rating. For 2009, the typical maximum tax per employee was under $1,000. Some states also impose unemployment, disability insurance, or similar taxes on employees.

===Reporting and payment===
Employers must report payroll taxes to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction in the manner each jurisdiction provides. Quarterly reporting of aggregate income tax withholding and Social Security taxes is required in most jurisdictions. Employers must file reports of aggregate unemployment tax quarterly and annually with each applicable state, and annually at the federal level.

Each employer is required to provide each employee an annual report on IRS Form W-2 of wages paid and federal, state and local taxes withheld, with a copy sent to the IRS and the taxation authority of the state. These are due by January 31 and February 28 (March 31 if filed electronically), respectively, following the calendar year in which wages are paid. The Form W-2 constitutes proof of payment of tax for the employee.

Employers are required to pay payroll taxes to the taxing jurisdiction under varying rules, in many cases within 1 banking day. Payment of federal and many state payroll taxes is required to be made by electronic funds transfer if certain dollar thresholds are met, or by deposit with a bank for the benefit of the taxing jurisdiction.

===Penalties===

Failure to timely and properly pay federal payroll taxes results in an automatic penalty of 2% to 10%. Similar state and local penalties apply. Failure to properly file monthly or quarterly returns may result in additional penalties. Failure to file Forms W-2 results in an automatic penalty of up to $50 per form not timely filed. State and local penalties vary by jurisdiction.

A particularly severe penalty applies where federal income tax withholding and Social Security taxes are not paid to the IRS. The penalty of up to 100% of the amount not paid can be assessed against the employer entity as well as any person (such as a corporate officer) having control or custody of the funds from which payment should have been made.

==Sales and excise taxes==
===Sales and use tax===

There is no federal sales or use tax in the United States. All but five states impose sales and use taxes on retail sale, lease and rental of many goods, as well as some services. Many cities, counties, transit authorities and special purpose districts impose an additional local sales or use tax. Sales and use tax is calculated as the purchase price times the appropriate tax rate. Tax rates vary widely by jurisdiction from less than 1% to over 10%. Sales tax is collected by the seller at the time of sale. Use tax is self assessed by a buyer who has not paid sales tax on a taxable purchase.

Unlike value added tax, sales tax is imposed only once, at the retail level, on any particular goods. Nearly all jurisdictions provide numerous categories of goods and services that are exempt from sales tax, or taxed at a reduced rate. Purchase of goods for further manufacture or for resale is uniformly exempt from sales tax. Most jurisdictions exempt food sold in grocery stores, prescription medications, and many agricultural supplies. Generally cash discounts, including coupons, are not included in the price used in computing tax.

Sales taxes, including those imposed by local governments, are generally administered at the state level. States imposing sales tax require retail sellers to register with the state, collect tax from customers, file returns, and remit the tax to the state. Procedural rules vary widely. Sellers generally must collect tax from in-state purchasers unless the purchaser provides an exemption certificate. Most states allow or require electronic remittance of tax to the state. States are prohibited from requiring out of state sellers to collect tax unless the seller has some minimal connection with the state.

===Excise taxes===
Excise taxes may be imposed on the sales price of goods or on a per unit or other basis, in theory to discourage consumption of the taxed goods or services. Excise tax may be required to be paid by the manufacturer at wholesale sale, or may be collected from the customer at retail sale. Excise taxes are imposed at the federal and state levels on a variety of goods, including alcohol, tobacco, tires, gasoline, diesel fuel, coal, firearms, telephone service, air transportation, unregistered bonds, and many other goods and services. Some jurisdictions require that tax stamps be affixed to goods to demonstrate payment of the tax.

==Property taxes==

Most jurisdictions below the state level in the United States impose a tax on interests in real property (land, buildings, and permanent improvements). Some jurisdictions also tax some types of business personal property. Rules vary widely by jurisdiction. Many overlapping jurisdictions (counties, cities, school districts) may have authority to tax the same property. Few states impose a tax on the value of property.

Property tax is based on fair market value of the subject property. The amount of tax is determined annually based on the market value of each property on a particular date, and most jurisdictions require redeterminations of value periodically. The tax is computed as the determined market value times an assessment ratio times the tax rate. Assessment ratios and tax rates vary widely among jurisdictions, and may vary by type of property within a jurisdiction. Where a property has recently been sold between unrelated sellers, such sale establishes fair market value. In other (&quot;i.e.&quot;, most) cases, the value must be estimated. Common estimation techniques include comparable sales, depreciated cost, and an income approach. Property owners may also declare a value, which is subject to change by the tax assessor.

===Types of property taxed===
Property taxes are most commonly applied to real estate and business property. Real property generally includes all interests considered under that state&#x27;s law to be ownership interests in land, buildings, and improvements. Ownership interests include ownership of title as well as certain other rights to property. Automobile and boat registration fees are a subset of this tax. Other nonbusiness goods are generally not subject to property tax, though Virginia maintains a unique personal property tax on all motor vehicles, including non-business vehicles.

===Assessment and collection===
The assessment process varies by state, and sometimes within a state. Each taxing jurisdiction determines values of property within the jurisdiction and then determines the amount of tax to assess based on the value of the property. Tax assessors for taxing jurisdictions are generally responsible for determining property values. The determination of values and calculation of tax is generally performed by an official referred to as a tax assessor. Property owners have rights in each jurisdiction to declare or contest the value so determined. Property values generally must be coordinated among jurisdictions, and such coordination is often performed by equalization.

Once value is determined, the assessor typically notifies the last known property owner of the value determination. After values are settled, property tax bills or notices are sent to property owners. Payment times and terms vary widely. If a property owner fails to pay the tax, the taxing jurisdiction has various remedies for collection, in many cases including seizure and sale of the property. Property taxes constitute a lien on the property to which transfers are also subject. Mortgage companies often collect taxes from property owners and remit them on behalf of the owner.

==Customs duties==
The United States imposes tariffs or customs duties on imports of goods. The duty is levied at the time of import and is paid by the importer of record. Customs duties vary by country of origin and product. Goods from many countries are exempt from duty under various trade agreements. Certain types of goods are exempt from duty regardless of source. Customs rules differ from other import restrictions. Failure to properly comply with customs rules can result in seizure of goods and criminal penalties against involved parties. United States Customs and Border Protection (&quot;CBP&quot;) enforces customs rules.

===Import of goods===
Goods may be imported to the United States subject to import restrictions. Importers of goods may be subject to tax (&quot;customs duty&quot; or &quot;tariff&quot;) on the imported value of the goods. &quot;Imported goods are not legally entered until after the shipment has arrived within the port of entry, delivery of the merchandise has been authorized by CBP, and estimated duties have been paid.&quot; Importation and declaration and payment of customs duties is done by the importer of record, which may be the owner of the goods, the purchaser, or a licensed customs broker. Goods may be stored in a bonded warehouse or a Foreign-Trade Zone in the United States for up to five years without payment of duties. Goods must be declared for entry into the U.S. within 15 days of arrival or prior to leaving a bonded warehouse or foreign trade zone. Many importers participate in a voluntary self-assessment program with CBP. Special rules apply to goods imported by mail. All goods imported into the United States are subject to inspection by CBP. Some goods may be temporarily imported to the United States under a system similar to the ATA Carnet system. Examples include laptop computers used by persons traveling in the U.S. and samples used by salesmen.

===Origin===
Rates of tax on transaction values vary by country of origin. Goods must be individually labeled to indicate country of origin, with exceptions for specific types of goods. Goods are considered to originate in the country with the highest rate of duties for the particular goods unless the goods meet certain minimum content requirements. Extensive modifications to normal duties and classifications apply to goods originating in Canada or Mexico under the [North American Free Trade Agreement].

===Classification===
All goods that are not exempt are subject to duty computed according to the Harmonized Tariff Schedule published by CBP and the U.S. International Trade Commission. This lengthy schedule provides rates of duty for each class of goods. Most goods are classified based on the nature of the goods, though some classifications are based on use.

===Duty rate===
Customs duty rates may be expressed as a percentage of value or dollars and cents per unit. Rates based on value vary from zero to 20% in the 2011 schedule. Rates may be based on relevant units for the particular type of goods (per ton, per kilogram, per square meter, etc.). Some duties are based in part on value and in part on quantity.

Where goods subject to different rates of duty are commingled, the entire shipment may be taxed at the highest applicable duty rate.

===Procedures===
Imported goods are generally accompanied by a bill of lading or air waybill describing the goods. For purposes of customs duty assessment, they must also be accompanied by an invoice documenting the transaction value. The goods on the bill of lading and invoice are classified and duty is computed by the importer or CBP. The amount of this duty is payable immediately, and must be paid before the goods can be imported. Most assessments of goods are now done by the importer and documentation filed with CBP electronically.

After duties have been paid, CBP approves the goods for import. They can then be removed from the port of entry, bonded warehouse, or Free-Trade Zone.

After duty has been paid on particular goods, the importer can seek a refund of duties if the goods are exported without substantial modification. The process of claiming a refund is known as duty drawback.

===Penalties===
Certain civil penalties apply for failures to follow CBP rules and pay duty. Goods of persons subject to such penalties may be seized and sold by CBP. In addition, criminal penalties may apply for certain offenses. Criminal penalties may be as high as twice the value of the goods plus twenty years in jail.

===Foreign-Trade Zones===
Foreign-Trade Zones are secure areas physically in the United States but legally outside the customs territory of the United States. Such zones are generally near ports of entry. They may be within the warehouse of an importer. Such zones are limited in scope and operation based on approval of the Foreign-Trade Zones Board. Goods in a Foreign-Trade Zone are not considered imported to the United States until they leave the Zone. Foreign goods may be used to manufacture other goods within the zone for export without payment of customs duties.

==Estate and gift taxes==
Estate and gift taxes in the United States are imposed by the federal and some state governments. The estate tax is an excise tax levied on the right to pass property at death. It is imposed on the estate, not the beneficiary. Some states impose an inheritance tax on recipients of bequests. Gift taxes are levied on the giver (donor) of property where the property is transferred for less than adequate consideration. An additional generation-skipping transfer (GST) tax is imposed by the federal and some state governments on transfers to grandchildren (or their descendants).

The federal gift tax is applicable to the donor, not the recipient, and is computed based on cumulative taxable gifts, and is reduced by prior gift taxes paid. The federal estate tax is computed on the sum of taxable estate and taxable gifts, and is reduced by prior gift taxes paid. These taxes are computed as the taxable amount times a graduated tax rate (up to 35% in 2011). The estate and gift taxes are also reduced by a major &quot;unified credit&quot; equivalent to an exclusion ($5 million in 2011). Rates and exclusions have varied, and the benefits of lower rates and the credit have been phased out during some years.

Taxable gifts are certain gifts of U.S. property by nonresident aliens, most gifts of any property by citizens or residents, in excess of an annual exclusion ($13,000 for gifts made in 2011) per donor per donee. Taxable estates are certain U.S. property of non-resident alien decedents, and most property of citizens or residents. For aliens, residence for estate tax purposes is primarily based on domicile, but U.S. citizens are taxed regardless of their country of residence. U.S. real estate and most tangible property in the U.S. are subject to estate and gift tax whether the decedent or donor is resident or nonresident, citizen or alien.

The taxable amount of a gift is the fair market value of the property in excess of consideration received at the date of gift. The taxable amount of an estate is the gross fair market value of all rights considered property at the date of death (or an alternative valuation date) (&quot;gross estate&quot;), less liabilities of the decedent, costs of administration (including funeral expenses) and certain other deductions, see Stepped-up basis. State estate taxes are deductible, with limitations, in computing the federal taxable estate. Bequests to charities reduce the taxable estate.

Gift tax applies to all irrevocable transfers of interests in tangible or intangible property. Estate tax applies to all property owned in whole or in part by a citizen or resident at the time of his or her death, to the extent of the interest in the property. Generally, all types of property are subject to estate tax. Whether a decedent has sufficient interest in property for the property to be subject to gift or estate tax is determined under applicable state property laws. Certain interests in property that lapse at death (such as life insurance) are included in the taxable estate.

Taxable values of estates and gifts are the fair market value. For some assets, such as widely traded stocks and bonds, the value may be determined by market listings. The value of other property may be determined by appraisals, which are subject to potential contest by the taxing authority. Special use valuation applies to farms and closely held businesses, subject to limited dollar amount and other conditions. Monetary assets, such as cash, mortgages, and notes, are valued at the face amount, unless another value is clearly established.

Life insurance proceeds are included in the gross estate. The value of a right of a beneficiary of an estate to receive an annuity is included in the gross estate. Certain transfers during lifetime may be included in the gross estate. Certain powers of a decedent to control the disposition of property by another are included in the gross estate.

The taxable estate of a married decedent is reduced by a deduction for all property passing to the decedent&#x27;s spouse. Certain terminable interests are included. Other conditions may apply.

Donors of gifts in excess of the annual exclusion must file gift tax returns on IRS Form 709 and pay the tax. Executors of estates with a gross value in excess of the unified credit must file an estate tax return on IRS Form 706 and pay the tax from the estate. Returns are required if the gifts or gross estate exceed the exclusions. Each state has its own forms and filing requirements. Tax authorities may examine and adjust gift and estate tax returns.

==Licenses and occupational taxes==
Many jurisdictions within the United States impose taxes or fees on the privilege of carrying on a particular business or maintaining a particular professional certification. These licensing or occupational taxes may be a fixed dollar amount per year for the licensee, an amount based on the number of practitioners in the firm, a percentage of revenue, or any of several other bases. Persons providing professional or personal services are often subject to such fees. Common examples include accountants, attorneys, barbers, casinos, dentists, doctors, auto mechanics, plumbers, and stockbrokers. In addition to the tax, other requirements may be imposed for licensure.

All 50 states impose a vehicle license fee. Generally, the fees are based on the type and size of the vehicle and are imposed annually or biannually. All states and the District of Columbia also impose a fee for a driver&#x27;s license, which generally must be renewed with payment of fee every few years.

===User fees===
Fees are often imposed by governments for use of certain facilities or services. Such fees are generally imposed at the time of use. Multi-use permits may be available. For example, fees are imposed for use of national or state parks, for requesting and obtaining certain rulings from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS), for the use of certain highways (called &quot;tolls&quot; or toll roads), for parking on public streets, and for the use of public transit.

==Tax administration==
Taxes in the United States are administered by hundreds of tax authorities. At the federal level there are three tax administrations. Most domestic federal taxes are administered by the Internal Revenue Service, which is part of the Department of the Treasury. Alcohol, tobacco, and firearms taxes are administered by the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB). Taxes on imports (customs duties) are administered by U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP). TTB is also part of the Department of the Treasury and CBP belongs to the Department of Homeland Security.

Organization of state and local tax administrations varies widely. Every state maintains a tax administration. A few states administer some local taxes in whole or part. Most localities also maintain a tax administration or share one with neighboring localities.

===Federal===

====Internal Revenue Service====
The Internal Revenue Service administers all U.S. federal tax laws on domestic activities, except those taxes administered by TTB. IRS functions include:
* Processing federal tax returns (except TTB returns), including those for Social Security and other federal payroll taxes
* Providing assistance to taxpayers in completing tax returns
* Collecting all taxes due related to such returns
* Enforcement of tax laws through examination of returns and assessment of penalties
* Providing an appeals mechanism for federal tax disputes
* Referring matters to the Justice Department for prosecution
* Publishing information about U.S. federal taxes, including forms, publications, and other materials
* Providing written guidance in the form of rulings binding on the IRS for the public and for particular taxpayers

The IRS maintains several Service Centers at which tax returns are processed. Taxpayers generally file most types of tax returns by mail with these Service Centers, or file electronically. The IRS also maintains a National Office in Washington, DC, and numerous local offices providing taxpayer services and administering tax examinations.

=====Examination=====
Tax returns filed with the IRS are subject to examination and adjustment, commonly called an IRS audit. Only a small percentage of returns (about 1% of individual returns in IRS FY 2008) are examined each year. The selection of returns uses a variety of methods based on IRS experiences. On examination, the IRS may request additional information from the taxpayer by mail, in person at IRS local offices, or at the business location of the taxpayer. The taxpayer is entitled to representation by an attorney, Certified Public Accountant (CPA), or enrolled agent, at the expense of the taxpayer, who may make representations to the IRS on behalf of the taxpayer.

Taxpayers have certain rights in an audit. Upon conclusion of the audit, the IRS may accept the tax return as filed or propose adjustments to the return. The IRS may also assess penalties and interest. Generally, adjustments must be proposed within three years of the due date of the tax return. Certain circumstances extend this time limit, including substantial understatement of income and fraud. The taxpayer and the IRS may agree to allow the IRS additional time to conclude an audit. If the IRS proposes adjustments, the taxpayer may agree to the adjustment, appeal within the IRS, or seek judicial determination of the tax.

=====Published and private rulings=====
In addition to enforcing tax laws, the IRS provides formal and informal guidance to taxpayers. While often referred to as IRS Regulations, the regulations under the Internal Revenue Code are issued by the Department of Treasury. IRS guidance consists of:

* Revenue Rulings, Revenue Procedures, and various IRS pronouncements applicable to all taxpayers and published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin, which are binding on the IRS
* Private letter rulings on specific issues, applicable only to the taxpayer who applied for the ruling
* IRS Publications providing informal instruction to the public on tax matters 
* IRS forms and instructions
* A comprehensive web site 
* Informal (nonbinding) advice by telephone

====Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau====
The Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Trade Bureau (TTB), a division of the Department of the Treasury, enforces federal excise tax laws related to alcohol, tobacco, and firearms. TTB has six divisions, each with discrete functions:

* Revenue Center: processes tax returns and issues permits, and related activities
* Risk Management: internally develops guidelines and monitors programs
* Tax Audit: verifies filing and payment of taxes
* Trade Investigations: investigating arm for non-tobacco items
* Tobacco Enforcement Division: enforcement actions for tobacco
* Advertising, Labeling, and Formulation Division: implements various labeling and ingredient monitoring

Criminal enforcement related to TTB is done by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, a division of the Justice Department.

====Customs and Border Protection====
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), an agency of the United States Department of Homeland Security, collects customs duties and regulates international trade. It has a workforce of over 58,000 employees covering over 300 official ports of entry to the United States. CBP has authority to seize and dispose of cargo in the case of certain violations of customs rules.

===State administrations===
Every state in the United States has its own tax administration, subject to the rules of that state&#x27;s law and regulations. For example, the California Franchise Tax Board. These are referred to in most states as the Department of Revenue or Department of Taxation. The powers of the state taxing authorities vary widely. Most enforce all state level taxes but not most local taxes. However, many states have unified state-level sales tax administration, including for local sales taxes.

State tax returns are filed separately with those tax administrations, not with the federal tax administrations. Each state has its own procedural rules, which vary widely.

===Local administrations===
Most localities within the United States administer most of their own taxes. In many cases, there are multiple local taxing jurisdictions with respect to a particular taxpayer or property. For property taxes, the taxing jurisdiction is typically represented by a tax assessor/collector whose offices are located at the taxing jurisdiction&#x27;s facilities.

==Legal basis==
The United States Constitution provides that Congress &quot;shall have the power to lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts, and Excises ... but all Duties, Imposts, and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States.&quot; Prior to amendment, it provided that &quot;No Capitation, or other direct, Tax shall be Laid unless in proportion to the Census ...&quot; The 16th Amendment provided that &quot;Congress shall have the power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source derived, without apportionment among the several States, and without regard to any census or enumeration.&quot; The 10th Amendment provided that &quot;powers not delegated to the United States by this Constitution, nor prohibited to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.&quot;

Congress has enacted numerous laws dealing with taxes since adoption of the Constitution. Those laws are now codified as Title 19, Customs Duties, Title 26, Internal Revenue Code, and various other provisions. These laws specifically authorize the United States Secretary of the Treasury to delegate various powers related to levy, assessment and collection of taxes.

State constitutions uniformly grant the state government the right to levy and collect taxes. Limitations under state constitutions vary widely.

Various fringe individuals and groups have questioned the legitimacy of United States federal income tax. These arguments are varied, but have been uniformly rejected by the Internal Revenue Service and by the courts and ruled to be frivolous.

==Policy issues==


Commentators Benjamin Page, Larry Bartels, and Jason Seawright contend that Federal tax policy in relation to regulation and reform in the United States tends to favor wealthy Americans. They assert that political influence is a legal right the wealthy can exercise by contributing funds to lobby for their policy preference.

Each major type of tax in the United States has been used by some jurisdiction at some time as a tool of social policy. Both liberals and conservatives have called for more progressive taxes in the U.S. Page, Bartels, and Seawright assert that, although members of the government favor a move toward progressive taxes, due to budget deficits, upper class citizens are not yet willing to make a push for the change. Tax cuts were provided during the Bush administration, and were extended in 2010, making federal income taxes less progressive.

===Tax evasion===
The Internal Revenue Service estimated that, in 2001, the tax gap was $345 billion. The tax gap is the difference between the amount of tax legally owed and the amount actually collected by the government. The tax gap in 2006 was estimated to be $450 billion. The tax gap two years later in 2008 was estimated to be in the range of $450$500 billion and unreported income was estimated to be approximately $2 trillion. Therefore, 1819 percent of total reportable income was not properly reported to the IRS.

== Penalties ==

The IRS considers different reasons to penalize, missing tax deadlines or making errors on your return can lead to penalties from the IRS. These penalties apply to situations like failing to file on time, not paying what you owe, or including inaccurate information. The IRS may also charge interest on unpaid penalties, and some penalties accrue monthly until the full amount is settled. To avoid these consequences, it&#x27;s important to understand the different types of penalties, how to address them if you receive one, and most importantly, how to file your taxes accurately and on time.
The IRS will inform the recipient when the penalty will be assessed by means of a notice or a letter in the mail. These documents will detail the penalty, the reason for the penalty and what steps to take next. Likewise, the detailed information must be corroborated, since if the user can resolve the problem as soon as possible, the fine will not be imposed.
The IRS applies certain interest on the penalties that have been incurred. However, the date from which interest begins to be charged may vary depending on the type of penalty that has been imposed. This interest accrues on the amount owed until the entire balance is paid. On the other hand, it is important to consider that interest can significantly increase the total amount owed, so the user should take care of his tax obligations as soon as possible and in an efficient manner so that he can avoid any additional charges. It is important to be aware that the IRS allows the penalized person to contest their penalty if they believe that the amount imposed is inadequate.

=== Interest Rates ===

The interest charged by the IRS is due to individuals or companies that do not pay their taxes or amounts due on time and does not cover the amount incurred, even if a request for extension of time has been filed. Likewise, interest may be generated in case the amount that has been paid exceeds the corresponding value. The IRS has established the tax rules and regulations in a very clear manner so that users comply with their tax obligations properly. 

=== Quarterly interest rates ===

By 2024 the quarterly interest rates are divided depending on the category to which they are assigned. Among the categories considered by the IRS, the interest imposed on overpayment not made by a business, i.e. a private individual, is 8%. On the other hand, the overpayment made by a business is 7%. The underpayment, whether by a company or a private individual, is 8%. The interest imposed on GATT (part of an overpayment by a company more than EUR 10,000) is 5.5%. For large companies with underpayments, the interest charged is 10%. Finally, the interest charged on deposit 6603 of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) (federal short-term rate) is 5%.

=== Types of penalties ===

Information return penalty

This penalty is applied when the information or tax returns are not filed on time or correctly, i.e., in case there are inconsistencies in the information this penalty will be applied to the user. In this case, charges may apply, as established in 2024, depending on the period in which the user responds after having been notified. The penalty may range from USD 60, in case the response is made 30 days later, to USD 630 for willful disregard.

Failure to File Penalty

This penalty is imposed on the individual who does not file the income tax return on the due date. In this case the fine is equivalent to 5% of the taxes that have not been paid each month, however, the ceiling is up to 25%. On the other hand, in case the penalty for not filing the return and the penalty for not paying the respective taxes are combined in the same month, the penalty for not filing is reduced by the amount of the penalty for not paying, resulting in a combined penalty of 5% for each month or part of the month that the return is late. After 5 months of non-payment of any amount, the non-filing penalty is reduced in full, however, the non-payment penalty is capped at 25%. Finally, in case the return has been filed more than 60 days late the charges can reach up to USD 485 after December 12, 2023.

Failure to pay penalty

This penalty is applied to the customer who has not paid his taxes before their due date. In this case the penalty is fixed with a percentage based on the amount of taxes that have not been paid. As previously mentioned, this penalty will not exceed 25%.

Accuracy-related penalty

This penalty is applied when the person pays less than what is stated on his or her tax return. The reasons why people fail to pay the corresponding amount may be because they have not reported the actual or full amount of their income, on the other hand, it may happen that the person has applied for some type of extension or credit for which he/she does not qualify. Within this penalty the IRS can proceed in two ways. It can apply a Negligence or disregard of the rules or regulations penalty, which is due to the lack of attention and the correct following of the U.S. tax laws to complete the tax return. It is considered that the person may recklessly or intentionally disregard the established rules or regulations. On the other hand, there may also be the case where a Substantial understatement of income tax penalty applies, which applies when the person understates his tax liability by 10% of the tax shown on his return or equals USD 5,000. However, if the person has qualified for a business deduction, the percentage is 5% or USD 5,000.

Erroneous claim for refund or credit

This penalty applies when the person has filed a claim for a refund or return of income tax for an excessive amount and no reasonable cause applies for such claim. The penalty is equal to 20% of the excessive amount that has been claimed.

Failure to Deposit Penalty

This penalty is applied when the individual has not paid the appropriate employment taxes on time and in the proper amount. These employment taxes include taxes on the individual&#x27;s income, social security and health care, and federal unemployment. The percentage of the penalty depends on how many days the payment is overdue from the due date. From 1 to 5 days is equivalent to a penalty of 2% of the amount that has not been paid, however, if the delay exceeds 15 days the percentage can increase up to 10%.

Tax preparer penalties

The tax return preparers who engage in misconduct are hereby penalized, i.e., there may be a possibility that an agent certified to prepare a third party&#x27;s tax returns may fail to comply with the established tax regulations. Charges will be made based on the number of violations, the type of regulations violated, inflation rates, and the number of tax years on record.

Dishonored Check or Other Form of Payment Penalty

This penalty will simply be alleviated when the person&#x27;s bank provider does not accept the user&#x27;s check or other form of payment. This may be because there is insufficient money in the bank account to cover the amount of tax owed. In this case the amount of the penalty is 25 USD when the amount owed is less than 1,250 USD. In case the debt exceeds this amount, the penalty is 2% of the amount owed. 

Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Corporations Penalty

This type of penalty is intended for corporations that have not made sufficient payments based on estimated tax or simply have not paid in a timely manner. Generally, corporations make these payments on a quarterly basis when they expect to pay over USD 500 on their tax return. The amount of the penalty will depend on the amount of the underpayment, the period overdue for payment and the quarterly interest rate mentioned above.

Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals Penalty

Like the previous one, the difference is that this penalty is applied to individuals, estates, or trusts. The calculation of the amount is made under the same conditions as the penalty to a corporation.

International information reporting penalties

This penalty is applied when the tax filer has its financial activity established abroad and does not comply with U.S. tax rules and regulations. In this case monthly interest is charged until the debtor pays the taxes based on the tax regulations where he files his taxes, in this case U.S.

== United States as a tax haven ==
Although the United States as a whole is not generally viewed as a tax haven, among its 50 states there are some that individuals and companies use to store their wealth and avoid or evade taxes. This fact was mostly revealed in the leaked Pandora papers  11.9 million documents that, beginning from October 31, 2021, exposed offshore accounts of world leaders and celebrities. In total the United States were revealed to shelter the second largest amount of money in the world.

=== South Dakota ===
Between the years 2011 and 2021 the assets managed in South Dakota by trust companies went from $75 billion to $367 billion. The assets are coming from all over the world  The South Dakota Trust Company has clients from 54 nations. Trusts are particularly popular in South Dakota because, in 1983, it revoked a law that prevented hereditary estates, allowing for the creation of trusts (serving to pass property onto one&#x27;s children) that, while preventing the sale of the estate assets, also shield those assets from tax. Unlike in the precedent for this in the English common law where these trusts could only exist for 21 years, South Dakota enables trusts to exist indefinitely. Trusts in South Dakota also serve as shields from government inspections and can even protect an individual if they get divorced or file a bankruptcy. In addition to this South Dakota is also one of nine states in the United States with no income tax.

=== Delaware ===
The state of Delaware is home to nearly 68% of the Fortune 500 companies. Corporation trust center in the city of Wilmington is the address to over 285,000 companies including Delaware entities of Google, Amazon, General Motors, Deutsche Bank&#x27;s subsidiaries etc. This is because this state does not collect any local and state sales tax and the companies based there are not subject to any income tax on their intangible assets. Legally this tax haven can be used by holding companies that charge their subsidiaries trademark charges  thus moving their income (in accounting terms reducing their income tax base by expenses) to the company set up in Delaware where it is not subject to state taxes. Property such as a trademark is hard to put an exact number on which offers the companies a lot of leeway on how much money they move to Delaware. If companies do not conduct any business in Delaware, then they pay a lower franchise tax instead of the corporate income tax. Also because of its business-friendly usury laws the interest rates can go above the average there and therefore Delaware attracts financial companies. Delaware also offers benefits in terms of high secrecy levels (companies do not have to file their beneficiaries nor their officers and directors) and predictable judiciary rulings in conflicts between companies.

=== Nevada ===
The state of Nevada has no state income tax, no personal income tax, no inheritance tax, and no franchise tax. This makes it a very widely used tax haven alongside of South Dakota and Delaware. Nevada also does not have an agreement with the IRS on sharing information, so some entities choose to incorporate here as to enjoy the benefits of high privacy. In addition, there are other laws on privacy and company officers&#x27; liability that make Nevada business friendly.

==Economics==
According to a 2011 study, the U.S. economy would become approximately $1.6 trillion larger or $5,200 wealthier per person, after a simplification of the complex U.S. tax system.

==History==

Before 1776, the American Colonies were subject to taxation by Great Britain and also imposed local taxes. Property taxes were imposed in the Colonies as early as 1634. In 1673, the English Parliament imposed a tax on exports from the American Colonies, and with it created the first tax administration in what would become the United States. Other tariffs and taxes were imposed by Parliament. Most of the colonies and many localities adopted property taxes.

Under Article VIII of the Articles of Confederation, the United States government did not have the power to tax. All such power lay with the states. The United States Constitution, adopted in 1787, authorized the federal government to lay and collect taxes, but required that some types of tax revenues be given to the states in proportion to population. Tariffs were the principal federal tax through the 1800s.

By 1796, state and local governments in fourteen of the 15 states taxed land. Delaware taxed the income from property. The War of 1812 required a federal sales tax on specific luxury items due to its costs. However, internal taxes were dropped in 1817 in favor of import tariffs that went to the federal government. By the American Civil War, the principle of taxation of property at a uniform rate had developed, and many of the states relied on property taxes as a major source of revenue. However, the increasing importance of intangible property, such as corporate stock, caused the states to shift to other forms of taxation in the 1900s.

Income taxes in the form of &quot;faculty&quot; taxes were imposed by the colonies. These combined income and property tax characteristics, and the income element persisted after 1776 in a few states. Several states adopted income taxes in 1837. Wisconsin adopted a corporate and individual income tax in 1911, and was the first to administer the tax with a state tax administration.

The first federal income tax was adopted as part of the Revenue Act of 1861. The tax lapsed after the American Civil War. Subsequently enacted income taxes were held to be unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in &quot;Pollock v. Farmers&#x27; Loan &amp; Trust Co.&quot; because they did not apportion taxes on property by state population. In 1913, the Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution was ratified, permitting the federal government to levy an income tax on both property and labor.
The federal income tax enacted in 1913 included corporate and individual income taxes. It defined income using language from prior laws, incorporated in the Sixteenth Amendment, as &quot;all income from whatever source derived&quot;. The tax allowed deductions for business expenses, but few non-business deductions. In 1918 the income tax law was expanded to include a foreign tax credit and more comprehensive definitions of income and deduction items. Various aspects of the present system of definitions were expanded through 1926, when U.S. law was organized as the United States Code. Income, estate, gift, and excise tax provisions, plus provisions relating to tax returns and enforcement, were codified as Title 26, also known as the Internal Revenue Code. This was reorganized and somewhat expanded in 1954, and remains in the same general form.

Federal taxes were expanded greatly during World War I. In 1921, Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon engineered a series of significant income tax cuts under three presidents. Mellon argued that tax cuts would spur growth. Taxes were raised again in the latter part of the Great Depression, and during World War II. Income tax rates were reduced significantly during the Johnson, Nixon, and Reagan presidencies. Significant tax cuts for corporations and all individuals were enacted during the second Bush presidency.

During 1936 the United States adopted the British system of deduction-at-source. This was extended to include dividends, interest, rent, wages and salaries paid by corporations. This system was short-lived as it was soon to be replaced by the system of information-at-source. As was found in Britain this proved to be one of the worst systems as it imposed a huge burden on revenue authorities to correlate large quantities of information. As had Britain, the United States returned to the deduction-at-source system thirty years after it was abolished.

In 1986, Congress adopted, with little modification, a major expansion of the income tax portion of the IRS Code proposed in 1985 by the U.S. Treasury Department under President Reagan. The thousand-page Tax Reform Act of 1986 significantly lowered tax rates, adopted sweeping expansions of international rules, eliminated the lower individual tax rate for capital gains, added significant inventory accounting rules, and made substantial other expansions of the law.

Federal income tax rates have been modified frequently. Tax rates were changed in 34 of the 97 years between 1913 and 2010. The rate structure has been graduated since the 1913 act.

The first individual income tax return Form 1040 under the 1913 law was four pages long. In 1915, some Congressmen complained about the complexity of the form. In 1921, Congress considered but did not enact replacement of the income tax with a national sales tax.

By the 1920s, many states had adopted income taxes on individuals and corporations. Many of the state taxes were simply based on the federal definitions. The states generally taxed residents on all of their income, including income earned in other states, as well as income of nonresidents earned in the state. This led to a long line of Supreme Court cases limiting the ability of states to tax income of nonresidents.

The states had also come to rely heavily on retail sales taxes. However, as of the beginning of World War II, only two cities (New York and New Orleans) had local sales taxes.

The Federal Estate Tax was introduced in 1916, and Gift Tax in 1924. Unlike many inheritance taxes, the Gift and Estate taxes were imposed on the transferor rather than the recipient. Many states adopted either inheritance taxes or estate and gift taxes, often computed as the amount allowed as a deduction for federal purposes. These taxes remained under 1% of government revenues through the 1990s.

All governments within the United States provide tax exemption for some income, property, or persons. These exemptions have their roots both in tax theory, federal and state legislative history, and the United States Constitution.

==See also==
*History of taxation in the United States
*Internal Revenue Service
*List of countries by tax rates
*List of countries by tax revenue as percentage of GDP
*Tariffs in United States history
*Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017
*Tax resistance in the United States
*Stepped-up basis

==References==
==Further reading==
Government sources:
* IRS Publication 17, Your Federal Income Tax
* U.S. Customs and Border Protection booklet &quot;Importing into the United States&quot;
* IRS website
* Links to state websites
* Customs and Border Patrol website
* Alcohol and Tobacco Tax website

Law &amp; regulations:
* Federal tax law, 26 USC
* Code of Federal Regulations, 26 CFR

Standard texts (most updated annually):
* Fox, Stephen C., &quot;Income Tax in the USA&quot;, 2013 edition 
* Hoffman, William H. Jr.; &quot;et al.&quot;, &quot;South-Western Federal Taxation&quot;, 2013 edition 
* Pratt, James W.; Kulsrud, William N.; &quot;et al&quot;, &quot;Federal Taxation&quot;, 2013 edition (cited above as Pratt).
* Whittenberg, Gerald; Altus-Buller, Martha; and Gill, Stephen, &quot;Income Tax Fundamentals 2013&quot;, 
* Hellerstein, Jerome R., and Hellerstein, Walter, &quot;State and Local Taxation: Cases and Materials&quot;, 2005, 

Reference works:
* CCH &quot;U.S. Master Tax Guide, 2010&quot; 
* RIA &quot;Federal Tax Handbook 2010&quot; 

Popular publications (annual):
* &quot;J.K. Lasser&#x27;s Your Income Tax for 2010&quot; 

Articles
* Robinson, Sarah; Tazhitdinova, Alisa (2025). &quot;&quot;. &quot;Journal of Public Economics.&quot;
* Bryce Covert and Mike Konczal, &quot;Make It Simple: An easier way to do taxes&quot;, &quot;The Nation&quot;, June 26, / July 3, 2023, p.14. &quot;In early 2024, a few taxpayers will participate in a[n Internal Revenue Service] project to file their taxes for free with the government... The IRS will pilot a free direct-filing system... that could save Americans $33 billion a year on tax software and filing fees. And the IRS could do even more. The IRS could autofill forms for nearly half of returns. But tax-preparation giants fight attempts to simplify.&quot;

==External links==
* Tariffs applied by the United States as provided by ITC&#x27;s Market Access Map, an online database of customs tariffs and market requirements.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4" end="17" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="31" end="38" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="40" end="45" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q516156" start="51" end="67" title="Local government in the United States" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035701" start="167" end="180" title="Capital gains tax in the United States" label="capital gains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="333" end="336" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="348" end="352" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308197" start="384" end="387" title="Income tax in the United States" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="414" end="425" title="Progressive tax" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q950001" start="457" end="474" title="income inequality in the United States" label="income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036463" start="731" end="755" title="Earned Income Tax Credit" label="Earned Income Tax Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="1001" end="1011" title="Income tax" label="net income"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468254" start="1395" end="1426" title="Inflation Reduction Act of 2022" label="Inflation Reduction Act of 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892410" start="1753" end="1775" title="Home mortgage interest deduction" label="home mortgage interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q107657209" start="1777" end="1798" title="State and local tax deduction" label="state and local taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074431" start="1800" end="1824" title="Charitable contribution deductions in the United States" label="charitable contributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128317" start="2005" end="2013" title="tax rate" label="tax rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955478" start="2263" end="2275" title="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017" label="2017 tax law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839797" start="2687" end="2701" title="tri-state area" label="tri-state area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513250" start="2873" end="2904" title="Citizenship-based taxation" label="taxes its non-resident citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468380" start="3107" end="3138" title="foreign earned income exclusion" label="foreign earned income exclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156893" start="3343" end="3354" title="Payroll tax" label="Payroll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="4019" end="4031" title="Property tax" label="Property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="4496" end="4505" title="Sales tax" label="Sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="4938" end="4945" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="5192" end="5198" title="Inheritance tax" label="Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118234" start="5203" end="5211" title="gift tax" label="gift tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="6745" end="6753" title="tax base" label="tax base"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7772" end="7809" title="History of taxation in the United States#Pre-16th Amendment" label="first income tax in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146780" start="7835" end="7854" title="Revenue Act of 1861" label="Revenue Act of 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="7858" end="7873" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="7885" end="7894" title="Civil War (US)" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="7908" end="7921" title="United States Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="8019" end="8035" title="Constitutionality" label="unconstitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225714" start="8045" end="8090" title="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co." label="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q926871" start="8115" end="8125" title="direct tax" label="direct tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="8201" end="8254" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566724" start="8380" end="8403" title="South Carolina v. Baker" label="South Carolina v. Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979716" start="8421" end="8459" title="Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad Co." label="Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683077" start="10169" end="10181" title="gross income" label="gross income"/>
<link wikidata="Q705450" start="10342" end="10355" title="tax exemption" label="tax exemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893102" start="10414" end="10427" title="tax deduction" label="tax deduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313706" start="10529" end="10548" title="Personal exemption (United States)" label="personal exemptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468604" start="10774" end="10792" title="foreign tax credit" label="foreign tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468380" start="10877" end="10908" title="foreign earned income exclusion" label="foreign earned income exclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689418" start="11544" end="11563" title="Combined reporting" label="consolidated return"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="11972" end="11992" title="domestic partnership" label="domestic partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955478" start="12699" end="12728" title="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017" label="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q107657209" start="13152" end="13173" title="State and local tax deduction" label="State and local taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955478" start="13292" end="13321" title="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017" label="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683077" start="13470" end="13482" title="gross income" label="gross income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893102" start="13514" end="13527" title="tax deduction" label="tax deduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154181" start="13615" end="13633" title="cost of goods sold" label="cost of goods sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="13809" end="13812" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="IRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q705450" start="14215" end="14228" title="tax exemption" label="tax exemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242841" start="14832" end="14844" title="tax treaty" label="tax treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120326" start="16435" end="16449" title="tax accounting" label="tax accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q114403" start="16751" end="16763" title="depreciation" label="depreciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105276450" start="16767" end="16779" title="Amortization (tax law)" label="amortization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313706" start="16866" end="16885" title="Personal exemption (United States)" label="personal exemptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598340" start="16905" end="16923" title="standard deduction" label="standard deduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094371" start="16927" end="16945" title="itemized deduction" label="itemized deduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892410" start="17217" end="17239" title="Home mortgage interest deduction" label="home mortgage interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q107657209" start="17241" end="17262" title="State and local tax deduction" label="state and local taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074431" start="17285" end="17322" title="Charitable contribution deductions in the United States" label="contributions to recognized charities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683209" start="17362" end="17383" title="adjusted gross income" label="adjusted gross income"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901333" start="17932" end="17945" title="S corporation" label="S corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q149789" start="18001" end="18026" title="limited liability company" label="limited liability company"/>
<link wikidata="Q109743477" start="18585" end="18601" title="Child tax credit (United States)" label="child tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744608" start="18628" end="18659" title="American Opportunity Tax Credit" label="American Opportunity Tax Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036463" start="18691" end="18715" title="Earned Income Tax Credit" label="Earned Income Tax Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468604" start="18903" end="18921" title="foreign tax credit" label="foreign tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004925" start="20007" end="20015" title="Form W-4" label="Form W-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="20087" end="20093" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="20136" end="20146" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q107657209" start="20473" end="20482" title="State and local tax deduction" label="deduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955478" start="20576" end="20588" title="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017" label="2017 tax law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21868" end="21880" title="International taxation#Source of income" label="U.S. sources"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22081" end="22089" title="Tax withholding in the United States#Withholding on payments to foreign persons" label="withhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242841" start="22199" end="22209" title="tax treaty" label="tax treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736466" start="22300" end="22323" title="alternative minimum tax" label="alternative minimum tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683209" start="22477" end="22498" title="adjusted gross income" label="adjusted gross income"/>
<link wikidata="Q650978" start="23310" end="23355" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)" label="U.S. generally accepted accounting principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154181" start="23848" end="23866" title="cost of goods sold" label="cost of goods sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q115185112" start="24194" end="24205" title="Tax return (United States)" label="tax returns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24596" end="24612" title="IRS tax forms#1098 series" label="Form 1040 series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24647" end="24658" title="IRS tax forms#1120" label="1120 series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24682" end="24686" title="IRS tax forms#1065" label="1065"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24714" end="24724" title="IRS tax forms#990" label="990 series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25022" end="25042" title="Combined reporting#United States consolidated returns" label="consolidated returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308197" start="25377" end="25400" title="Income tax in the United States" label="U.S. federal income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850816" start="25431" end="25443" title="capital gain" label="capital gain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25495" end="25506" title="tax bracket#Tax brackets in the United States" label="tax bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141694" start="25613" end="25628" title="ordinary income" label="ordinary income"/>
<link wikidata="Q180674" start="26521" end="26536" title="withholding tax" label="withholding tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004925" start="26878" end="26886" title="Form W-4" label="Form W-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062630" start="26995" end="27005" title="tax credit" label="tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062630" start="27976" end="27986" title="tax credit" label="tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326019" start="29488" end="29513" title="electronic funds transfer" label="electronic funds transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="31031" end="31046" title="value added tax" label="value added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q321809" start="32573" end="32580" title="Alcohol tax" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429965" start="33296" end="33313" title="fair market value" label="fair market value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="34589" end="34597" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435947" start="35165" end="35177" title="tax assessor" label="tax assessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80161922" start="35386" end="35398" title="property tax equalization" label="equalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="36042" end="36049" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044003" start="37787" end="37797" title="ATA Carnet" label="ATA Carnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373417" start="37965" end="37982" title="country of origin" label="country of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190272" start="39336" end="39350" title="bill of lading" label="bill of lading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468613" start="40527" end="40546" title="Foreign trade zones of the United States" label="Foreign-Trade Zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611069" start="43388" end="43404" title="Stepped-up basis" label="Stepped-up basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="44479" end="44502" title="closely held corporation" label="closely held businesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="47445" end="47471" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="Department of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="47636" end="47670" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="47702" end="47728" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="Department of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="47752" end="47783" title="United States Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153408" start="49774" end="49782" title="Attorneys in the United States" label="attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056337" start="49784" end="49811" title="Certified Public Accountant" label="Certified Public Accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367303" start="49822" end="49836" title="enrolled agent" label="enrolled agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973605" start="50116" end="50125" title="IRS penalties" label="penalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747823" start="50503" end="50524" title="Office of Appeals" label="appeal within the IRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318024" start="50868" end="50882" title="Revenue Ruling" label="Revenue Ruling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047674" start="50985" end="51010" title="Internal Revenue Bulletin" label="Internal Revenue Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246219" start="51043" end="51064" title="Private letter ruling" label="Private letter ruling"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="51442" end="51468" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="Department of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q434371" start="52090" end="52142" title="Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives" label="Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="52162" end="52180" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="52280" end="52325" title="United States Department of Homeland Security" label="United States Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020495" start="52768" end="52798" title="California Franchise Tax Board" label="California Franchise Tax Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="53697" end="53723" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="53738" end="53746" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="54065" end="54079" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="16th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q164665" start="54304" end="54318" title="Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="10th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q10080014" start="55029" end="55051" title="Tax protester (United States)" label="individuals and groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689464" start="55126" end="55135" title="Tax protester arguments" label="arguments"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="55779" end="55794" title="progressive tax" label="progressive tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="56699" end="56702" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="IRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="65087" end="65096" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q108782773" start="65260" end="65274" title="Pandora Papers" label="Pandora papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="65618" end="65619" title="USD" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172531" start="66554" end="66578" title="Corporation Trust Center (CT Corporation)" label="Corporation trust center"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="68585" end="68598" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="69009" end="69034" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="69136" end="69162" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="69720" end="69738" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146780" start="70483" end="70502" title="Revenue Act of 1861" label="Revenue Act of 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225714" start="70646" end="70691" title="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co." label="Pollock v. Farmers&amp;#x27; Loan &amp;amp; Trust Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="70781" end="70834" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="71090" end="71109" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468604" start="71303" end="71321" title="foreign tax credit" label="foreign tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666281" start="71675" end="71696" title="Internal Revenue Code" label="Internal Revenue Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="71832" end="71843" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q446858" start="71873" end="71886" title="Andrew Mellon" label="Andrew Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="72059" end="72075" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="72088" end="72100" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824563" start="72157" end="72164" title="Presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="72166" end="72171" title="Presidency of Richard Nixon" label="Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="72177" end="72196" title="Presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan presidencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="72280" end="72302" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="second Bush presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16326070" start="73064" end="73086" title="Tax Reform Act of 1986" label="Tax Reform Act of 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q705450" start="74826" end="74839" title="tax exemption" label="tax exemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934092" start="75023" end="75063" title="History of taxation in the United States" label="History of taxation in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="75065" end="75089" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361588" start="75091" end="75121" title="List of countries by tax rates" label="List of countries by tax rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529105" start="75123" end="75176" title="List of countries by tax revenue as percentage of GDP" label="List of countries by tax revenue as percentage of GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686042" start="75178" end="75210" title="Tariffs in United States history" label="Tariffs in United States history"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955478" start="75212" end="75241" title="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017" label="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742314" start="75243" end="75278" title="Tax resistance in the United States" label="Tax resistance in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611069" start="75280" end="75296" title="Stepped-up basis" label="Stepped-up basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="76658" end="76668" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="76859" end="76862" title="IRS" label="IRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689457" start="77076" end="77091" title="tax preparation" label="tax-preparation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30554" wikidata="Q1191433" url="?curid=30554" title="Tychonoff space">
<text>In topology and related branches of mathematics, Tychonoff spaces and completely regular spaces are kinds of topological spaces. These conditions are examples of separation axioms. A Tychonoff space is any completely regular space that is also a Hausdorff space; there exist completely regular spaces that are not Tychonoff (i.e. not Hausdorff).

Paul Urysohn had used the notion of completely regular space in a 1925 paper without giving it a name. But it was Andrey Tychonoff who introduced the terminology &quot;completely regular&quot; in 1930.

==Definitions==

A topological space formula_1 is called if points can be separated from closed sets via (bounded) continuous real-valued functions. In technical terms this means: for any closed set formula_2 and any point formula_3 there exists a real-valued continuous function formula_4 such that formula_5 and formula_6 (Equivalently one can choose any two values instead of formula_7 and formula_8 and even require that formula_9 be a bounded function.)

A topological space is called a &#x27; (alternatively: &#x27;, or , or ) if it is a completely regular Hausdorff space.

Remark. Completely regular spaces and Tychonoff spaces are related through the notion of Kolmogorov equivalence. A topological space is Tychonoff if and only if it&#x27;s both completely regular and T0. On the other hand, a space is completely regular if and only if its Kolmogorov quotient is Tychonoff.

==Naming conventions==

Across mathematical literature different conventions are applied when it comes to the term &quot;completely regular&quot; and the &quot;T&quot;-Axioms. The definitions in this section are in typical modern usage. Some authors, however, switch the meanings of the two kinds of terms, or use all terms interchangeably. In Wikipedia, the terms &quot;completely regular&quot; and &quot;Tychonoff&quot; are used freely and the &quot;T&quot;-notation is generally avoided. In standard literature, caution is thus advised, to find out which definitions the author is using. For more on this issue, see History of the separation axioms.

==Examples==

Almost every topological space studied in mathematical analysis is Tychonoff, or at least completely regular.
For example, the real line is Tychonoff under the standard Euclidean topology.
Other examples include:

* Every metric space is Tychonoff; every pseudometric space is completely regular.
* Every locally compact regular space is completely regular, and therefore every locally compact Hausdorff space is Tychonoff.
* In particular, every topological manifold is Tychonoff.
* Every totally ordered set with the order topology is Tychonoff.
* Every topological group is completely regular.
* Every pseudometrizable space is completely regular, but not Tychonoff if the space is not Hausdorff.
* Every seminormed space is completely regular (both because it is pseudometrizable and because it is a topological vector space, hence a topological group). But it will not be Tychonoff if the seminorm is not a norm.
* Generalizing both the metric spaces and the topological groups, every uniform space is completely regular. The converse is also true: every completely regular space is uniformisable.
* Every CW complex is Tychonoff.
* Every normal regular space is completely regular, and every normal Hausdorff space is Tychonoff.
* The Niemytzki plane is an example of a Tychonoff space that is not normal.

There are regular Hausdorff spaces that are not completely regular, but such examples are complicated to construct. One of them is the so-called &quot;Tychonoff corkscrew&quot;, which contains two points such that any continuous real-valued function on the space has the same value at these two points. An even more complicated construction starts with the Tychonoff corkscrew and builds a regular Hausdorff space called &quot;Hewitt&#x27;s condensed corkscrew&quot;, which is not completely regular in a stronger way, namely, every continuous real-valued function on the space is constant.

==Properties==

===Preservation===

Complete regularity and the Tychonoff property are well-behaved with respect to initial topologies. Specifically, complete regularity is preserved by taking arbitrary initial topologies and the Tychonoff property is preserved by taking point-separating initial topologies. It follows that:
* Every subspace of a completely regular or Tychonoff space has the same property.
* A nonempty product space is completely regular (respectively Tychonoff) if and only if each factor space is completely regular (respectively Tychonoff).

Like all separation axioms, complete regularity is not preserved by taking final topologies. In particular, quotients of completely regular spaces need not be regular. Quotients of Tychonoff spaces need not even be Hausdorff, with one elementary counterexample being the line with two origins. There are closed quotients of the Moore plane that provide counterexamples.

===Real-valued continuous functions===

For any topological space formula_10 let formula_11 denote the family of real-valued continuous functions on formula_1 and let formula_13 be the subset of bounded real-valued continuous functions.

Completely regular spaces can be characterized by the fact that their topology is completely determined by formula_11 or formula_15 In particular:

* A space formula_1 is completely regular if and only if it has the initial topology induced by formula_11 or formula_15
* A space formula_1 is completely regular if and only if every closed set can be written as the intersection of a family of zero sets in formula_1 (i.e. the zero sets form a basis for the closed sets of formula_1).
* A space formula_1 is completely regular if and only if the cozero sets of formula_1 form a basis for the topology of formula_24

Given an arbitrary topological space formula_25 there is a universal way of associating a completely regular space with formula_26 Let  be the initial topology on formula_1 induced by formula_28 or, equivalently, the topology generated by the basis of cozero sets in formula_26 Then  will be the finest completely regular topology on formula_1 that is coarser than formula_31 This construction is universal in the sense that any continuous function
formula_32
to a completely regular space formula_33 will be continuous on formula_34 In the language of category theory, the functor that sends formula_25 to formula_36 is left adjoint to the inclusion functor CReg  Top. Thus the category of completely regular spaces CReg is a reflective subcategory of Top, the category of topological spaces. By taking Kolmogorov quotients, one sees that the subcategory of Tychonoff spaces is also reflective.

One can show that formula_37 in the above construction so that the rings formula_11 and formula_13 are typically only studied for completely regular spaces formula_24

The category of realcompact Tychonoff spaces is anti-equivalent to the category of the rings formula_11 (where formula_1 is realcompact) together with ring homomorphisms as maps. For example one can reconstruct formula_1 from formula_11 when formula_1 is (real) compact. The algebraic theory of these rings is therefore subject of intensive studies.
A vast generalization of this class of rings that still resembles many properties of Tychonoff spaces, but is also applicable in real algebraic geometry, is the class of real closed rings.

===Embeddings===

Tychonoff spaces are precisely those spaces that can be embedded in compact Hausdorff spaces. More precisely, for every Tychonoff space formula_10 there exists a compact Hausdorff space formula_47 such that formula_1 is homeomorphic to a subspace of formula_49

In fact, one can always choose formula_47 to be a Tychonoff cube (i.e. a possibly infinite product of unit intervals). Every Tychonoff cube is compact Hausdorff as a consequence of Tychonoff&#x27;s theorem. Since every subspace of a compact Hausdorff space is Tychonoff one has:

:&quot;A topological space is Tychonoff if and only if it can be embedded in a Tychonoff cube&quot;.

===Compactifications===

Of particular interest are those embeddings where the image of formula_1 is dense in formula_52 these are called Hausdorff compactifications of formula_24
Given any embedding of a Tychonoff space formula_1 in a compact Hausdorff space formula_47 the closure of the image of formula_1 in formula_47 is a compactification of formula_24
In the same 1930 article where Tychonoff defined completely regular spaces, he also proved that every Tychonoff space has a Hausdorff compactification.

Among those Hausdorff compactifications, there is a unique &quot;most general&quot; one, the Stoneech compactification formula_59
It is characterized by the universal property that, given a continuous map formula_9 from formula_1 to any other compact Hausdorff space formula_62 there is a unique continuous map formula_63 that extends formula_9 in the sense that formula_9 is the composition of formula_66 and formula_67

===Uniform structures===

Complete regularity is exactly the condition necessary for the existence of uniform structures on a topological space. In other words, every uniform space has a completely regular topology and every completely regular space formula_1 is uniformizable. A topological space admits a separated uniform structure if and only if it is Tychonoff.

Given a completely regular space formula_1 there is usually more than one uniformity on formula_1 that is compatible with the topology of formula_24 However, there will always be a finest compatible uniformity, called the fine uniformity on formula_24 If formula_1 is Tychonoff, then the uniform structure can be chosen so that formula_74 becomes the completion of the uniform space formula_24

==See also==

==Citations==
==Bibliography==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="3" end="11" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="36" end="47" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="49" end="65" title="Tychonoff space" label="Tychonoff spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="70" end="95" title="Tychonoff space" label="completely regular spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="109" end="126" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140985" start="162" end="178" title="separation axiom" label="separation axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="246" end="261" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q451716" start="347" end="359" title="Paul Urysohn" label="Paul Urysohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q372026" start="461" end="477" title="Andrey Tychonoff" label="Andrey Tychonoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q257272" start="624" end="633" title="Separated sets" label="separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="738" end="748" title="closed set" label="closed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q44946" start="767" end="772" title="Point (geometry)" label="point"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="798" end="809" title="real line" label="real-valued"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="810" end="829" title="continuous function (topology)" label="continuous function"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="1113" end="1128" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="1220" end="1242" title="Kolmogorov equivalence" label="Kolmogorov equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="1330" end="1332" title="Kolmogorov space" label="T0"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="1402" end="1421" title="Kolmogorov quotient" label="Kolmogorov quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870906" start="2056" end="2088" title="History of the separation axioms" label="History of the separation axioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="2147" end="2168" title="mathematical analysis" label="mathematical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="2232" end="2241" title="real line" label="real line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="2274" end="2292" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="2327" end="2339" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397059" start="2360" end="2378" title="pseudometric space" label="pseudometric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="2410" end="2425" title="locally compact" label="locally compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="2426" end="2439" title="regular space" label="regular space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721559" start="2552" end="2572" title="topological manifold" label="topological manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="2595" end="2614" title="totally ordered set" label="totally ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321469" start="2624" end="2638" title="order topology" label="order topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="2661" end="2678" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397059" start="2710" end="2726" title="pseudometrizable" label="pseudometrizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416088" start="2813" end="2829" title="seminormed space" label="seminormed space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455249" start="2909" end="2933" title="topological vector space" label="topological vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="3095" end="3108" title="uniform space" label="uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q189061" start="3216" end="3226" title="CW complex" label="CW complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="3249" end="3255" title="Normal space" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q839999" start="3346" end="3361" title="Niemytzki plane" label="Niemytzki plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="3409" end="3415" title="Normal space" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416298" start="4126" end="4144" title="initial topology" label="initial topologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="4344" end="4352" title="subspace (topology)" label="subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="4432" end="4445" title="product space" label="product space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416138" start="4650" end="4666" title="Final topology" label="final topologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="4683" end="4692" title="Quotient space (topology)" label="quotients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="4734" end="4741" title="Regular space" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="4790" end="4799" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048762" start="4846" end="4867" title="line with two origins" label="line with two origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q839999" start="4903" end="4914" title="Moore plane" label="Moore plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="5071" end="5091" title="Continuous function (topology)" label="continuous functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267362" start="5141" end="5148" title="Bounded function" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416298" start="5400" end="5416" title="initial topology" label="initial topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="5577" end="5585" title="zero set" label="zero set"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="5729" end="5739" title="cozero set" label="cozero set"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="5761" end="5766" title="Basis (topology)" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="6097" end="6103" title="Finest topology" label="finest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417809" start="6198" end="6207" title="Universal property" label="universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="6354" end="6369" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q864475" start="6375" end="6382" title="functor" label="functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q357858" start="6422" end="6434" title="left adjoint" label="left adjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101219" start="6529" end="6551" title="reflective subcategory" label="reflective subcategory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000555" start="6564" end="6594" title="category of topological spaces" label="category of topological spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="6606" end="6625" title="Kolmogorov quotient" label="Kolmogorov quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301190" start="6883" end="6894" title="Realcompact space" label="realcompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301119" start="7346" end="7369" title="real algebraic geometry" label="real algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301124" start="7387" end="7403" title="real closed ring" label="real closed ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q980509" start="7481" end="7489" title="Topological embedding" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="7493" end="7516" title="compact Hausdorff space" label="compact Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="7645" end="7657" title="homeomorphic" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337810" start="7737" end="7751" title="Tychonoff cube" label="Tychonoff cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987578" start="7789" end="7802" title="unit interval" label="unit interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137014" start="7868" end="7892" title="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="8170" end="8175" title="Dense subset" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q546145" start="8217" end="8234" title="Compactification (mathematics)" label="compactifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q320346" start="8344" end="8351" title="Closure (topology)" label="closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033899" start="8674" end="8701" title="Stoneech compactification" label="Stoneech compactification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417809" start="8740" end="8758" title="universal property" label="universal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502253" start="8872" end="8878" title="Unique (mathematics)" label="unique"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="8963" end="8974" title="Composition (functions)" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="9107" end="9124" title="uniform structure" label="uniform structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="9172" end="9185" title="uniform space" label="uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885139" start="9268" end="9281" title="uniformizable" label="uniformizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885139" start="9595" end="9610" title="fine uniformity" label="fine uniformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="9724" end="9734" title="Completion (topology)" label="completion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30555" wikidata="Q72941682" url="?curid=30555" title="Tattoo">
<text>A tattoo is a form of body modification made by inserting tattoo ink, dyes, and/or pigments, either indelible or temporary, into the dermis layer of the skin to form a design. Tattoo artists create these designs using several tattooing processes and techniques, including hand-tapped traditional tattoos and modern tattoo machines. The history of tattooing goes back to Neolithic times, practiced across the globe by many cultures, and the symbolism and impact of tattoos varies in different places and cultures.

Tattoos may be decorative (with no specific meaning), symbolic (with a specific meaning to the wearer), pictorial (a depiction of a specific person or item), or textual (words or pictographs from written languages). Many tattoos serve as rites of passage, marks of status and rank, symbols of religious and spiritual devotion, decorations for bravery, marks of fertility, pledges of love, amulets and talismans, protection, and as punishment, like the marks of outcasts, slaves and convicts. Extensive decorative tattooing has also been part of the work of performance artists such as tattooed ladies.

Although tattoo art has existed at least since the first known tattooed person, tzi, lived around the year 3330 BCE, the way society perceives tattoos has varied immensely throughout history. In the 20th century, tattoo art throughout most of the world was associated with a limited selection of specific &quot;rugged&quot; lifestyles, notably sailors and prisoners. In the 21st century, people choose to be tattooed for artistic, cosmetic, sentimental/memorial, religious, and spiritual reasons, or to symbolize their belonging to or identification with particular groups, including criminal gangs (see criminal tattoos) or a particular ethnic group or law-abiding subculture. Tattoos may show how a person feels about a relative (commonly a parent or child) or about an unrelated person.

Tattoos can also be used for functional purposes, such as identification, permanent makeup, and medical purposes.

== Terminology ==
The word &quot;&quot;, or &quot;tattow&quot; in the 18th century, is a loanword from the Samoan word , meaning &quot;to strike&quot;, from Proto-Oceanic *&quot;sau&quot; referring to a wingbone from a flying fox used as an instrument for the tattooing process. The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; gives the etymology of tattoo as &quot;In 18th c. tattaow, tattow. From Polynesian (Samoan, Tahitian, Tongan, etc.) tatau. In Marquesan, tatu.&quot; Before the importation of the Polynesian word, the practice of tattooing had been described in the West as painting, scarring, or staining.

The etymology of the body modification term is not to be confused with the origins of the word for the military drumbeat or performance. In this case, the English word &quot;tattoo&quot; is derived from the Dutch word .

Copyrighted tattoo designs that are mass-produced and sent to tattoo artists are known as &quot;flash&quot;. Flash sheets are prominently displayed in many tattoo parlors for the purpose of providing both inspiration and ready-made tattoo images to customers.

The Japanese word means &quot;insertion of ink&quot; and can mean tattoos using , the traditional Japanese hand method, a Western-style machine or any method of tattooing using insertion of ink. The most common word used for traditional Japanese tattoo designs is . Japanese may use the word Western &quot;tattoo&quot; as a loan word meaning any non-Japanese styles of tattooing.

British anthropologist Ling Roth in 1900 described four methods of skin marking and suggested they be differentiated under the names &quot;tatu&quot;, &quot;moko&quot;, &quot;cicatrix&quot; and &quot;keloid&quot;. The first is by pricking that leaves the skin smooth as found in places including the Pacific Islands. The second is a tattoo combined with chiseling to leave furrows in the skin as found in places including New Zealand. The third is scarification using a knife or chisel as found in places including West Africa. The fourth and the last is scarification by irritating and re-opening a preexisting wound, and re-scarification to form a raised scar as found in places including Tasmania, Australia, Melanesia and Central Africa.

== Types ==
The American Academy of Dermatology distinguishes five types of tattoos: traumatic tattoos that result from injuries, such as asphalt from road injuries or pencil lead; amateur tattoos; professional tattoos, both via traditional methods and modern tattoo machines; cosmetic tattoos, also known as &quot;permanent makeup&quot;; and medical tattoos.

=== Traumatic tattoos ===
A traumatic tattoo occurs when a substance such as asphalt or gunpowder is rubbed into a wound as the result of some kind of accident or trauma. When this involves carbon, dermatologists may call the mark a carbon stain instead of a tattoo. Coal miners could develop characteristic marks owing to coal dust getting into wounds. These are particularly difficult to remove as they tend to be spread across several layers of skin, and scarring or permanent discoloration can be almost unavoidable depending on the location. An amalgam tattoo is when amalgam particles are implanted in to the soft tissues of the mouth, usually the gums, during dental filling placement or removal. Another example of such accidental tattoos is the result of a deliberate or accidental stabbing with a pencil or pen, leaving graphite or ink beneath the skin.

=== Identification ===

==== Forcible tattooing for identification ====
A well-known example is the Nazi practice of forcibly tattooing concentration camp inmates with identification numbers during the Holocaust as part of the Nazis&#x27; identification system, beginning in fall 1941. The SS introduced the practice at Auschwitz concentration camp in order to identify the bodies of registered prisoners in the concentration camps. During registration, guards would tattoo each prisoner with a number, usually on the left forearm, but sometimes on the chest or stomach. Of the Nazi concentration camps, only Auschwitz put tattoos on inmates. Prisoners found with tattoos in Mauthausen concentration camp and Buchenwald concentration camp upon liberation were presumably transported from Auschwitz by death march. The tattoo was the prisoner&#x27;s camp number, sometimes with a special symbol added: some Jews had a triangle, and Romani had the letter &quot;Z&quot; (from German &quot;&quot; for &#x27;Gypsy&#x27;). In May 1944, Jewish men received the letters &quot;A&quot; or &quot;B&quot; to indicate a particular series of numbers.

As early as the Zhou, Chinese authorities would employ facial tattoos as a punishment for certain crimes or to mark prisoners or slaves.

During the Roman Empire, gladiators and slaves were tattooed: exported slaves were tattooed with the words &quot;tax paid&quot;, and it was a common practice to tattoo &quot;fugitive&quot; (denoted by the letters &quot;FUG&quot;) on the foreheads of runaway slaves. Owing to the Biblical strictures against the practice, Emperor Constantine I banned tattooing the face around AD330, and the Second Council of Nicaea banned all body markings as a pagan practice in AD787.

==== In criminal investigations ====
These markings can potentially provide a wealth of information about an individual. Simple visual examinations, as well as more advanced digital recognition technologies, are employed to assist in identifying or providing clues about suspects or victims of crimes.

==== Postmortem identification ====

Tattoos are sometimes used by forensic pathologists to help them identify burned, putrefied, or mutilated bodies. As tattoo pigment lies encapsulated deep in the skin, tattoos are not easily destroyed even when the skin is burned.

==== Identification of animals ====

Pets, show animals, thoroughbred horses, and livestock are sometimes tattooed with animal identification marks. Ear tattoos are a method of identification for beef cattle. Tattooing with a &#x27;slap mark&#x27; on the shoulder or on the ear is the standard identification method in commercial pig farming. Branding is used for similar reasons and is often performed without anesthesia, but is different from tattooing as no ink or dye is inserted during the process, the mark instead being caused by permanent scarring of the skin. Pet dogs and cats are sometimes tattooed with a serial number (usually in the ear, or on the inner thigh) via which their owners can be identified. However, the use of a microchip has become an increasingly popular choice and since 2016 is a legal requirement for all 8.5 million pet dogs in the UK. In Australia, desexed cats and dogs are marked with a tattoo on the inside of the ear.

=== Cosmetic ===
Permanent makeup is the use of tattoos to create long-lasting eyebrows, lips (liner and/or lip blushing), eyes (permanent eyeliner), and even moles definition. Natural colors are used to mimic eyebrows and freckles, while diverse pigments for lips and eyeliner for a look akin to traditional makeup.

A growing trend in the US and UK is to place artistic tattoos over the surgical scars of a mastectomy. &quot;More women are choosing not to reconstruct after a mastectomy and tissue instead... The mastectomy tattoo or areola tattoo will become just another option for post cancer patients and a truly personal way of regaining control over post cancer bodies...&quot; However, the tattooing of nipples on reconstructed breasts remains in high demand.

=== Medical ===

Medical tattoos are used to ensure instruments are properly located for repeated application of radiotherapy and for the areola in some forms of breast reconstruction. Tattooing has also been used to convey medical information about the wearer (e.g., blood group, medical condition, etc.). Alzheimer patients may be tattooed with their names, so they may be easily identified if they go missing. Additionally, tattoos are used in skin tones to cover vitiligo, a skin pigmentation disorder.
SS blood group tattoos () were worn by members of the Waffen-SS in Nazi Germany during World War II to identify the individual&#x27;s blood type. After the war, the tattoo was taken to be &quot;prima facie&quot;, if not perfect, evidence of being part of the Waffen-SS, leading to potential arrest and prosecution. This led a number of ex-Waffen-SS to shoot themselves through the arm with a gun, removing the tattoo and leaving scars like the ones resulting from pox inoculation, making the removal less obvious.

Tattoos were probably also used in ancient medicine as part of the treatment of the patient. In 1898, medical doctor Daniel Fouquet wrote about &quot;medical tattooing&quot; practices in Ancient Egypt based on female mummies at the Deir el-Bahari site.

tzi the iceman had a total of 61 tattoos, which may have been a form of acupuncture used to relieve pain. Radiological examination of tzi&#x27;s bones showed &quot;age-conditioned or strain-induced degeneration&quot; corresponding to many tattooed areas, including osteochondrosis and slight spondylosis in the lumbar spine and wear-and-tear degeneration in the knee and especially in the ankle joints. If so, this is at least 2,000 years before acupuncture&#x27;s previously known earliest use in China ().

== History ==
Preserved tattoos on ancient mummified human remains reveal that tattooing has been practiced throughout the world for thousands of years. In 2015, scientific re-assessment of the age of the two oldest known tattooed mummies identified tzi as the oldest example then known. This body, with 61 tattoos, was found embedded in glacial ice in the Alps, and was dated to 3250 BCE. In 2018, the oldest figurative tattoos in the world were discovered on two mummies from Egypt which are dated between 3351 and 3017 BCE.

Ancient tattooing was most widely practiced among the Austronesian people. It was one of the early technologies developed by the Proto-Austronesians in Taiwan and coastal South China prior to at least 1500 BCE, before the Austronesian expansion into the islands of the Indo-Pacific. It may have originally been associated with headhunting. Tattooing traditions, including facial tattooing, can be found among all Austronesian subgroups, including Taiwanese indigenous peoples, Islander Southeast Asians, Micronesians, Polynesians, and the Malagasy people. Austronesians used the characteristic hafted skin-puncturing technique, using a small mallet and a piercing implement made from &quot;Citrus&quot; thorns, fish bone, bone, and oyster shells.

Ancient tattooing traditions have also been documented among Papuans and Melanesians, with their use of distinctive obsidian skin piercers. Some archeological sites with these implements are associated with the Austronesian migration into Papua New Guinea and Melanesia. But other sites are older than the Austronesian expansion, being dated to around 1650 to 2000 BCE, suggesting that there was a preexisting tattooing tradition in the region.

Among other ethnolinguistic groups, tattooing was also practiced among the Ainu people of Japan; some Austroasians of Indochina; Berber women of Tamazgha (North Africa); the Yoruba, Fulani and Hausa people of Nigeria; Native Americans of the Pre-Columbian Americas; people of Rapa Nui; Picts of Iron Age Britain; and Paleo-Balkan peoples (Illyrians and Thracians, as well as Daunians in Apulia), a tradition that has been preserved in the western Balkans by Albanians (Albanian traditional tattooing), Catholics in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Sicanje), and women of some Vlach communities.

=== Egypt and Sudan ===
The earliest figural tattoos were identified on the naturally mummified human remains of a male buried within a shallow grave from Gebelein in upper Egypt, and radiocarbon dated to around 3351-3017 BCE. The male mummy, named the Gebelein man, had two overlapping tattoos on his right forearm, one depicting a bovine, and the other depicting another horned animal, perhaps a barbary sheep or another bovine. The Gebelein man was approximately 1821 years of age when he died, suggesting that he received his tattoos at an early age.

The cultures of Ancient Egypt and Ancient Nubia, located in modern-day Sudan, while diverse and multifaceted within their own rights, often have roots in a shared cultural heritage such as the tradition of tattooing. While the Gebelein man was buried in Egypt, most discoveries of tattooed individuals from this region are from Ancient Nubia. In Nubia, the earliest identified human remains with tattoos are dated to the C-Group period, which lasted from 2345 to 1500 BCE and contemporaneous with the First Intermediate period through the Second Intermediate period in Ancient Egypt. During this C-Group period, only women have been found with tattoos, suggesting that tattooing was gendered at this time. Tattoos of this period usually consist of dotted patterns and lines, and typically were located on the abdomen, chest, arms, and/or legs.

By 500 BCE, there is evidence of tattooing on men in Ancient Nubia, typically on the hands or arms, and rarely on the face. There is also more evidence of figural tattooing around this period, typically found on female human remains. These figural tattoos encompassed a wide variety of images, such as abstract chains of sss or depictions of gods and goddesses. In Nubia, a female mummy from Aksha dated to the 4th century BCE contains a tattoo of the Egyptian deity Bes on her thigh. Bes, a dwarfed god, is often associated with fertility and childbirth, and was a popular image tattooed onto women both in Egypt and Nubia, as seen in both iconographic examples, such as tomb paintings, and on human remains.

No ancient tattoo instruments or tools have been confidently identified at archaeological excavations in either Egypt or Sudan, due to the perishable nature of the tools and their possibility for misidentification. However, tattoos during this period were created with metal needles or awls, tools typically associated with the work of domestic women.

=== China ===

Cemeteries throughout the Tarim Basin (Xinjiang of western China) including the sites of Qwrighul, Yanghai, Shengjindian, Zaghunluq, and Qizilchoqa have revealed several tattooed mummies with Western Asian/Indo-European physical traits and cultural materials. These date from between 2100 and 550 BC.

In ancient China, tattoos were considered a barbaric practice associated with the Yue peoples of southeastern and southern China. Tattoos were often referred to in literature depicting bandits and folk heroes. As late as the Qing dynasty, it was common practice to tattoo characters such as (&quot;Prisoner&quot;) on convicted criminals&#x27; faces. Although relatively rare during most periods of Chinese history, slaves were also sometimes marked to display ownership.

However, tattoos seem to have remained a part of southern culture. Marco Polo wrote of Quanzhou, &quot;Many come hither from Upper India to have their bodies painted with the needle in the way we have elsewhere described, there being many adepts at this craft in the city&quot;. At least three of the main characters Lu Zhishen, Shi Jin (), and Yan Ching () in the classic novel &quot;Water Margin&quot; are described as having tattoos covering nearly all of their bodies. Wu Song was sentenced to a facial tattoo describing his crime after killing Xi Menqing () to avenge his brother. In addition, Chinese legend claimed the mother of Yue Fei (a famous Song general) tattooed the words &quot;Repay the Country with Pure Loyalty&quot; (, &quot;jing zhong bao guo&quot;) down her son&#x27;s back before he left to join the army.

=== Europe ===
In 1566, French sailors abducted an Inuk woman and her child in modern-day Labrador and brought her to the city of Antwerp in modern-day Belgium. The mother was tattooed while the child was unmarked. In Antwerp, the two were put on display at a local tavern at least until 1567, with handbills promoting the event being distributed in the city. In 1577, English privateer Martin Frobisher captured two Inuit and brought them back to England for display. One of the Inuit was a tattooed woman from Baffin Island, who was illustrated by the English cartographer John White.

In 1691, William Dampier brought to London a Filipino man named Jeoly or Giolo from the island of Mindanao (Philippines) who had a tattooed body. Dampier exhibited Jeoly in a human zoo to make a fortune and falsely branded him as a &quot;prince&quot; to draw large crowds. At the time of exhibition, Jeoly was still grieving his mother, who Dampier also enslaved and had died at sea during their exploitation to Europe. Dampier claimed that he became friends with Jeoly, but with the intention to make money, he continued to exploit his &quot;friend&quot; by exhibiting him in a human zoo, where Jeoly died three months later. Jeoly&#x27;s dead body was afterwards skinned, and his skinless body was disposed, while the tattooed skin was sold and displayed at Oxford.

It is commonly held that the modern popularity of tattooing stems from Captain James Cook&#x27;s three voyages to the South Pacific in the late 18th century. Certainly, Cook&#x27;s voyages and the dissemination of the texts and images from them brought more awareness about tattooing (and, as noted above, imported the word &quot;tattow&quot; into Western languages). On Cook&#x27;s first voyage in 1768, his science officer and expedition botanist, Sir Joseph Banks, as well as artist Sydney Parkinson and many others of the crew, returned to England with a keen interest in tattoos with Banks writing about them extensively and Parkinson is believed to have gotten a tattoo himself in Tahiti. Banks was a highly regarded member of the English aristocracy who had acquired his position with Cook by co-financing the expedition with ten thousand pounds, a very large sum at the time. In turn, Cook brought back with him a tattooed Raiatean man, Omai, whom he presented to King George and the English Court. On subsequent voyages other crew members, from officers, such as American John Ledyard, to ordinary seamen, were tattooed.

The first documented professional tattooist in Britain was Sutherland Macdonald, who operated out of a salon in London beginning in 1894. In Britain, tattooing was still largely associated with sailors and the lower or even criminal class, but by the 1870s had become fashionable among some members of the upper classes, including royalty, and in its upmarket form it could be an expensive and sometimes painful process. A marked class division on the acceptability of the practice continued for some time in Britain.

=== North America ===
Many Indigenous peoples of North America practice tattooing. European explorers and traders who met Native Americans noticed these tattoos and wrote about them, and a few Europeans chose to be tattooed by Native Americans. See history of tattooing in North America.

By the time of the American Revolution, tattoos were already common among American sailors (see sailor tattoos). Tattoos were listed in protection papers, an identity certificate issued to prevent impressment into the British Royal Navy. Because protection papers were proof of American citizenship, Black sailors used them to show that they were freemen.
The first recorded professional tattoo shop in the U.S. was established in the early 1870s by a German immigrant, Martin Hildebrandt. He had served as a Union soldier in the Civil War and tattooed many other soldiers.

Soon after the Civil War, tattoos became fashionable among upper-class young adults. This trend lasted until the beginning of World War I. The invention of the electric tattoo machine caused popularity of tattoos among the wealthy to drop off. The machine made the tattooing procedure both much easier and cheaper, thus, eliminating the status symbol tattoos previously held, as they were now affordable for all socioeconomic classes. The status symbol of a tattoo shifted from a representation of wealth to a mark typically seen on rebels and criminals. Despite this change, tattoos remained popular among military servicemen, a tradition that continues today.

In 1975, there were only 40 tattoo artists in the U.S.; in 1980, there were more than 5,000 self-proclaimed tattoo artists, appearing in response to sudden demand.

Many studies have been done of the tattooed population and society&#x27;s view of tattoos. In June 2006, the &quot;Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology&quot; published the results of a telephone survey of 2004: it found that 36% of Americans ages 1829, 24% of those 3040, and 15% of those 4151 had a tattoo. In September 2006, the Pew Research Center conducted a telephone survey that found that 36% of Americans ages 1825, 40% of those 2640 and 10% of those 4164 had a tattoo. They concluded that Generation X and Millennials express themselves through their appearance, and tattoos are a popular form of self-expression. In January 2008, a survey conducted online by Harris Interactive estimated that 14% of all adults in the United States have a tattoo, slightly down from 2003, when 16% had a tattoo. Among age groups, 9% of those ages 1824, 32% of those 2529, 25% of those 3039 and 12% of those 4049 have tattoos, as do 8% of those 5064. Men are slightly more likely to have a tattoo than women.

Since the 1970s, tattoos have become a mainstream part of Western fashion, common both for men and women, and among all economic classes and to age groups from the later teen years to middle age. For many young Americans, the tattoo has taken on a decidedly different meaning than for previous generations. The tattoo has undergone &quot;dramatic redefinition&quot; and has shifted from a form of deviance to an acceptable form of expression.

As of 1 November 2006, Oklahoma became the last state to legalize tattooing, having banned it since 1963.

=== Australia ===
Scarring was practised widely amongst the Indigenous peoples of Australia, now only really found in parts of Arnhem Land. Each &quot;deliberately placed scar tells a story of pain, endurance, identity, status, beauty, courage, sorrow or grief.&quot;&quot;Barramoyokjarlukkugarr walang bolhminy now bolitj.&quot; They put it on the wound and then it comes up as an adornment scar. (Bob Burruwal, Rembarrnga, Arnhem Land)

The European history of the use of tattoo in Australia is that branding was used by European authorities for marking criminals throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The practice was also used by British authorities to mark army deserters and military personnel court-martialed in Australia. In nineteenth century Australia tattoos were generally the result of personal rather than official decisions but British authorities started to record tattoos along with scars and other bodily markings to describe and manage convicts assigned for transportation. The practice of tattooing appears to have been a largely non-commercial enterprise during the convict period in Australia. For example, James Ross in the Hobart Almanac of 1833 describes how the convicts on board ship commonly spent time tattooing themselves with gunpowder. Out of a study of 10,180 convict records that were transported to then Van Diemen&#x27;s Land (now Tasmania) between 1823 and 1853 about 37% of all men and about 15% of all women arrived with tattoos, making Australia at the time the most heavily tattooed English-speaking country.By the beginning of the twentieth century, there were tattoo studios in Australia but they do not appear to have been numerous. For example, the Sydney tattoo studio of Fred Harris was touted as being the only tattoo studio in Sydney between 1916 and 1943. Tattoo designs often reflected the culture of the day and in 1923 Harris&#x27;s small parlour experienced an increase in the number of women getting tattoos. Another popular trend was for women to have their legs tattooed so the designs could be seen through their stockings.
By 1937 Harris was one of Sydney&#x27;s best-known tattoo artists and was inking around 2000 tattoos a year in his shop. Sailors provided most of the canvases for his work but among the more popular tattoos in 1938 were Australian flags and kangaroos for sailors of the visiting American Fleet.

In modern-day Australia a popular tattoo design is the Southern Cross motif, or variations of it.
There are currently over 2000 official tattoo practitioners in Australia and over 100 registered parlours and clinics, with the number of unregistered parlours and clinics are estimated to be double that amount. The demand over the last decade for tattoos in Australia has risen over 440%, making it an in demand profession in the country.

There are several large tattoo conventions held in Australia, some of which are considered the biggest in the southern hemisphere, with the best artists from around Oceania attending.

=== Latin America ===
Of the three best-known Pre-Columbian civilizations in the Americas, the Mayas and the Aztecs of Central America were known to wear tattoos while the Incas of South America were not. However, there is evidence that the Chimu people who preceded the Incas did wear tattoos for magic and medical purposes. The Chancay culture of coastal Peru had tattoos around 1250 A.D. which were studied with lasers by researchers at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. The diverse tribes of the Amazon have also worn tattoos for millennia and continue to do so to this day, including facial tattoos and notably, the people of the Xingu River in the North of Brazil and the Putumayo River between Peru, Brazil, and Colombia So Paulo, Brazil is largely regarded as one of the most tattooed cities in the world.

=== New Zealand ===
The Mori people of New Zealand have historically practiced tattooing. Amongst these are facial designs worn to indicate lineage, social position, and status within the tribe called &quot;t moko&quot;. The tattoo art was a sacred marker of identity among the Mori and also referred to as a vehicle for storing one&#x27;s tapu, or spiritual being, in the afterlife. One practice was after death to preserve the skin-covered skull known as &quot;Toi moko&quot; or &quot;mokomokai&quot;. In the period of early contact between Mori and Europeans these heads were traded especially for firearms. Many of these are now being repatriated back to New Zealand led by the national museum Te Papa.
=== India ===
Tattooing in India has a long history, practiced by various tribes and communities. The art of tattooing was traditionally linked to cultural, social, and spiritual beliefs. In the northeastern states, such as Assam and Nagaland, tribal tattoos were symbolic of protection, rites of passage, and spiritual identity. The Gond people of central India and Warli tribe of Maharashtra also practiced tattooing, which represented their cultural heritage and connection to nature.

In Rajasthan, tattoos were often considered to protect the wearer from evil spirits and bring good fortune. Among the Mishing people of Assam, tattoos were seen as indicators of maturity and social standing. The tradition of tattooing evolved over time from a ritualistic and protective art form to an expression of personal identity and individuality.

In contemporary India, tattooing has become mainstream, particularly in urban areas, with many tattoo artists gaining international recognition. Tattoos are now a popular means of expressing personal stories, beliefs, and artistic style.

== Process ==
Tattooing involves the placement of pigment into the skin&#x27;s dermis, the layer of dermal tissue underlying the epidermis. After initial injection, pigment is dispersed throughout a homogenized damaged layer down through the epidermis and upper dermis, in both of which the presence of foreign material activates the immune system&#x27;s phagocytes to engulf the pigment particles. As healing proceeds, the damaged epidermis flakes away (eliminating surface pigment) while deeper in the skin granulation tissue forms, which is later converted to connective tissue by collagen growth. This mends the upper dermis, where pigment remains trapped within successive generations of macrophages, ultimately concentrating in a layer just below the dermis/epidermis boundary. Its presence there is stable, but in the long term (decades) the pigment tends to migrate deeper into the dermis, accounting for the degraded detail of old tattoos.

An alternative and painless method of permanent tattooing is to use patches covered by microneedles made of tattoo ink. The patch is pressed onto the skin the same way a temporary tattoo paper is applied to the body. The microneedles then dissolve, and after a few minutes the ink sinks into the skin.

== Equipment ==

Some tribal cultures traditionally created tattoos by cutting designs into the skin and rubbing the resulting wound with ink, ashes or other agents; some cultures continue this practice, which may be an adjunct to scarification. Some cultures create tattooed marks by hand-tapping the ink into the skin using sharpened sticks or animal bones (made into needles) with clay formed disks or, in modern times, actual needles.

The most common method of tattooing in modern times is the electric tattoo machine, which inserts ink into the skin via a single needle or a group of needles that are soldered onto a bar, which is attached to an oscillating unit. The unit rapidly and repeatedly drives the needles in and out of the skin, usually 80 to 150 times a second. The needles are single-use needles that come packaged individually, or manufactured by artists, on-demand, as groupings dictate on a per-piece basis.

In modern tattooing, an artist may use thermal stencil paper or hectograph ink/stencil paper to first place a printed design on the skin before applying a tattoo design.

== Practice regulation and health risk certification ==
Tattooing is regulated in many countries because of the associated health risks to client and practitioner, specifically local infections and virus transmission. Disposable plastic aprons and eye protection can be worn depending on the risk of blood or other secretions splashing into the eyes or clothing of the tattooist. Hand hygiene, assessment of risks and appropriate disposal of all sharp objects and materials contaminated with blood are crucial areas. The tattoo artist&#x27;s hands must be washed, as must the area of the client&#x27;s body that will be tattooed. Gloves must be worn at all times and the wound must be wiped frequently with a wet disposable towel of some kind. All equipment must be sterilized in a certified autoclave before and after every use. It is good practice to provide clients with a printed consent form that outlines risks and complications as well as instructions for after care.

== Associations ==

=== Historical associations ===
Among Austronesian societies, tattoos had various functions. Among men, they were strongly linked to the widespread practice of head-hunting raids. In head-hunting societies, like the Ifugao and Dayak people, tattoos were records of how many heads the warriors had taken in battle, and were part of the initiation rites into adulthood. The number, design, and location of tattoos, therefore, were indicative of a warrior&#x27;s status and prowess. They were also regarded as magical wards against various dangers like evil spirits and illnesses. Among the Visayans of the pre-colonial Philippines, tattoos were worn by the &quot;tumao&quot; nobility and the &quot;timawa&quot; warrior class as permanent records of their participation and conduct in maritime raids known as &quot;mangayaw&quot;. In Austronesian women, like the facial tattoos among the women of the Tayal and Mori people, they were indicators of status, skill, and beauty.

Tattoos were part of the ancient Wu culture of the Yangtze River Delta but had negative connotations in traditional Han culture in China. The Zhou refugees Wu Taibo and his brother Zhongyong were recorded cutting their hair and tattooing themselves to gain acceptance before founding the state of Wu, but Zhou and imperial Chinese culture tended to restrict tattooing as a punishment for marking criminals. The association of tattoos with criminals was transmitted from China to influence Japan. Today, tattoos remain generally disfavored in Chinese society.

Tattooing of criminals and slaves was commonplace in the Roman Empire. Catholic Croats of Bosnia, especially children and women, used Sicanje for protection against conversion to Islam during the Ottoman rule in the Balkans.

In the 19th century, released convicts from the U.S. and Australia, as well as British military deserters were identified by tattoos. Prisoners in Nazi concentration camps were tattooed with an identification number. Today, many prison inmates still tattoo themselves as an indication of time spent in prison.
The Government of Meiji Japan had outlawed tattoos in the 19th century, a prohibition that stood for 70 years before being repealed in 1948. As of 6 June 2012, all new tattoos are forbidden for employees of the city of Osaka. Existing tattoos are required to be covered with proper clothing. The regulations were added to Osaka&#x27;s ethical codes, and employees with tattoos were encouraged to have them removed. This was done because of the strong connection of tattoos with the yakuza, or Japanese organized crime, after an Osaka official in February 2012 threatened a schoolchild by showing his tattoo.

Native Americans also used tattoos to represent their tribe.

=== Modern associations ===

Tattoos are strongly associated with deviance, personality disorders and criminality. Although the general acceptance of tattoos is on the rise in Western society, they still carry a heavy stigma among certain social groups. Tattoos are generally considered an important part of the culture of the Russian mafia.

Current cultural understandings of tattoos in Europe and North America have been greatly influenced by long-standing stereotypes based on deviant social groups in the 19th and 20th centuries. Particularly in North America, tattoos have been associated with stereotypes, folklore and racism. Not until the 1960s and 1970s did people associate tattoos with such societal outcasts as bikers and prisoners. Today, in the United States many prisoners and criminal gangs use distinctive tattoos to indicate facts about their criminal behavior, prison sentences and organizational affiliation. A teardrop tattoo, for example, can be symbolic of murder, or each tear represents the death of a friend. At the same time, members of the U.S. military have an equally well-established and longstanding history of tattooing to indicate military units, battles, kills, etc., an association that remains widespread among older Americans. In Japan, tattoos are associated with yakuza criminal groups, but there are non-yakuza groups such as Fukushi Masaichi&#x27;s tattoo association that sought to preserve the skins of dead Japanese who have extensive tattoos. Tattooing is also common in the British Armed Forces. Depending on vocation, tattoos are accepted in a number of professions in America. Companies across many fields are increasingly focused on diversity and inclusion. Mainstream art galleries hold exhibitions of both conventional and custom tattoo designs, such as &quot;Beyond Skin&quot;, at the Museum of Croydon.
In Britain, there is evidence of women with tattoos, concealed by their clothing, throughout the 20th century, and records of women tattooists such as Jessie Knight from the 1920s. A study of &quot;at-risk&quot; (as defined by school absenteeism and truancy) adolescent girls showed a positive correlation between body modification and negative feelings towards the body and low self-esteem; however, the study also demonstrated that a strong motive for body modification is the search for &quot;self and attempts to attain mastery and control over the body in an age of increasing alienation&quot;. The prevalence of women in the tattoo industry in the 21st century, along with larger numbers of women bearing tattoos, appears to be changing negative perceptions.

In &quot;Covered in Ink&quot; by Beverly Yuen Thompson, she interviews heavily tattooed women in Washington, Miami, Orlando, Houston, Long Beach, and Seattle from 2007 to 2010 using participant observation and in-depth interviews of 70 women. Younger generations are typically more unbothered by heavily tattooed women, while older generation including the participants parents are more likely to look down on them, some even go to the extreme of disowning their children for getting tattoos. Typically how the family reacts is an indicator of their relationship in general. Reports were given that family members who were not accepting of tattoos wanted to scrub the images off, pour holy water on them or have them surgically removed. Families who were emotionally accepting of their family members were able to maintain close bonds after tattooing.

== Advertising and marketing ==

Tattoos have also been used in marketing and advertising with companies paying people to have logos of brands like HBO, Red Bull, ASOS.com and Sailor Jerry&#x27;s rum tattooed in their bodies. This practice is known as &quot;skinvertising&quot;.

B.T.&#x27;s Smokehouse, a barbecue restaurant located in Massachusetts, offered customers free meals for life if they had the logo of the establishment tattooed on a visible part of their bodies. Nine people took the business up on the offer.

== Health risks ==

The pain of tattooing can range from uncomfortable to excruciating, depending on the location of the tattooing the body. With the use of modern numbing creams, pain may be eliminated or reduced. Fainting can occur during tattoo procedures, but is not considered very likely.

Because it requires breaking the immunologic barrier formed by the skin, tattooing carries health risks, including infection and allergic reactions. Modern tattooists reduce health risks by following universal precautions working with single-use items and sterilizing their equipment after each use. Many jurisdictions require that tattooists have blood-borne pathogen training such as that provided through the Red Cross and OSHA. As of 2009 (in the United States) there have been no reported cases of HIV contracted from tattoos.

In amateur tattooing, such as the practice in prisons, there is an elevated risk of infection. Infections that can theoretically be transmitted by the use of unsterilized tattoo equipment or contaminated ink include surface infections of the skin, fungal infections, some forms of hepatitis, herpes simplex virus, HIV, staph, tetanus, and tuberculosis.
Tattoo inks have been described as &quot;remarkably nonreactive histologically&quot;. However, cases of allergic reactions to tattoo inks, particularly certain colors, have been medically documented. This is sometimes due to the presence of nickel in an ink pigment, which triggers a common metal allergy. Occasionally, when a blood vessel is punctured during the tattooing procedure, a bruise/hematoma may appear. At the same time, a number of tattoo inks may contain hazardous substances, and a proposal has been submitted by the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) to restrict the intentional use or concentration limit of approximately 4000 substances when contained in tattoo inks. According to a study by the European Union Observatory for Nanomaterials (EUON), a number of modern-day tattoo inks contain nanomaterials. These engender significant nanotoxicological concerns.

Certain colours  red or similar colours such as purple, pink, and orange  tend to cause more problems and damage compared to other colours. Red ink has even caused skin and flesh damages so severe that the amputation of a leg or an arm has been necessary. If part of a tattoo (especially if red) begins to cause even minor troubles, like becoming itchy or worse, lumpy, then Danish experts strongly suggest to remove the red parts.

In 2017, researchers from the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility in France found that some of the chemicals in tattoo ink accumulate in the lymph nodes, obstructing their ability to fight infections. However, the authors noted that most tattooed individuals including the donors analyzed do not suffer from chronic inflammation.

Tattoo artists frequently recommend sun protection of skin to prevent tattoos from fading and to preserve skin integrity to make future tattooing easier.

== Removal ==

While tattoos are considered permanent, it is sometimes possible to remove them, fully or partially, with laser treatments. Typically, carbon based pigments, or iron-oxide-based pigments, as well as some colored inks can be removed more completely than inks of other colors.
The expense and pain associated with removing tattoos are typically greater than the expense and pain associated with applying them. Methods other than laser tattoo removal methods include dermabrasion, salabrasion (scrubbing the skin with salt), reduction techniques, cryosurgery and which is sometimes still used along with skin grafts for larger tattoos. These older methods, however, have been nearly completely replaced by laser removal treatment options.

Pew Research found that about 24% of Americans with tattoos regret at least one of them. A survey of tattooed people in India revealed that about 26% regretted their tattoos. A survey by a dermatology clinic also tracked significant regret.

== Temporary tattoos ==
A temporary tattoo is a non-permanent image on the skin resembling a permanent tattoo. As a form of body painting, temporary tattoos can be drawn, painted, or airbrushed.

=== Types ===

==== Decal-style temporary tattoos ====
Decal (press-on) temporary tattoos are used to decorate any part of the body. They may last for a day or for more than a week.

==== Metallic jewelry tattoos ====
Foil temporary tattoos are a variation of decal-style temporary tattoos, printed using a foil stamping technique instead of using ink. The foil design is printed as a mirror image in order to be viewed in the right direction once it is applied to the skin. Each metallic tattoo is protected by a transparent protective film.

==== Airbrush temporary tattoos ====
Although they have become more popular and usually require a greater investment, airbrush temporary tattoos are less likely to achieve the look of a permanent tattoo, and may not last as long as press-on temporary tattoos. An artist sprays on airbrush tattoos using a stencil with alcohol-based cosmetic inks. Like decal tattoos, airbrush temporary tattoos also are easily removed with rubbing alcohol or baby oil.

==== Henna temporary tattoos ====

Another tattoo alternative is henna-based tattoos, which generally contain no additives. Henna is a plant-derived substance which is painted on the skin, staining it a reddish-orange-to-brown color. Because of the semi-permanent nature of henna, they lack the realistic colors typical of decal temporary tattoos. Due to the time-consuming application process, it is a relatively poor option for children. Dermatological publications report that allergic reactions to natural henna are very rare and the product is generally considered safe for skin application. Serious problems can occur, however, from the use of henna with certain additives. The FDA and medical journals report that painted black henna temporary tattoos are especially dangerous.

=== Safety ===

==== Decal-style temporary tattoo safety ====
Decal temporary tattoos, when legally sold in the United States, have had their color additives approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as cosmetics  the FDA has determined these colorants are safe for &quot;direct dermal contact&quot;. While the FDA has received some accounts of minor skin irritation, including redness and swelling, from this type of temporary tattoo, the agency has found these symptoms to be &quot;child specific&quot; and not significant enough to support warnings to the public. Unapproved pigments, however, which are sometimes used by non-US manufacturers, can provoke allergic reactions in anyone.

==== Airbrush tattoo safety ====
The types of airbrush paints manufactured for crafting, creating art or decorating clothing should never be used for tattooing. These paints can be allergenic or toxic.

==== Henna tattoo safety ====

The FDA regularly issues warnings to consumers about avoiding any temporary tattoos labeled as black henna or pre-mixed henna as these may contain potentially harmful ingredients including silver nitrate, carmine, pyrogallol, disperse orange dye and chromium. Black henna gets its color from paraphenylenediamine (PPD), a textile dye approved by the FDA for human use only in hair coloring. In Canada, the use of PPD on the skin, including hair dye, is banned. Research has linked these and other ingredients to a range of health problems including allergic reactions, chronic inflammatory reactions, and late-onset allergic reactions to related clothing and hairdressing dyes. They can cause these reactions long after application. Neither black henna nor pre-mixed henna are approved for cosmetic use by the FDA.

== Religious views ==
Ancient Egyptians used tattoos to show dedication to a deity, and the tattoos were believed to convey divine protection. In Hinduism, Buddhism, and Neopaganism, tattoos are accepted. Southeast Asia has a tradition of protective tattoos variously known as &quot;sak yant&quot; or yantra tattoos that include Buddhist images, prayers, and symbols. Images of the Buddha or other religious figures have caused controversy in some Buddhist countries when incorporated into tattoos by Westerners who do not follow traditional customs regarding respectful display of images of Buddhas or deities.

Judaism generally prohibits tattoos among its adherents based on the commandments in Leviticus 19. Jews tend to believe this commandment only applies to Jews and not to gentiles. However, an increasing number of young Jews are getting tattoos either for fashion, or an expression of their faith.

There is no specific teaching in the New Testament prohibiting tattoos. Most Christian denominations believe that the Old Covenant ceremonial laws in Leviticus were abrogated with the coming of the New Covenant; that the prohibition of various cultural practices, including tattooing, was intended to distinguish the Israelites from neighbouring peoples for a limited period of time, and was not intended as a universal law to apply to the gentiles for all time. Many Coptic Christians in Egypt have a cross tattoo on their right wrist to differentiate themselves from Muslims. However, some Evangelical and fundamentalist Protestant denominations believe the commandment applies today for Christians and believe it is a sin to get a tattoo.

Tattoos are considered to be haram for many Sunni Muslims, based on rulings from scholars and passages in the Sunni Hadith. Shia Islam does not prohibit tattooing, and many Shia Muslims (Lebanese, Iraqis, Iranians) have tattoos, specifically with religious themes.

== In popular culture ==
* &quot;Inked&quot; (magazine), a tattoo lifestyle digital media company that bills itself as the outsiders&#x27; insider media
*See List of tattoo TV shows

== See also ==
=== Styles ===
* 
* Borneo traditional tattooing
* Chinese calligraphy tattoos
* Christian tattooing in Bosnia and Herzegovina
* 
* New school (tattoo)
* Old school (tattoo)
* Prison tattooing
* Sak Yant
* Sailor tattoos
* Scarification
* Sleeve tattoo
* Soot tattoo 
=== Location ===

* Body suit (tattoo)
* Genital tattooing
* Lower back tattoo
* Scleral tattooing
=== Others ===
*Blackout tattoo
*Trash polka
*Body art
**Body painting
**Mehndi (also called henna)
*Legal status of tattooing in European countries
*Legal status of tattooing in the United States
*List of tattoo artists
*Lucky Diamond Rich  world&#x27;s most tattooed person
*Tattoo convention
*Tattooed lady
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== General sources ===

; Anthropological
* Buckland, A. W. (1887). &quot;On Tattooing&quot;, in &quot;Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland&quot;, 1887/12, p.318328
* Caplan, Jane (ed.) (2000): &quot;Written on the Body: the Tattoo in European and American History&quot;, Princeton University Press
* DeMello, Margo (2000) &quot;Bodies of Inscription: a Cultural History of the Modern Tattoo Community&quot;, California. Durham NC: Duke University Press
* Gell, Alfred (1993) &quot;Wrapping in Images: Tattooing in Polynesia&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press
* Gilbert, Stephen G. (2001) &quot;Tattoo History: a Source Book&quot;, New York: Juno Books
* Gustafson, Mark (1997) &quot;&quot;Inscripta in fronte&quot;: Penal Tattooing in Late Antiquity&quot;, in &quot;Classical Antiquity&quot;, April 1997, Vol. 16/No. 1, pp.79105
* Hambly, Wilfrid Dyson (1925) &quot;The History of Tattooing and Its Significance: With Some Account of Other Forms of Corporal Marking&quot;, London: H. F. &amp; G. Witherby (reissued: Detroit 1974)
* Hesselt van Dinter, Maarten (2005) &quot;The World of Tattoo; An Illustrated History&quot;. Amsterdam, KIT Publishers
* Jones, C. P. (1987) &quot;Stigma: Tattooing and Branding in GraecoRoman Antiquity&quot;, in &quot;Journal of Roman Studies&quot;, 77/1987, pp.139155
* Juno, Andrea. &quot;Modern Primitives&quot;. &quot;Re/Search&quot; #12 (October 1989) 
* Kchelen, Wolf-Peter (2004): &quot;Tatau und Tattoo  Eine Epigraphik der Identittskonstruktion.&quot; Shaker Verlag, Aachen, .
* Kchelen, Wolf-Peter (2020): &quot;Tatau und Tattoo Revisited: Tattoo pandemic: A harbinger of global economic and social collapse.&quot; In: Wolf-Peter Kchelen  Tatau und Tattoo, abstract pp.46
* Lombroso, Cesare (1896) &quot;The Savage Origin of Tattooing&quot;, in &quot;Popular Science Monthly&quot;, &quot;Popular Science&quot; Vol. IV., 1896
* Pang, Joey (2008) &quot;Tattoo Art Expressions&quot;
* Raviv, Shaun (2006) &quot;Marked for Life: Jews and Tattoos&quot; (&quot;Moment Magazine&quot;; June 2006)
* &quot;Comparative study about tzi&#x27;s therapeutic tattoos&quot; (L. Renaut, 2004, French and English abstract)
* Robley, Horatio (1896) &quot;Moko, or, Maori tattooing&quot;. London: Chapman and Hall
* Roth, H. Ling (1901) &quot;Maori tatu and moko&quot;. In: &quot;Journal of the Anthropological Institute&quot; vol. 31, JanuaryJune 1901
* Rubin, Arnold (ed.) (1988) &quot;Marks of Civilization: Artistic Transformations of the Human Body&quot;, Los Angeles: UCLA Museum of Cultural History
* Sanders, Clinton R. (1989) &quot;Customizing the Body: the Art and Culture of Tattooing&quot;. Philadelphia: Temple University Press
* Sinclair, A. T. (1909) &quot;Tattooing of the North American Indians&quot;, in &quot;American Anthropologist&quot; 1909/11, No. 3, p.362400
* Thompson, Beverly Yuen (2015) &quot;Covered in Ink: Tattoos, Women and the Politics of the Body &quot;, New York University Press. 
* Wianecki, Shannon (2011) &quot;Marked&quot; &quot;Maui No Ka &#x27;Oi Magazine&quot;.
* Lodder, Matt (2004) &quot;Tattoos - The Untold History of a Modern Art&quot; New Haven: Yale University Press 

; Popular and artistic
* Green, Terisa. &quot;Ink: The Not-Just-Skin-Deep Guide to Getting a Tattoo&quot; New York: New American Library 
* Green, Terisa. &quot;The Tattoo Encyclopedia: A Guide to Choosing Your Tattoo&quot; New York: New American Library 
* Krakw, Amy. &quot;Total Tattoo Book&quot; New York: Warner Books 

; Medical
* 
* 
* Paola Piccinini, Laura Contor, Ivana Bianchi, Chiara Senaldi, Sazan Pakalin: &quot;Safety of tattoos and permanent make-up&quot;, Joint Research Centre, 2016, , .
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* 
* Tattoos, The Permanent Art, documentary produced by Off Book
* History, Ink, article produced by Meghan Glass Hughes for The Valentine Richmond History Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q72941682" start="2" end="8" title="Tattoo" label="tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q890057" start="22" end="39" title="body modification" label="body modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4237858" start="58" end="68" title="tattoo ink" label="tattoo ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="70" end="73" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="83" end="91" title="pigments" label="pigments"/>
<link wikidata="Q505531" start="133" end="139" title="dermis" label="dermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259911" start="153" end="157" title="Human skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861368" start="176" end="189" title="Tattoo artist" label="Tattoo artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43006" start="226" end="260" title="Process of tattooing" label="tattooing processes and techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708032" start="315" end="329" title="tattoo machine" label="tattoo machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868977" start="336" end="356" title="history of tattooing" label="history of tattooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="370" end="379" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="752" end="768" title="Rite of passage" label="rites of passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q964401" start="875" end="884" title="fertility" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="903" end="909" title="amulet" label="amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804416" start="1099" end="1114" title="Tattooed lady" label="tattooed ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q171291" start="1197" end="1201" title="tzi" label="tzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003624" start="1571" end="1579" title="memorial" label="memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="1581" end="1590" title="religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185640" start="1722" end="1737" title="criminal tattoo" label="criminal tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q268052" start="1983" end="1999" title="permanent makeup" label="permanent makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806607" start="2005" end="2021" title="Medical tattoo" label="medical purposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="2113" end="2121" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="2131" end="2137" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q141741" start="2181" end="2194" title="Proto-Oceanic language" label="Proto-Oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336" start="2228" end="2236" title="wingbone" label="wingbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241332" start="2244" end="2254" title="flying fox" label="flying fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="2314" end="2339" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="2356" end="2365" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="2418" end="2428" title="Polynesian languages" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34128" start="2438" end="2446" title="Tahitian language" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34094" start="2448" end="2454" title="Tongan language" label="Tongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33781" start="2472" end="2481" title="Marquesan language" label="Marquesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156702" start="2739" end="2756" title="Military tattoo" label="military drumbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308372" start="2953" end="2958" title="flash (tattoo)" label="flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="3442" end="3451" title="loan word" label="loan word"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130829" start="3522" end="3531" title="Henry Ling Roth" label="Ling Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q642667" start="3656" end="3660" title="T moko" label="moko"/>
<link wikidata="Q570784" start="3674" end="3682" title="scarification" label="cicatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131260" start="3699" end="3705" title="keloid" label="keloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742879" start="4258" end="4289" title="American Academy of Dermatology" label="American Academy of Dermatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q268052" start="4557" end="4573" title="permanent makeup" label="permanent makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806607" start="4585" end="4600" title="medical tattoos" label="medical tattoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q184753" start="4718" end="4723" title="wound" label="wound"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="4793" end="4799" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037996" start="4836" end="4848" title="carbon stain" label="carbon stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="4870" end="4881" title="Coal mining" label="Coal miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778575" start="4926" end="4935" title="coal dust" label="coal dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242812" start="5153" end="5167" title="amalgam tattoo" label="amalgam tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q898259" start="5176" end="5183" title="amalgam (dentistry)" label="amalgam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5568" end="5572" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="5604" end="5622" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="5666" end="5679" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5691" end="5728" title="Identification in Nazi camps#Numbers" label="the Nazis&amp;#x27; identification system"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="5758" end="5760" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="5788" end="5816" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q160139" start="6143" end="6172" title="Mauthausen concentration camp" label="Mauthausen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="6177" end="6206" title="Buchenwald concentration camp" label="Buchenwald concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023193" start="6269" end="6280" title="Death marches during the Holocaust" label="death march"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="6374" end="6377" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="6399" end="6405" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="6622" end="6626" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6755" end="6767" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="7023" end="7031" title="Bible" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="7073" end="7086" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q187201" start="7136" end="7160" title="Second Council of Nicaea" label="Second Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="7191" end="7196" title="Paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21685486" start="7588" end="7608" title="forensic pathologist" label="forensic pathologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="7847" end="7859" title="thoroughbred" label="thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="7872" end="7881" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764945" start="7910" end="7931" title="animal identification" label="animal identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208989" start="7986" end="7997" title="beef cattle" label="beef cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q898443" start="8133" end="8141" title="Livestock branding" label="Branding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482590" start="8673" end="8680" title="desexed" label="desexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362" start="8741" end="8744" title="ear" label="ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q692077" start="8906" end="8911" title="mole (skin marking)" label="moles"/>
<link wikidata="Q848318" start="9156" end="9166" title="mastectomy" label="mastectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="9824" end="9833" title="Alzheimer" label="Alzheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180152" start="9984" end="9992" title="vitiligo" label="vitiligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q324020" start="10024" end="10045" title="SS blood group tattoo" label="SS blood group tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="10078" end="10087" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47657" start="10158" end="10168" title="blood type" label="blood type"/>
<link wikidata="Q837138" start="10218" end="10229" title="prima facie" label="prima facie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="10726" end="10739" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q373909" start="10771" end="10785" title="Deir el-Bahari" label="Deir el-Bahari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10793" end="10808" title="tzi#Skeletal details and tattooing" label="tzi the iceman"/>
<link wikidata="Q121713" start="10866" end="10877" title="acupuncture" label="acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="10900" end="10912" title="Radiological" label="Radiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154055" start="11060" end="11075" title="osteochondrosis" label="osteochondrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097028" start="11087" end="11098" title="spondylosis" label="spondylosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11293" end="11298" title="Acupuncture#History" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="11347" end="11356" title="mummies" label="mummified"/>
<link wikidata="Q171291" start="11554" end="11558" title="tzi" label="tzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="11662" end="11666" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622217" start="11715" end="11725" title="Figurative art" label="figurative"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="11887" end="11906" title="Austronesian people" label="Austronesian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="11985" end="11991" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038564" start="12004" end="12015" title="South China" label="South China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="12102" end="12114" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345851" start="12160" end="12171" title="headhunting" label="headhunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="12280" end="12308" title="Taiwanese indigenous peoples" label="Taiwanese indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="12310" end="12335" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Islander Southeast Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="12337" end="12349" title="Micronesian people" label="Micronesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="12351" end="12362" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="12372" end="12387" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy people"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="12389" end="12402" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="12523" end="12529" title="Citrus" label="Citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q424129" start="12642" end="12649" title="Indigenous people of New Guinea" label="Papuans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762752" start="12654" end="12665" title="Melanesians" label="Melanesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q53754" start="12697" end="12705" title="obsidian" label="obsidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="12820" end="12836" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="12841" end="12850" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101828" start="13102" end="13113" title="Ainu people" label="Ainu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="13129" end="13140" title="Austroasian" label="Austroasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="13145" end="13154" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="13156" end="13162" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727150" start="13172" end="13180" title="Tamazgha" label="Tamazgha"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="13201" end="13207" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="13209" end="13215" title="Fulani people" label="Fulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="13220" end="13225" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="13236" end="13243" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="13245" end="13261" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="13269" end="13291" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="Pre-Columbian Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112076" start="13303" end="13311" title="Rapa Nui tattooing" label="Rapa Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="13313" end="13318" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q277399" start="13322" end="13338" title="British Iron Age" label="Iron Age Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815070" start="13344" end="13364" title="Paleo-Balkan languages" label="Paleo-Balkan peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="13366" end="13375" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="13380" end="13389" title="Thracians" label="Thracians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172997" start="13402" end="13410" title="Daunians" label="Daunians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="13414" end="13420" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="13474" end="13481" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="13485" end="13494" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q129254825" start="13496" end="13526" title="Albanian traditional tattooing" label="Albanian traditional tattooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="13542" end="13564" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507857" start="13566" end="13573" title="Sicanje" label="Sicanje"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="13594" end="13599" title="Vlachs" label="Vlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="13690" end="13709" title="Mummy" label="naturally mummified"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="13787" end="13792" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="13798" end="13815" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979192" start="13949" end="13955" title="Bovinae" label="bovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q322141" start="14014" end="14027" title="barbary sheep" label="barbary sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="14215" end="14220" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="14244" end="14249" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q421454" start="15412" end="15417" title="Temple of Aksha" label="Aksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q146083" start="15472" end="15486" title="Ancient Egyptian deities" label="Egyptian deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188931" start="15505" end="15508" title="Bes" label="Bes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="15661" end="15673" title="Iconography" label="iconographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="15806" end="15831" title="archaeological excavation" label="archaeological excavation"/>
<link wikidata="Q216622" start="16125" end="16136" title="Tarim Basin" label="Tarim Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="16138" end="16146" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q84152598" start="16188" end="16197" title="Qwrighul" label="Qwrighul"/>
<link wikidata="Q123144527" start="16199" end="16206" title="Yanghai" label="Yanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q123144527" start="16208" end="16220" title="Shengjindian" label="Shengjindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002185" start="16262" end="16286" title="Tarim mummies" label="several tattooed mummies"/>
<link wikidata="Q774615" start="16484" end="16487" title="Baiyue" label="Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="16627" end="16639" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="16674" end="16684" title="Chinese characters" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057923" start="16817" end="16823" title="Slavery in China" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="16941" end="16951" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q68695" start="16961" end="16969" title="Quanzhou" label="Quanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075357" start="17191" end="17201" title="Lu Zhishen" label="Lu Zhishen"/>
<link wikidata="Q70827" start="17263" end="17275" title="Water Margin" label="Water Margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055296" start="17351" end="17358" title="Wu Song" label="Wu Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="17480" end="17494" title="Chinese mythology" label="Chinese legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q334398" start="17517" end="17524" title="Yue Fei" label="Yue Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="17535" end="17539" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="17749" end="17757" title="Human trafficking" label="abducted"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="17761" end="17765" title="Inuit" label="Inuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q380307" start="17800" end="17808" title="Labrador" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="17840" end="17847" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="17862" end="17869" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="18087" end="18096" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80288" start="18097" end="18113" title="Martin Frobisher" label="Martin Frobisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q81178" start="18222" end="18235" title="Baffin Island" label="Baffin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182736" start="18285" end="18295" title="John White (colonist and artist)" label="John White"/>
<link wikidata="Q221125" start="18307" end="18322" title="William Dampier" label="William Dampier"/>
<link wikidata="Q72941682" start="18362" end="18367" title="Jeoly" label="Jeoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="18396" end="18404" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569977" start="18473" end="18482" title="human zoo" label="human zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="19146" end="19156" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="19517" end="19533" title="Joseph Banks" label="Sir Joseph Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q530787" start="19553" end="19569" title="Sydney Parkinson" label="Sydney Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="19754" end="19760" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q847008" start="19998" end="20005" title="Raiatea" label="Raiatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q457143" start="20012" end="20016" title="Omai" label="Omai"/>
<link wikidata="Q26242981" start="20257" end="20277" title="Sutherland Macdonald" label="Sutherland Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="20628" end="20642" title="class division" label="class division"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="20744" end="20779" title="Indigenous people of North America" label="Indigenous peoples of North America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20966" end="21003" title="History of tattooing#North America" label="history of tattooing in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="21025" end="21044" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400437" start="21102" end="21116" title="sailor tattoos" label="sailor tattoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983792" start="21142" end="21159" title="protection papers" label="protection papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="21203" end="21214" title="impressment" label="impressment"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="21232" end="21242" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27835024" start="21476" end="21494" title="Martin Hildebrandt" label="Martin Hildebrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742879" start="22524" end="22570" title="American Academy of Dermatology" label="Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="22753" end="22772" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="22923" end="22935" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q277633" start="22940" end="22951" title="Millennials" label="Millennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088696" start="23094" end="23112" title="Harris Insights &amp;amp; Analytics" label="Harris Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="23899" end="23907" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q329884" start="24110" end="24121" title="Arnhem Land" label="Arnhem Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q66370734" start="24382" end="24394" title="Bob Burruwal" label="Bob Burruwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39091289" start="24396" end="24406" title="Rembarrnga" label="Rembarrnga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688461" start="26839" end="26856" title="tattoo convention" label="tattoo convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q581741" start="27241" end="27246" title="Chimor" label="Chimu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061632" start="27330" end="27345" title="Chancay culture" label="Chancay culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="27415" end="27420" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q15570" start="27444" end="27475" title="Chinese University of Hong Kong" label="Chinese University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q49544" start="27638" end="27649" title="Xingu River" label="Xingu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q478465" start="27657" end="27662" title="North Region, Brazil" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q213782" start="27681" end="27695" title="Putumayo River" label="Putumayo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="27843" end="27855" title="Mori people" label="Mori people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="28008" end="28013" title="iwi" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q642667" start="28027" end="28034" title="t moko" label="t moko"/>
<link wikidata="Q11046554" start="28162" end="28166" title="Tapu (Polynesian culture)" label="tapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326115" start="28309" end="28318" title="mokomokai" label="mokomokai"/>
<link wikidata="Q915603" start="28521" end="28528" title="Te Papa" label="Te Papa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268437" start="28864" end="28875" title="Gondi people" label="Gond people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790160" start="28897" end="28902" title="Warli" label="Warli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="29022" end="29031" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596080" start="29137" end="29144" title="Mising people" label="Mishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212743" start="29741" end="29750" title="epidermis (skin)" label="epidermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345654" start="29811" end="29822" title="Homogenization (biology)" label="homogenized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="29946" end="29959" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q107647" start="29967" end="29976" title="phagocyte" label="phagocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543255" start="30121" end="30139" title="granulation tissue" label="granulation tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="30196" end="30204" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="30305" end="30315" title="macrophage" label="macrophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q570784" start="31096" end="31109" title="scarification" label="scarification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708032" start="31373" end="31387" title="tattoo machine" label="tattoo machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q866612" start="31472" end="31478" title="solder" label="solder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545659" start="31859" end="31869" title="hectograph" label="hectograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q188223" start="32758" end="32767" title="autoclave" label="autoclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="33000" end="33012" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345851" start="33122" end="33134" title="head-hunting" label="head-hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543654" start="33178" end="33184" title="Ifugao people" label="Ifugao"/>
<link wikidata="Q847603" start="33189" end="33201" title="Dayak people" label="Dayak people"/>
<link wikidata="Q594939" start="33297" end="33312" title="initiation rite" label="initiation rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290600" start="33550" end="33558" title="Visayans" label="Visayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16738664" start="33566" end="33590" title="pre-colonial Philippines" label="pre-colonial Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263428" start="33623" end="33628" title="maginoo" label="tumao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261" start="33658" end="33664" title="timawa" label="timawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261" start="33774" end="33782" title="mangayaw" label="mangayaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q701676" start="33860" end="33865" title="Tayal people" label="Tayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="33870" end="33882" title="Mori people" label="Mori people"/>
<link wikidata="Q10919151" start="33969" end="33979" title="Wu culture" label="Wu culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195076" start="33987" end="34006" title="Yangtze River Delta" label="Yangtze River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="34052" end="34063" title="Han culture" label="Han culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="34067" end="34072" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924982" start="34078" end="34082" title="Predynastic Zhou" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010535" start="34092" end="34100" title="Wu Taibo" label="Wu Taibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070990" start="34117" end="34126" title="Zhongyong of Wu" label="Zhongyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q836688" start="34224" end="34229" title="ancient Chinese state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q912068" start="34233" end="34235" title="Wu (state)" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="34250" end="34266" title="imperial China" label="imperial Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="34375" end="34383" title="criminal" label="criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="34553" end="34565" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="34576" end="34582" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="34586" end="34592" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507857" start="34630" end="34637" title="Sicanje" label="Sicanje"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="34675" end="34680" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="34869" end="34893" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322181" start="35036" end="35061" title="Government of Meiji Japan" label="Government of Meiji Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="35251" end="35256" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="35514" end="35520" title="yakuza" label="yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="35641" end="35657" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q623184" start="35769" end="35777" title="Deviance (sociology)" label="deviance"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="35779" end="35800" title="personality disorders" label="personality disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982596" start="36030" end="36043" title="Russian criminal tattoos" label="Russian mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="36316" end="36324" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849110" start="36427" end="36433" title="Outlaw motorcycle club" label="bikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245794" start="36584" end="36600" title="prison tattooing" label="prison sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691764" start="36635" end="36650" title="teardrop tattoo" label="teardrop tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="36772" end="36785" title="United States Armed Forces" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868977" start="36836" end="36856" title="history of tattooing" label="history of tattooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="37007" end="37013" title="yakuza" label="yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q11591940" start="37071" end="37087" title="Fukushi Masaichi" label="Fukushi Masaichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="37225" end="37245" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940827" start="37542" end="37559" title="Museum of Croydon" label="Museum of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28957226" start="37712" end="37725" title="Jessie Knight (tattoo artist)" label="Jessie Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129049" start="38509" end="38532" title="participant observation" label="participant observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="39328" end="39331" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q51482" start="39333" end="39341" title="Red Bull" label="Red Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q211951" start="39343" end="39351" title="ASOS.com" label="ASOS.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335701" start="39356" end="39368" title="Sailor Jerry" label="Sailor Jerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826522" start="39460" end="39482" title="B.T.&amp;#x27;s Smokehouse" label="B.T.&amp;#x27;s Smokehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927522" start="40348" end="40368" title="Blood-borne disease" label="blood-borne pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="40412" end="40421" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="40426" end="40430" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="OSHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="40814" end="40823" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q655331" start="40825" end="40845" title="herpes simplex virus" label="herpes simplex virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="40847" end="40850" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q199695" start="40852" end="40857" title="staph" label="staph"/>
<link wikidata="Q47790" start="40859" end="40866" title="tetanus" label="tetanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="40872" end="40884" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="41213" end="41225" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q574491" start="41273" end="41279" title="bruise" label="bruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q468787" start="41280" end="41288" title="hematoma" label="hematoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q48798" start="41418" end="41443" title="European Chemicals Agency" label="European Chemicals Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518429" start="41736" end="41753" title="Nanotoxicology" label="nanotoxicological"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259911" start="41931" end="41935" title="Human skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13119823" start="41940" end="41945" title="flesh" label="flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="41973" end="41983" title="amputation" label="amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q901751" start="42230" end="42269" title="European Synchrotron Radiation Facility" label="European Synchrotron Radiation Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="42345" end="42355" title="lymph node" label="lymph node"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200226" start="43169" end="43181" title="dermabrasion" label="dermabrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="43220" end="43224" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705075" start="43249" end="43260" title="cryosurgery" label="cryosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591440" start="43307" end="43317" title="skin graft" label="skin graft"/>
<link wikidata="Q620505" start="43809" end="43822" title="body painting" label="body painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q336665" start="43936" end="43941" title="Decal" label="Decal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302713" start="44867" end="44875" title="baby oil" label="baby oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10521987" start="44943" end="44948" title="henna" label="henna"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="46607" end="46610" title="FDA" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207442" start="46792" end="46806" title="silver nitrate" label="silver nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q320617" start="46808" end="46815" title="carmine" label="carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q388692" start="46817" end="46827" title="pyrogallol" label="pyrogallol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46829" end="46848" title="disperse orange dye" label="disperse orange dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="46853" end="46861" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q415024" start="46895" end="46915" title="paraphenylenediamine" label="paraphenylenediamine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46925" end="46936" title="textile dye" label="textile dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="47441" end="47458" title="Ancient Egyptians" label="Ancient Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="47565" end="47573" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041988" start="47720" end="47734" title="Yantra tattooing" label="yantra tattoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="48032" end="48039" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12486369" start="48117" end="48129" title="Leviticus 19" label="Leviticus 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="48201" end="48209" title="gentiles" label="gentiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="48366" end="48379" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="48406" end="48415" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915332" start="48447" end="48459" title="Old Covenant" label="Old Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669560" start="48494" end="48503" title="Abrogation of Old Covenant laws" label="abrogated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672123" start="48527" end="48539" title="New Covenant" label="New Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="48646" end="48656" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q146744" start="48797" end="48814" title="Coptic Christians" label="Coptic Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="48921" end="48932" title="Evangelical" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="48937" end="48951" title="Christian fundamentalism" label="fundamentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="48952" end="48962" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="49050" end="49053" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223862" start="49101" end="49106" title="haram" label="haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="49116" end="49129" title="Sunni Muslims" label="Sunni Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="49188" end="49194" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="49196" end="49206" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10302260" start="49365" end="49393" title="Inked (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Inked&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349642" start="49496" end="49519" title="List of tattoo TV shows" label="List of tattoo TV shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q847603" start="49556" end="49584" title="Borneo traditional tattooing" label="Borneo traditional tattooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646077" start="49587" end="49614" title="Chinese calligraphy tattoos" label="Chinese calligraphy tattoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507857" start="49617" end="49662" title="Christian tattooing in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Christian tattooing in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18392048" start="49668" end="49687" title="New school (tattoo)" label="New school (tattoo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q613135" start="49690" end="49709" title="Old school (tattoo)" label="Old school (tattoo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245794" start="49712" end="49728" title="Prison tattooing" label="Prison tattooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041988" start="49731" end="49739" title="Sak Yant" label="Sak Yant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400437" start="49742" end="49756" title="Sailor tattoos" label="Sailor tattoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q570784" start="49759" end="49772" title="Scarification" label="Scarification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540012" start="49775" end="49788" title="Sleeve tattoo" label="Sleeve tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562765" start="49791" end="49802" title="Soot tattoo" label="Soot tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936969" start="49824" end="49842" title="Body suit (tattoo)" label="Body suit (tattoo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533240" start="49845" end="49862" title="Genital tattooing" label="Genital tattooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q704251" start="49865" end="49882" title="Lower back tattoo" label="Lower back tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570372" start="49885" end="49902" title="Scleral tattooing" label="Scleral tattooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610308" start="49919" end="49934" title="Blackout tattoo" label="Blackout tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134766" start="49936" end="49947" title="Trash polka" label="Trash polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q678649" start="49949" end="49957" title="Body art" label="Body art"/>
<link wikidata="Q620505" start="49960" end="49973" title="Body painting" label="Body painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q769843" start="49976" end="49982" title="Mehndi" label="Mehndi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10521987" start="49996" end="50001" title="henna" label="henna"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152605" start="50004" end="50051" title="Legal status of tattooing in European countries" label="Legal status of tattooing in European countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517606" start="50053" end="50099" title="Legal status of tattooing in the United States" label="Legal status of tattooing in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103423" start="50101" end="50123" title="List of tattoo artists" label="List of tattoo artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987442" start="50125" end="50143" title="Lucky Diamond Rich" label="Lucky Diamond Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688461" start="50181" end="50198" title="Tattoo convention" label="Tattoo convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804416" start="50200" end="50213" title="Tattooed lady" label="Tattooed lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708210" start="50563" end="50589" title="Princeton University Press" label="Princeton University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q352545" start="51271" end="51294" title="H. F. &amp;amp; G. Witherby" label="H. F. &amp;amp; G. Witherby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276265" start="51647" end="51656" title="Re/Search" label="Re/Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276557" start="51789" end="51802" title="Shaker Verlag" label="Shaker Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q773087" start="52131" end="52146" title="Popular Science" label="Popular Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897107" start="52298" end="52313" title="Moment Magazine" label="Moment Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52799" end="52830" title="UCLA Museum of Cultural History" label="UCLA Museum of Cultural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579783" start="53053" end="53076" title="American Anthropologist" label="American Anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014807" start="53216" end="53241" title="New York University Press" label="New York University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792380" start="53296" end="53324" title="Maui No Ka &amp;#x27;Oi Magazine" label="Maui No Ka &amp;#x27;Oi Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005314" start="53562" end="53582" title="New American Library" label="New American Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150392" start="53757" end="53769" title="Warner Books" label="Warner Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500915" start="53920" end="53941" title="Joint Research Centre" label="Joint Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078917" start="54057" end="54065" title="Off Book (web series)" label="Off Book"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30558" wikidata="Q1367657" url="?curid=30558" title="Levellers">
<text>The Levellers were a political movement active during the English Civil War who were committed to popular sovereignty, extended suffrage, equality before the law and religious tolerance. The hallmark of Leveller thought was its populism, as shown by its emphasis on equal natural rights, and their practice of reaching the public through pamphlets, petitions and vocal appeals to the crowd.

The Levellers came to prominence at the end of the First English Civil War (16421646) and were most influential before the start of the Second Civil War (164849). Leveller views and support were found in the populace of the City of London and in some regiments in the New Model Army. Their ideas were presented in their manifesto &quot;Agreement of the People&quot;. In contrast to the Diggers, the Levellers opposed common ownership, except in cases of mutual agreement of the property owners.

They were organised at the national level, with offices in a number of London inns and taverns such as The Rosemary Branch in Islington, which got its name from the sprigs of rosemary that Levellers wore in their hats as a sign of identification. They also identified themselves by sea-green ribbons worn on their clothing. 

From July 1648 to September 1649, they published a newspaper, &quot;The Moderate&quot;, and were pioneers in the use of petitions and pamphleteering to political ends. London&#x27;s printing and bookselling trade was pivotal to the movement. 

After Pride&#x27;s Purge and the execution of Charles I, power lay in the hands of the Grandees in the Army (and to a lesser extent with the Rump Parliament). The Levellers, along with all other opposition groups, were marginalised by those in power and their influence waned. By 1650, they were no longer a serious threat to the established order.

==Origin of name==
The term &quot;leveller&quot; had been used in 17th-century England as a term of abuse for rural rebels. In the Midland Revolt of 1607, the name was used to refer to those who levelled hedges and walls in enclosure riots.

As a political movement, the term first referred to a faction of New Model Army Agitators and their London supporters who were allegedly plotting to assassinate Charles I of England. But the term was gradually attached to John Lilburne, Richard Overton, and William Walwyn and their &quot;faction&quot;. Books published in 16471648 often reflect this terminological uncertainty. The public &quot;identification&quot; was largely due to the aspersions by Marchamont Needham, the author of the newspaper &quot;Mercurius Pragmaticus&quot;. Lilburne, John Wildman and Richard Baxter later thought that Oliver Cromwell and Henry Ireton had applied the term to Lilburne&#x27;s group during the Putney Debates of late 1647. Lilburne considered the term pejorative and called his supporters &quot;Levellers so-called&quot; and preferred &quot;Agitators&quot;. The term suggested that the &quot;Levellers&quot; aimed to bring all down to the lowest common level. The leaders vehemently denied the charge of &quot;levelling&quot;, but adopted the name because it was how they were known to the majority of people. After their arrest and imprisonment in 1649, four of the &quot;Leveller&quot; leaders  Walwyn, Overton, Lilburne and Thomas Prince  signed a manifesto in which they called themselves Levellers.

The first ideological identification was due to Thomas Edwards, who, in his work &quot;Gangraena&quot; (1646), summed up Levellers&#x27; views and attacked their radical political egalitarianism that showed no respect for the constitution. The prime targets in part III of his work were the men who were to be recognized as the leaders of the Leveller party.

The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; dates the first written use of the term for a political movement to 1644, in Marchamont Needham&#x27;s pamphlet &quot;The Case for the Commonwealth of England Stated&quot; which however dates from 1650. The OED notes the term was also used in a letter of 1 November 1647.

The 19th-century historian S. R. Gardiner suggested that it existed as a nickname before this date. Blair Worden, the most recent historian to publish on the subject, concluded that the 1 November letter was the first recorded use of the term. The letter referred to extremists among the Army agitators: &quot;They have given themselves a new name, viz. Levellers, for they intend to sett all things straight, and rayse a parity and community in the kingdom&quot;. Worden shows that the term first appeared in print in a book by Charles I called &quot;His Majesties Most Gracious Declaration&quot;. This tract was a printing of a letter that had been read in the House of Lords on 11 November 1647. Although George Thomason did not date this tract, the last date internal to the document was Saturday 13 November 1647, suggesting a publication date of 15 November 1647.

== Political ambitions ==
The Levellers&#x27; agenda developed in tandem with growing dissent within the New Model Army in the wake of the First Civil War. Early drafts of the Agreement of the People emanated from army circles and appeared before the Putney Debates of October and November 1647, and a final version, appended and issued in the names of prominent Levellers Lt. Col. Lilburne, Walwyn, Overton and Prince appeared in May 1649. It called for an extension of suffrage to include almost all the adult male population (but excluding wage-earners, for reasons mentioned below), electoral reform, biennial elections, religious freedom, and an end to imprisonment for debt. They were committed broadly to the abolition of corruption within the parliamentary and judicial process, toleration of religious differences, the translation of law into the common tongue and, arguably, something that could be considered democracy in its modern form  arguably the first time contemporary democratic ideas had been formally framed and adopted by a political movement. The Levellers have been seen as having undemocratic tendencies by some as they excluded household servants and those dependent upon charitable handouts from suffrage as Levellers feared that poor, dependent men would simply vote as their masters wished. It would also have excluded women; most adult women were married and, as wives, were legally and financially dependent on their husbands.

Some Levellers like Lilburne argued that the English Common law, particularly the Magna Carta, was the foundation of English rights and liberties, but others, like William Walwyn, compared the Magna Carta to a &quot;mess of potage&quot;. Lilburne also harked back in his writing to the notion of a Norman yoke that has been imposed on the English people and to some extent argued that the English were simply seeking to reclaim those rights they had enjoyed before the Conquest.
Levellers tended to hold fast to a notion of &quot;natural rights&quot; that had been violated by the King&#x27;s side in the Civil Wars (16421651). At the Putney Debates in 1647, Colonel Thomas Rainsborough defended natural rights as coming from the law of God expressed in the Bible. Richard Overton considered that liberty was an innate property of every person. Michael Mendle has demonstrated the development of Leveller ideas from elements of early parliamentarian thought as expressed by men such as Henry Parker.

According to George Sabine, Levellers held to &quot;the doctrine of consent by participation in the choice of representatives&quot;.

== Timeline ==
In July 1645, John Lilburne was imprisoned for denouncing Members of Parliament who lived in comfort while the common soldiers fought and died for the Parliamentary cause. His offence was slandering William Lenthall, the Speaker of the House of Commons, whom he accused of corresponding with Royalists. He was freed in October 1645 after a petition requesting his release, signed by over 2,000 leading London citizens, was presented to the House of Commons.

In July 1646, Lilburne was imprisoned again, this time in the Tower of London, for denouncing his former army commander, the Earl of Manchester, as a Royalist sympathiser because he had protected an officer who had been charged with treason. It was the campaigns to free Lilburne from prison that spawned the movement known as the Levellers. Richard Overton was arrested in August 1646 for publishing a pamphlet attacking the House of Lords. During his imprisonment, he wrote an influential Leveller manifesto, &quot;An Arrow Against All Tyrants and Tyranny&quot;.

The soldiers in the New Model Army elected &quot;Agitators&quot; from each regiment to represent them. These Agitators were recognised by the Army&#x27;s commanders and had a seat on the General Council. However, by September 1647, at least five regiments of cavalry had elected new unofficial agitators and produced a pamphlet called &quot;The Case of the Army truly stated&quot;. This was presented to the commander-in-chief, Sir Thomas Fairfax, on 18 October 1647. In this, they demanded a dissolution of Parliament within a year and substantial changes to the constitution of future Parliaments that were to be regulated by an unalterable &quot;law paramount&quot;.

The senior officers in the Army (nicknamed &quot;Grandees&quot;) were angered by the &quot;Case of the Army&quot; and ordered the unofficial Agitators to give an account of their principles before the General Council of the Army. These debates, known as the Putney Debates, were held in St. Mary&#x27;s Church, Putney, in the county of Surrey between 28 October and 11 November 1647. The Agitators were assisted by some civilians, notably John Wildman and Maximilian Petty, who had been connected to the Army as civilian advisers since July 1647. On 28 October, the Agitator Robert Everard presented a document entitled &quot;An Agreement of the People&quot;. This manifesto, which was inherently republican and democratic, appeared to conflict with the terms of settlement that had already been endorsed by the General Council in July entitled &quot;The Heads of the Proposals&quot; The &quot;Heads of the Proposals&quot; contained many demands that looked towards social justice but relied upon the King to agree to them and bring them into law through acts of Parliament. The new Agitators, who distrusted the King, demanded that England be settled from &quot;the bottom up&quot; rather than the &quot;top down&quot; by giving the vote to most adult males. The debates help to throw light on the areas on which supporters of the Parliamentarian side agreed and those on which they differed. For example, Ireton asked whether the phrase in the Agreement &quot;according to the number of the inhabitants&quot; gave a foreigner just arrived in England and resident in a property the right to vote. He argued that a person must have a &quot;permanent interest of this kingdom&quot; to be entitled to vote, and that &quot;permanent interest&quot; means owning property, which is where he and the Levellers disagreed. To modern eyes, the debates seem to draw heavily on the Bible to lay out certain basic principles. This is to be expected in an age still racked by religious upheavals in the aftermath of the Reformation and particularly in an army where soldiers were, in part, selected for their religious zeal. It is notable that John Wildman resisted religious language, arguing that the Bible produced no model for civil government and that reason should be the basis of any future settlement.

The Corkbush Field rendezvous on 17 November 1647, was the first of three meetings to take place as agreed in the Putney Debates. The Army commanders Thomas Fairfax and Cromwell were worried by the strength of support for Levellers in the Army, so they decided to impose &quot;The Heads of the Proposals&quot; as the army&#x27;s manifesto instead of the Levellers&#x27; &quot;Agreement of the People&quot;. When some refused to accept this (because they wanted the army to adopt the Levellers&#x27; document), they were arrested and one of the ringleaders, Private Richard Arnold, was executed. At the other two meetings, the troops who were summoned agreed to the manifesto without further protest.

The Levellers&#x27; largest petition, titled &quot;To The Right Honourable The Commons Of England&quot;, was presented to Parliament on 11 September 1648 after amassing signatories including about a third of all Londoners.

On 30 October 1648, Thomas Rainsborough, a Member of Parliament and Leveller leader who had spoken at the Putney Debates, was killed during an attempt to abduct him. His funeral was the occasion for a large Leveller-led demonstration in London, with thousands of mourners wearing the Levellers&#x27; ribbons of sea-green and bunches of rosemary for remembrance in their hats.

On 20 January 1649, a version of the &quot;Agreement of the People&quot; that had been drawn up in October 1647 for the Army Council and subsequently modified was presented to the House of Commons.

At the end of January 1649, Charles I of England was tried and executed for treason against the people. In February, the Grandees banned petitions to Parliament by soldiers. In March, eight Leveller troopers went to the commander-in-chief of the New Model Army, Thomas Fairfax, and demanded the restoration of the right to petition. Five of them were out of the army.

In April, 300 infantrymen of Colonel John Hewson&#x27;s regiment, who declared that they would not serve in Ireland until the Levellers&#x27; programme had been realised, were cashiered without arrears of pay. This was the threat that had been used to quell the mutiny at the Corkbush Field rendezvous. Later that month, in the Bishopsgate mutiny, soldiers of the regiment of Colonel Edward Whalley stationed in Bishopsgate London made demands similar to those of Hewson&#x27;s regiment; they were ordered out of London. When they refused to go, 15 soldiers were arrested and court martialed. Six of their number were sentenced to death. Of these, five were later pardoned, while Robert Lockyer (or Lockier), a former Levellers agitator, was hanged on 27 April 1649. &quot;At his burial a thousand men, in files, preceded the corpse, which was adorned with bunches of rosemary dipped in blood; on each side rode three trumpeters, and behind was led the troopers horse, covered with mourning; some thousands of men and women followed with black and green ribbons on their heads and breasts, and were received at the grave by a numerous crowd of the inhabitants of London and Westminster.&quot;

In 1649, Lieutenant-Colonel John Lilburne, William Walwyn, Thomas Prince, and Richard Overton were imprisoned in the Tower of London by the Council of State (see above). It was while the leaders of the Levellers were being held in the Tower that they wrote an outline of the reforms the Levellers wanted, in a pamphlet entitled &quot;An Agreement Of The Free People Of England&quot; (written on 1 May 1649). It includes reforms that have since been made law in England, such as the right to silence, and others that have not been, such as an elected judiciary.

Shortly afterwards, Cromwell attacked the &quot;Banbury mutineers&quot;, 400 troopers who supported the Levellers and who were commanded by Captain William Thompson. Several mutineers were killed in the skirmish. Captain Thompson escaped only to be killed a few days later in another skirmish near the Diggers community at Wellingborough. The three other leaders  William Thompson&#x27;s brother, Corporal Perkins, and John Church  were shot on 17 May 1649. This destroyed the Levellers&#x27; support base in the New Model Army, which by then was the major power in the land. Although Walwyn and Overton were released from the Tower, and Lilburne tried and acquitted, the Leveller cause had effectively been crushed.

== &quot;The Moderate&quot; ==

The Moderate was a newspaper published by the Levellers from July 1648 to September 1649.

== Other usage ==
In the 1724 Levellers Rising in Dumfries and Galloway, a number of men who took part in it were called &quot;Dykebreakers&quot; (a dyke being a Scottish term for a stone wall without cement). They first met at the annual Horse Fair at Kelton Hill. They were confronted by six troops of dragoons, after which nocturnal attacks continued for six months, making it the most serious rural disturbance in 18th-century Scotland. The most troublesome of these Levellers were transported to the plantations of North America as punishment.

The word was also used in Ireland during the 18th century to describe a secret revolutionary society similar to the Whiteboys.

== See also ==

* List of liberal theorists
* English Dissenters
* Good Old Cause
* Green Ribbon Club A post restoration political club. The &quot;Green Ribbon&quot; was the badge of The Levellers in the English Civil Wars in which many of the members had fought and was an overt reminder of their radical origins.
* Hugo Black, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States who cited John Lilburne&#x27;s trial in several opinions beginning with &quot;In re Oliver&quot; in 1948
* Kett&#x27;s Rebellion (1549)
* Chartism
* Republicanism in the United Kingdom
* Edward Sexby (16161658); English Puritan, soldier and Leveller; he turned against Cromwell and plotted his assassination
* Peasants&#x27; Revolt
* Libertarianism
* United States Bill of Rights
* Gerrard Winstanley
* Norman yoke
* Pre-Marxist communism
== References ==
== Sources ==
* HN Brailsford, &quot;The Levellers and the English Revolution&quot;, edited and prepared for publication by Christopher Hill. (Cresset Books, 1961; Spokesman Books, 2nd Edition, 1983).
* Christopher Hill, The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas During the English Revolution (1972)
* Mendle, Michael (ed), &quot;The Putney Debates of 1647: The Army, the Levellers, and the English State&quot;. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2001. .
* Morton, A.L (ed), &quot;Freedom in Arms: A Selection of Leveller Writings&quot;. New York: International Publishers, 1975.
* John Rees, &quot;The Leveller Revolution: Radical Political Organisation in England, 16401650&quot;. Brooklyn, Verso Books, 2016.
* Jrgen Diethe, &quot;Wir das freie Volk von England. Aufstieg und Fall der Levellers in der Englischen Revolution&quot;. Mnster u.a., LIT Verlag, 2009 (Politica et Ars, 22), 280 S.

== Further reading ==
* Annis, Ben &quot;Have Historians Exaggerated the Significance of Radical Movements in the English Revolution?&quot;
* Anderson, Angela; &quot;Cromwell and the Levellers&quot; interviewed as part of the preparation for Cromwell: New Model Englishman by Channel 4
* Peter Kurrild-Klitgaard (2000). Self-Ownership and Consent: The Contractarian Liberalism of Richard Overton. Journal of Libertarian Studies 15, 1 (Fall 2000): 4396.
* Selected works of the Levellers
* Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution 
* John Lilburne and the Levellers
* BBC: Civil War &amp; The Levellers (17th century)
* 16421652: Levellers and Diggers in the English Revolution
* A Time-line for the Levellers
* The Levellers: Overton, Walwyn and Lilburne Note 1 in this link includes an explanation of the origins of the word Levellers.
* Hoile, David; The Levellers: Libertarian Radicalism and the English Civil War 
* Feltham, Oliver, Anatomy of Failure  Philosophy and Political Action</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1367657" start="4" end="13" title="Levellers" label="Levellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738074" start="21" end="39" title="political movement" label="political movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="58" end="75" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q285950" start="98" end="117" title="popular sovereignty" label="popular sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="166" end="185" title="religious tolerance" label="religious tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="228" end="236" title="populism" label="populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142505" start="443" end="466" title="First English Civil War" label="First English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025332" start="529" end="545" title="Second English Civil War" label="Second Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="618" end="632" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="662" end="676" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q396432" start="730" end="753" title="Agreement of the People" label="Agreement of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224630" start="780" end="787" title="Diggers" label="Diggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117368" start="811" end="827" title="common ownership" label="common ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787448" start="1466" end="1484" title="Pride&amp;#x27;s Purge" label="Pride&amp;#x27;s Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088700" start="1493" end="1515" title="execution of Charles I" label="execution of Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="1547" end="1554" title="Grandee (New Model Army)" label="Grandee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477668" start="1601" end="1616" title="Rump Parliament" label="Rump Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842436" start="1941" end="1955" title="Midland Revolt" label="Midland Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="2034" end="2049" title="enclosure riots" label="enclosure riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="2117" end="2131" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369159" start="2132" end="2141" title="Agitators" label="Agitators"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="2213" end="2233" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q714416" start="2274" end="2287" title="John Lilburne" label="John Lilburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328211" start="2289" end="2304" title="Richard Overton (pamphleteer)" label="Richard Overton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019987" start="2310" end="2324" title="William Walwyn" label="William Walwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289688" start="2507" end="2525" title="Marchamont Needham" label="Marchamont Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070148" start="2600" end="2612" title="John Wildman" label="John Wildman"/>
<link wikidata="Q680070" start="2617" end="2631" title="Richard Baxter" label="Richard Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="2651" end="2666" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q719724" start="2671" end="2683" title="Henry Ireton" label="Henry Ireton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042349" start="2741" end="2755" title="Putney Debates" label="Putney Debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191054" start="3275" end="3288" title="Thomas Prince (Leveller)" label="Thomas Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791093" start="3402" end="3416" title="Thomas Edwards (heresiographer)" label="Thomas Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521178" start="3441" end="3450" title="Gangraena" label="Gangraena"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="3724" end="3749" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289688" start="3833" end="3851" title="Marchamont Needham" label="Marchamont Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770846" start="4056" end="4070" title="S. R. Gardiner" label="S. R. Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="4102" end="4110" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924195" start="4129" end="4141" title="Blair Worden" label="Blair Worden"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="4558" end="4567" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545169" start="4737" end="4752" title="George Thomason (book collector)" label="George Thomason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="5005" end="5019" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q396432" start="5076" end="5099" title="Agreement of the People" label="Agreement of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042349" start="5151" end="5165" title="Putney Debates" label="Putney Debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="5629" end="5639" title="Political corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="6442" end="6453" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827003" start="6576" end="6590" title="mess of pottage" label="mess of potage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327434" start="6658" end="6669" title="Norman yoke" label="Norman yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="6890" end="6904" title="natural rights" label="natural rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793392" start="7028" end="7047" title="Thomas Rainsborough" label="Thomas Rainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="7119" end="7124" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7206" end="7220" title="Michael Mendle" label="Michael Mendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726722" start="7347" end="7359" title="Henry Parker (writer)" label="Henry Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507581" start="7375" end="7388" title="George Sabine" label="George Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="7430" end="7437" title="consent of the governed" label="consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="7472" end="7487" title="representative democracy" label="representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="7569" end="7590" title="Member of Parliament (England)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="7662" end="7675" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="7699" end="7706" title="slander" label="slander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568790" start="7710" end="7726" title="William Lenthall" label="William Lenthall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="7747" end="7763" title="House of Commons of England" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="7803" end="7812" title="Cavalier" label="Royalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="8032" end="8047" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702018" start="8095" end="8113" title="Edward Montagu, 2nd Earl of Manchester" label="Earl of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="8120" end="8128" title="cavalier" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="8203" end="8210" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q190399" start="8373" end="8381" title="pamphlet" label="pamphlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="8396" end="8410" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="8556" end="8570" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042349" start="9465" end="9479" title="Putney Debates" label="Putney Debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590181" start="9494" end="9524" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Putney" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Putney"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="9543" end="9549" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070148" start="9646" end="9658" title="John Wildman" label="John Wildman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795725" start="9663" end="9679" title="Maximilian Petty" label="Maximilian Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344128" start="9782" end="9796" title="Robert Everard" label="Robert Everard"/>
<link wikidata="Q396432" start="9833" end="9859" title="An Agreement of the People" label="An Agreement of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q46337" start="9872" end="9881" title="manifesto" label="manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689990" start="10058" end="10084" title="The Heads of the Proposals" label="The Heads of the Proposals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="11214" end="11225" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070148" start="11338" end="11350" title="John Wildman" label="John Wildman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330968" start="11509" end="11534" title="Corkbush Field rendezvous" label="Corkbush Field rendezvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q550612" start="11655" end="11669" title="Thomas Fairfax" label="Thomas Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12070" end="12084" title="Richard Arnold (soldier)" label="Richard Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q697279" start="12234" end="12242" title="petition" label="petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q535158" start="12328" end="12338" title="Long Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793392" start="12450" end="12469" title="Thomas Rainsborough" label="Thomas Rainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="12473" end="12493" title="Member of Parliament (England)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="12766" end="12774" title="rosemary" label="rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794123" start="12927" end="12939" title="Army Council (1647)" label="Army Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="13034" end="13054" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625153" start="13320" end="13337" title="right to petition" label="right to petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387219" start="13412" end="13423" title="John Hewson (regicide)" label="John Hewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="13483" end="13490" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406150" start="13569" end="13576" title="arrears" label="arrears"/>
<link wikidata="Q511866" start="13637" end="13643" title="mutiny" label="mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330969" start="13703" end="13721" title="Bishopsgate mutiny" label="Bishopsgate mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048719" start="13759" end="13773" title="Edward Whalley" label="Edward Whalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q779444" start="13787" end="13798" title="Bishopsgate" label="Bishopsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="13951" end="13964" title="court martial" label="court martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346970" start="14055" end="14069" title="Robert Lockyer" label="Robert Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="14293" end="14300" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123526" start="14550" end="14561" title="Liberty of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q714416" start="14598" end="14611" title="John Lilburne" label="John Lilburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019987" start="14613" end="14627" title="William Walwyn" label="William Walwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191054" start="14629" end="14642" title="Thomas Prince (Leveller)" label="Thomas Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328211" start="14648" end="14663" title="Richard Overton (Leveller)" label="Richard Overton"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="14687" end="14702" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993731" start="14710" end="14726" title="English Council of State" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q196995" start="15052" end="15068" title="right to silence" label="right to silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="15120" end="15129" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379085" start="15180" end="15197" title="Banbury mutiny" label="Banbury mutineers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15280" end="15296" title="William Thompson (Leveller)" label="William Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224630" start="15434" end="15441" title="Diggers" label="Diggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q913499" start="15455" end="15469" title="Wellingborough" label="Wellingborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="15903" end="15912" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="16025" end="16046" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q194199" start="16279" end="16286" title="dragoon" label="dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="16551" end="16558" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q862527" start="16641" end="16650" title="Whiteboys" label="Whiteboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q831027" start="16671" end="16696" title="List of liberal theorists" label="List of liberal theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="16699" end="16717" title="English Dissenters" label="English Dissenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110687" start="16720" end="16734" title="Good Old Cause" label="Good Old Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603108" start="16737" end="16754" title="Green Ribbon Club" label="Green Ribbon Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q459752" start="16970" end="16980" title="Hugo Black" label="Hugo Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="16982" end="17041" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q19066622" start="17120" end="17132" title="In re Oliver" label="In re Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q27566029" start="17149" end="17170" title="Kett&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Kett&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193974" start="17180" end="17188" title="Chartism" label="Chartism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059094" start="17191" end="17226" title="Republicanism in the United Kingdom" label="Republicanism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048668" start="17229" end="17241" title="Edward Sexby" label="Edward Sexby"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="17353" end="17374" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="17377" end="17391" title="Libertarianism" label="Libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="17394" end="17422" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q964050" start="17425" end="17443" title="Gerrard Winstanley" label="Gerrard Winstanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327434" start="17446" end="17457" title="Norman yoke" label="Norman yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924269" start="17460" end="17481" title="Pre-Marxist communism" label="Pre-Marxist communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="17924" end="17950" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010248" start="18199" end="18210" title="Verso Books" label="Verso Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="18679" end="18688" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175305" start="18691" end="18714" title="Peter Kurrild-Klitgaard" label="Peter Kurrild-Klitgaard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30559" wikidata="Q7730170" url="?curid=30559" title="The Diggers (band)">
<text>The Diggers are a Scottish post-Britpop powerpop band, with a 1997 debut album, &quot;Mount Everest&quot;.

==History==
Members Miezitis and Moffatt had attended school together and began playing as an acoustic duo in the early 1990s. In 1991 they moved to Glasgow, and added members Eslick and Ross. After a 1993 car crash, the group was noticed by Martin Carr of The Boo Radleys, who got them signed to Creation Records. They opened for Super Furry Animals on tour in 1996, and released their debut album for Creation, &quot;Mount Everest&quot;.

The band got their name from the novel Ringolevio by Emmett Grogan.

==Members==
*Chris Miezitis (vocals, guitar)
*Alan Moffat (vocals, bass)
*John Eslick (guitar)
*Hank Ross (drums)

==Discography==
*&quot;Mount Everest&quot; (Creation Records, 1997)
*&quot;Nobody&#x27;s Fool&quot; (Three-track CD). Includes &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Fool&quot;, &quot;Life&#x27;s All Ways&quot; and &quot;Here and There&quot; (Creation Records, 1996)
*&quot;Peace of Mind&quot; (Three-track CD). Includes &quot;Peace of Mind&quot;, &quot;Tangled Web&quot; and &quot;Get It Together&quot; (Creation Records, 1996)
*&quot;O.K. Alright&quot; (Three-track CD). Includes &quot;O.K. Alright&quot;, &quot;On the Line&quot; and &quot;Holiday Inn&quot; (Creation Records, 1997)

==References==
*Stephen Thomas Erlewine [ The Diggers], AllMusic</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7730170" start="0" end="11" title="The Diggers (band)" label="The Diggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189045" start="27" end="39" title="Britpop" label="post-Britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q837837" start="40" end="48" title="powerpop" label="powerpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q286080" start="202" end="210" title="acoustic music" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q109940" start="211" end="214" title="duet (music)" label="duo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="257" end="264" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775119" start="350" end="361" title="Martin Carr" label="Martin Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778436" start="365" end="380" title="The Boo Radleys" label="The Boo Radleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139341" start="405" end="421" title="Creation Records" label="Creation Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135582" start="439" end="458" title="Super Furry Animals" label="Super Furry Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139341" start="777" end="793" title="Creation Records" label="Creation Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="1316" end="1339" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1356" end="1364" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30561" wikidata="Q2550231" url="?curid=30561" title="Tallage">
<text>Tallage or talliage (from the French , i.e. a part cut out of the whole) may have signified at first any tax, but became in England and France a land use or land tenure tax. Later in England it was further limited to assessments by the crown upon cities, boroughs, and royal domains. In effect, tallage was a land tax.

==England==
Land taxes were not unknown in England, as the Anglo-Saxon kings had periodically levied a Danegeld on that basis, but tallage was brought to England by the Normans as a feudal duty. The word first appeared in the reign of Henry II as a synonym for the , which was an occasional payment exacted by king and barons. Under Henry&#x27;s sons it became a common source of royal revenue. It was condemned in the Magna Carta of 1215, and its imposition practically ceased by 1283 in favour of a general grant made in Parliament. There were three further attempts to impose tallage, and it was formally abolished in England in 1340 (Taxation, etc. Act 1340) under Edward III, when Parliament&#x27;s consent to the imposition of common charges became required.

Like scutage, tallage was superseded by various property and trade taxes, and then the subsidy system in the 14th century, which involved poll taxes. The last occasion on which tallage was levied in England appears to be about the year 1332.


The famous statute of 25 Edw. 1 (34 Edw. 1. Stat. 4 in &quot;The Statutes at Large&quot;), , though it is printed among the statutes of the realm, and was cited as a statute in the preamble to the Petition of Right in 1628, and by the judges in John Hampden&#x27;s case in 1637, is probably an imperfect and unauthoritative abstract of the . The first section enacts that no tallage for aid shall be imposed or levied by the king and his heirs without the will and assent of the archbishops, bishops, and other prelates, the earls, barons, knights, burgesses, and other freemen in the kingdom.

===Tally sticks===

 was the technical term for rendering accounts in the Exchequer, the accounts being kept by means of &quot;tallies&quot; or notched sticks. The s (a corruption of ) of the Exchequer were at one time important financial officers.

The system of keeping the national accounts by tallies was abolished by the Receipt of the Exchequer Act 1783 (23 Geo. 3. c. 82) and the office of teller by the Offices of Exchequer Act 1817 (57 Geo. 3. c. 84).

===Tallage and Jews===

The tax was frequently levied on English Jews during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. A tallage of 60,000, known as the &quot;Saladin tallage&quot;, was levied at Guildford in 1189, the ostensible object being preparation for the Third Crusade.

It was reported that John may have imposed a tallage upon Jews in 1210 to the extent of 60,000 marks (40,000). There are likewise records of tallages under Henry III of 4,000 marks (1225) and 5,000 marks (1270). Important tallages were made by Edward I in the second, third and fourth years (1,000), and in the fifth year (25,000 marks), of his reign. These taxes were in addition to the various claims which were made upon Jews for relief, wardship, marriage, fines, law-proceedings, debts, licenses, amercements etc. and which Jews paid to the English exchequer, like other English subjects.

It has been claimed that after their expulsion from England in 1290, the loss of the income from Jews was a chief reason why Edward I was obliged to give up his right of tallage upon Englishmen.

==France==
Tallage lasted much longer in France, where it was a royal tax and one of estate owners with tenants. It came to be called &#x27;taille&#x27; and was much used during the Hundred Years&#x27; War. It was not abolished in France until the French Revolution.

==Germany==
Tallage never became significantly developed in the German states. It remained a small tax owed to a feudal lord in lieu of other feudal duties, dying out along with other feudal duties.

==See also==
*Danegeld
*Dazdie
*Leibzoll
*Taille

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
*

== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2550231" start="0" end="7" title="Tallage" label="Tallage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550231" start="11" end="19" title="Tallage" label="talliage"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="30" end="36" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="105" end="108" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="247" end="253" title="city" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="255" end="262" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="269" end="274" title="monarchy" label="royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="309" end="317" title="land tax" label="land tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q301742" start="423" end="431" title="Danegeld" label="Danegeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="489" end="496" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="555" end="563" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="639" end="644" title="baron" label="baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="739" end="750" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="843" end="853" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="958" end="981" title="Taxation, etc. Act 1340" label="Taxation, etc. Act 1340"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="989" end="999" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q131887" start="1091" end="1098" title="scutage" label="scutage"/>
<link wikidata="Q721368" start="1224" end="1232" title="poll tax" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q123739406" start="1352" end="1361" title="25 Edw. 1" label="25 Edw. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497669" start="1391" end="1412" title="The Statutes at Large" label="The Statutes at Large"/>
<link wikidata="Q584063" start="1527" end="1544" title="Petition of Right" label="Petition of Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q329843" start="1575" end="1594" title="John Hampden" label="John Hampden&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="1755" end="1759" title="monarch" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="1809" end="1819" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="1822" end="1828" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q725440" start="1841" end="1848" title="prelate" label="prelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="1855" end="1859" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="1862" end="1867" title="baron" label="baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="1870" end="1876" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q48784578" start="1879" end="1886" title="burgess (title)" label="burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408803" start="1999" end="2008" title="Exchequer" label="Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q933008" start="2052" end="2059" title="tally stick" label="tallies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2251" end="2284" title="Receipt of the Exchequer Act 1783" label="Receipt of the Exchequer Act 1783"/>
<link wikidata="Q122835067" start="2286" end="2295" title="23 Geo. 3" label="23 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2336" end="2365" title="Offices of Exchequer Act 1817" label="Offices of Exchequer Act 1817"/>
<link wikidata="Q123944577" start="2367" end="2376" title="57 Geo. 3" label="57 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573647" start="2543" end="2558" title="Saladin tithe" label="Saladin tallage"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="2580" end="2589" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="2647" end="2660" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="2684" end="2688" title="John of England" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="2820" end="2829" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="2908" end="2916" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q831704" start="3106" end="3114" title="wardship" label="wardship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243001" start="3126" end="3130" title="fine (penalty)" label="fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="3150" end="3155" title="debts" label="debts"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="3157" end="3164" title="license" label="license"/>
<link wikidata="Q690133" start="3167" end="3177" title="amercement" label="amercement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="3638" end="3661" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3704" end="3721" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q301742" start="3938" end="3946" title="Danegeld" label="Danegeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243662" start="3948" end="3954" title="Dazdie" label="Dazdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q873808" start="3956" end="3964" title="Leibzoll" label="Leibzoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757650" start="3966" end="3972" title="Taille" label="Taille"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30562" wikidata="Q2358888" url="?curid=30562" title="Glossary of general topology">
<text>This is a glossary of some terms used in the branch of mathematics known as topology. Although there is no absolute distinction between different areas of topology, the focus here is on general topology. The following definitions are also fundamental to algebraic topology, differential topology and geometric topology. For a list of terms specific to algebraic topology, see Glossary of algebraic topology.

All spaces in this glossary are assumed to be topological spaces unless stated otherwise.

== A ==

;Absolutely closed: See &quot;H-closed&quot;

;Accessible: See formula_1.

;Accumulation point: See limit point.

;Alexandrov topology: The topology of a space &quot;X&quot; is an Alexandrov topology (or is finitely generated) if arbitrary intersections of open sets in &quot;X&quot; are open, or equivalently, if arbitrary unions of closed sets are closed, or, again equivalently, if the open sets are the upper sets of a poset.

;Almost discrete: A space is almost discrete if every open set is closed (hence clopen). The almost discrete spaces are precisely the finitely generated zero-dimensional spaces.

;-closed, -open: A subset &quot;A&quot; of a topological space &quot;X&quot; is -open if formula_2, and the complement of such a set is -closed.

;Approach space: An approach space is a generalization of metric space based on point-to-set distances, instead of point-to-point.

== B ==

;Baire space: This has two distinct common meanings:
:#A space is a Baire space if the intersection of any countable collection of dense open sets is dense; see Baire space.
:#Baire space is the set of all functions from the natural numbers to the natural numbers, with the topology of pointwise convergence; see Baire space (set theory).

;Base: A collection &quot;B&quot; of open sets is a base (or basis) for a topology formula_3 if every open set in formula_3 is a union of sets in formula_5. The topology formula_3 is the smallest topology on formula_7 containing formula_8 and is said to be generated by formula_8.

;Basis: See Base.

;-open: See &quot;Semi-preopen&quot;.

;b-open, b-closed: A subset formula_10 of a topological space formula_7 is b-open if formula_12. The complement of a b-open set is b-closed.

;Borel algebra: The Borel algebra on a topological space formula_13 is the smallest formula_14-algebra containing all the open sets. It is obtained by taking intersection of all formula_14-algebras on formula_16 containing formula_17.

;Borel set: A Borel set is an element of a Borel algebra.

;Boundary: The boundary (or frontier) of a set is the set&#x27;s closure minus its interior. Equivalently, the boundary of a set is the intersection of its closure with the closure of its complement. Boundary of a set formula_18 is denoted by formula_19 or formula_20 formula_10.

;Bounded: A set in a metric space is bounded if it has finite diameter. Equivalently, a set is bounded if it is contained in some open ball of finite radius. A function taking values in a metric space is bounded if its image is a bounded set.

== C ==

;Category of topological spaces: The category Top has topological spaces as objects and continuous maps as morphisms.

;Cauchy sequence: A sequence {&quot;x&quot;&quot;n&quot;} in a metric space (&quot;M&quot;, &quot;d&quot;) is a Cauchy sequence if, for every positive real number &quot;r&quot;, there is an integer &quot;N&quot; such that for all integers &quot;m&quot;, &quot;n&quot; &gt; &quot;N&quot;, we have &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;&quot;m&quot;, &quot;x&quot;&quot;n&quot;) &lt; &quot;r&quot;.

;Clopen set: A set is clopen if it is both open and closed.

;Closed ball: If (&quot;M&quot;, &quot;d&quot;) is a metric space, a closed ball is a set of the form &quot;D&quot;(&quot;x&quot;; &quot;r&quot;) := {&quot;y&quot; in &quot;M&quot; : &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;)  &quot;r&quot;}, where &quot;x&quot; is in &quot;M&quot; and &quot;r&quot; is a positive real number, the radius of the ball. A closed ball of radius &quot;r&quot; is a closed &quot;r&quot;-ball. Every closed ball is a closed set in the topology induced on &quot;M&quot; by &quot;d&quot;. Note that the closed ball &quot;D&quot;(&quot;x&quot;; &quot;r&quot;) might not be equal to the closure of the open ball &quot;B&quot;(&quot;x&quot;; &quot;r&quot;).

;Closed set: A set is closed if its complement is a member of the topology.

;Closed function: A function from one space to another is closed if the image of every closed set is closed.

;Closure: The closure of a set is the smallest closed set containing the original set. It is equal to the intersection of all closed sets which contain it. An element of the closure of a set &quot;S&quot; is a point of closure of &quot;S&quot;.

;Closure operator: See Kuratowski closure axioms.

;Coarser topology: If &quot;X&quot; is a set, and if &quot;T&quot;1 and &quot;T&quot;2 are topologies on &quot;X&quot;, then &quot;T&quot;1 is coarser (or smaller, weaker) than &quot;T&quot;2 if &quot;T&quot;1 is contained in &quot;T&quot;2. Beware, some authors, especially analysts, use the term stronger.

;Comeagre: A subset &quot;A&quot; of a space &quot;X&quot; is comeagre (comeager) if its complement &quot;X&quot;\&quot;A&quot; is meagre. Also called residual.

;Compact: A space is compact if every open cover has a finite subcover. Every compact space is Lindelf and paracompact. Therefore, every compact Hausdorff space is normal. See also quasicompact.

;Compact-open topology: The compact-open topology on the set &quot;C&quot;(&quot;X&quot;, &quot;Y&quot;) of all continuous maps between two spaces &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; is defined as follows: given a compact subset &quot;K&quot; of &quot;X&quot; and an open subset &quot;U&quot; of &quot;Y&quot;, let &quot;V&quot;(&quot;K&quot;, &quot;U&quot;) denote the set of all maps &quot;f&quot; in &quot;C&quot;(&quot;X&quot;, &quot;Y&quot;) such that &quot;f&quot;(&quot;K&quot;) is contained in &quot;U&quot;. Then the collection of all such &quot;V&quot;(&quot;K&quot;, &quot;U&quot;) is a subbase for the compact-open topology.

;Complete: A metric space is complete if every Cauchy sequence converges.

;Completely metrizable/completely metrisable: See complete space.

;Completely normal: A space is completely normal if any two separated sets have disjoint neighbourhoods.

;Completely normal Hausdorff: A completely normal Hausdorff space (or T5 space) is a completely normal T1 space. (A completely normal space is Hausdorff if and only if it is T1, so the terminology is consistent.) Every completely normal Hausdorff space is normal Hausdorff.

;Completely regular: A space is completely regular if, whenever &quot;C&quot; is a closed set and &quot;x&quot; is a point not in &quot;C&quot;, then &quot;C&quot; and {&quot;x&quot;} are functionally separated.

;Completely T3: See Tychonoff.

;Component: See Connected component/Path-connected component.

;Connected: A space is connected if it is not the union of a pair of disjoint nonempty open sets. Equivalently, a space is connected if the only clopen sets are the whole space and the empty set.

;Connected component: A connected component of a space is a maximal nonempty connected subspace. Each connected component is closed, and the set of connected components of a space is a partition of that space.

;Continuous: A function from one space to another is continuous if the preimage of every open set is open.

;Continuum: A space is called a continuum if it a compact, connected Hausdorff space.

;Contractible: A space &quot;X&quot; is contractible if the identity map on &quot;X&quot; is homotopic to a constant map. Every contractible space is simply connected.

;Coproduct topology: If {&quot;X&quot;&quot;i&quot;} is a collection of spaces and &quot;X&quot; is the (set-theoretic) disjoint union of {&quot;X&quot;&quot;i&quot;}, then the coproduct topology (or disjoint union topology, topological sum of the &quot;X&quot;&quot;i&quot;) on &quot;X&quot; is the finest topology for which all the injection maps are continuous.

;Core-compact space

;Cosmic space: A continuous image of some separable metric space.

;Countable chain condition: A space &quot;X&quot; satisfies the countable chain condition if every family of non-empty, pairswise disjoint open sets is countable.

;Countably compact: A space is countably compact if every countable open cover has a finite subcover. Every countably compact space is pseudocompact and weakly countably compact.

;Countably locally finite: A collection of subsets of a space &quot;X&quot; is countably locally finite (or -locally finite) if it is the union of a countable collection of locally finite collections of subsets of &quot;X&quot;.

;Cover: A collection of subsets of a space is a cover (or covering) of that space if the union of the collection is the whole space.

;Covering: See Cover.

;Cut point: If &quot;X&quot; is a connected space with more than one point, then a point &quot;x&quot; of &quot;X&quot; is a cut point if the subspace &quot;X&quot;  {&quot;x&quot;} is disconnected.

== D ==
;-cluster point, -closed, -open: A point &quot;x&quot; of a topological space &quot;X&quot; is a -cluster point of a subset &quot;A&quot; if formula_22 for every open neighborhood &quot;U&quot; of &quot;x&quot; in &quot;X&quot;. The subset &quot;A&quot; is -closed if it is equal to the set of its -cluster points, and -open if its complement is -closed.

;Dense set: A set is dense if it has nonempty intersection with every nonempty open set. Equivalently, a set is dense if its closure is the whole space.

;Dense-in-itself set: A set is dense-in-itself if it has no isolated point.

;Density: the minimal cardinality of a dense subset of a topological space. A set of density 0 is a separable space.

;Derived set: If &quot;X&quot; is a space and &quot;S&quot; is a subset of &quot;X&quot;, the derived set of &quot;S&quot; in &quot;X&quot; is the set of limit points of &quot;S&quot; in &quot;X&quot;.

;Developable space: A topological space with a development.

;Development: A countable collection of open covers of a topological space, such that for any closed set &quot;C&quot; and any point &quot;p&quot; in its complement there exists a cover in the collection such that every neighbourhood of &quot;p&quot; in the cover is disjoint from &quot;C&quot;.

;Diameter: If (&quot;M&quot;, &quot;d&quot;) is a metric space and &quot;S&quot; is a subset of &quot;M&quot;, the diameter of &quot;S&quot; is the supremum of the distances &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;), where &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; range over &quot;S&quot;.

;Discrete metric: The discrete metric on a set &quot;X&quot; is the function &quot;d&quot; : &quot;X&quot;  &quot;X&quot;  R such that for all &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot; in &quot;X&quot;, &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;x&quot;) = 0 and &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;) = 1 if &quot;x&quot;  &quot;y&quot;. The discrete metric induces the discrete topology on &quot;X&quot;.

;Discrete space: A space &quot;X&quot; is discrete if every subset of &quot;X&quot; is open. We say that &quot;X&quot; carries the discrete topology.

;Discrete topology: See discrete space.

;Disjoint union topology: See Coproduct topology.

;Dispersion point: If &quot;X&quot; is a connected space with more than one point, then a point &quot;x&quot; of &quot;X&quot; is a dispersion point if the subspace &quot;X&quot;  {&quot;x&quot;} is hereditarily disconnected (its only connected components are the one-point sets).

;Distance: See metric space.

;Dowker space

;Dunce hat (topology)

== E ==

;Entourage: See Uniform space.

;Exterior: The exterior of a set is the interior of its complement.

== F ==

;&quot;F&quot; set: An &quot;F&quot; set is a countable union of closed sets.

;Filter: See also: Filters in topology. A filter on a space &quot;X&quot; is a nonempty family &quot;F&quot; of subsets of &quot;X&quot; such that the following conditions hold:
:# The empty set is not in &quot;F&quot;.
:# The intersection of any finite number of elements of &quot;F&quot; is again in &quot;F&quot;.
:# If &quot;A&quot; is in &quot;F&quot; and if &quot;B&quot; contains &quot;A&quot;, then &quot;B&quot; is in &quot;F&quot;.

;Final topology: On a set &quot;X&quot; with respect to a family of functions into formula_7, is the finest topology on &quot;X&quot; which makes those functions continuous.

;Fine topology (potential theory): On Euclidean space formula_24, the coarsest topology making all subharmonic functions (equivalently all superharmonic functions) continuous.

;Finer topology: If &quot;X&quot; is a set, and if &quot;T&quot;1 and &quot;T&quot;2 are topologies on &quot;X&quot;, then &quot;T&quot;2 is finer (or larger, stronger) than &quot;T&quot;1 if &quot;T&quot;2 contains &quot;T&quot;1. Beware, some authors, especially analysts, use the term weaker.

;Finitely generated: See Alexandrov topology.

;First category: See Meagre.

;First-countable: A space is first-countable if every point has a countable local base.

;Frchet: See T1.

;Frontier: See Boundary.

;Full set: A compact subset &quot;K&quot; of the complex plane is called full if its complement is connected. For example, the closed unit disk is full, while the unit circle is not.

;Functionally separated: Two sets &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; in a space &quot;X&quot; are functionally separated if there is a continuous map &quot;f&quot;: &quot;X&quot;  [0, 1] such that &quot;f&quot;(&quot;A&quot;) = 0 and &quot;f&quot;(&quot;B&quot;) = 1.

== G ==

;&quot;G&quot; set: A &quot;G&quot; set or inner limiting set is a countable intersection of open sets.

;&quot;G&quot; space: A space in which every closed set is a &quot;G&quot; set.

;Generic point: A generic point for a closed set is a point for which the closed set is the closure of the singleton set containing that point.

== H ==

; Hausdorff: A Hausdorff space (or T2 space) is one in which every two distinct points have disjoint neighbourhoods. Every Hausdorff space is T1.
; H-closed: A space is H-closed, or Hausdorff closed or absolutely closed, if it is closed in every Hausdorff space containing it.
; Hemicompact: A space is hemicompact, if there is a sequence of compact subsets so that every compact subset is contained in one of them.
; Hereditarily &quot;P&quot;: A space is hereditarily &quot;P&quot; for some property &quot;P&quot; if every subspace is also &quot;P&quot;.
; Hereditary: A property of spaces is said to be hereditary if whenever a space has that property, then so does every subspace of it. For example, second-countability is a hereditary property.
; Homeomorphism: If &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; are spaces, a homeomorphism from &quot;X&quot; to &quot;Y&quot; is a bijective function &quot;f&quot; :&quot;X&quot;&quot;Y&quot; such that &quot;f&quot; and &quot;f&quot;1 are continuous. The spaces &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; are then said to be homeomorphic. From the standpoint of topology, homeomorphic spaces are identical.
; Homogeneous: A space &quot;X&quot; is homogeneous if, for every &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; in &quot;X&quot;, there is a homeomorphism &quot;f&quot; : &quot;X&quot;  &quot;X&quot; such that &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) = &quot;y&quot;. Intuitively, the space looks the same at every point. Every topological group is homogeneous.
; Homotopic maps: Two continuous maps &quot;f&quot;, &quot;g&quot; : &quot;X&quot;  &quot;Y&quot; are homotopic (in &quot;Y&quot;) if there is a continuous map &quot;H&quot; : &quot;X&quot;  [0, 1]  &quot;Y&quot; such that &quot;H&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, 0) = &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) and &quot;H&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, 1) = &quot;g&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) for all &quot;x&quot; in &quot;X&quot;. Here, &quot;X&quot;  [0, 1] is given the product topology. The function &quot;H&quot; is called a homotopy (in &quot;Y&quot;) between &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot;.
; Homotopy: See Homotopic maps.
; Hyperconnected: A space is hyperconnected if no two non-empty open sets are disjoint Every hyperconnected space is connected.

== I ==

; Identification map: See Quotient map.
; Identification space: See Quotient space.
; Indiscrete space: See Trivial topology.
; Infinite-dimensional topology: See Hilbert manifold and Q-manifolds, i.e. (generalized) manifolds modelled on the Hilbert space and on the Hilbert cube respectively.
; Inner limiting set: A &quot;G&quot; set.
; Interior: The interior of a set is the largest open set contained in the original set. It is equal to the union of all open sets contained in it. An element of the interior of a set &quot;S&quot; is an interior point of &quot;S&quot;.
; Interior point: See Interior.
; Isolated point: A point &quot;x&quot; is an isolated point if the singleton {&quot;x&quot;} is open. More generally, if &quot;S&quot; is a subset of a space &quot;X&quot;, and if &quot;x&quot; is a point of &quot;S&quot;, then &quot;x&quot; is an isolated point of &quot;S&quot; if {&quot;x&quot;} is open in the subspace topology on &quot;S&quot;.
; Isometric isomorphism: If &quot;M&quot;1 and &quot;M&quot;2 are metric spaces, an isometric isomorphism from &quot;M&quot;1 to &quot;M&quot;2 is a bijective isometry &quot;f&quot; : &quot;M&quot;1  &quot;M&quot;2. The metric spaces are then said to be isometrically isomorphic. From the standpoint of metric space theory, isometrically isomorphic spaces are identical.
; Isometry: If (&quot;M&quot;1, &quot;d&quot;1) and (&quot;M&quot;2, &quot;d&quot;2) are metric spaces, an isometry from &quot;M&quot;1 to &quot;M&quot;2 is a function &quot;f&quot; : &quot;M&quot;1  &quot;M&quot;2 such that &quot;d&quot;2(&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;), &quot;f&quot;(&quot;y&quot;)) = &quot;d&quot;1(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;) for all &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot; in &quot;M&quot;1. Every isometry is injective, although not every isometry is surjective.

== K ==

;Kolmogorov axiom: See T0.

;Kuratowski closure axioms: The Kuratowski closure axioms is a set of axioms satisfied by the function which takes each subset of &quot;X&quot; to its closure:
:# &quot;Isotonicity&quot;: Every set is contained in its closure.
:# &quot;Idempotence&quot;: The closure of the closure of a set is equal to the closure of that set.
:# &quot;Preservation of binary unions&quot;: The closure of the union of two sets is the union of their closures.
:# &quot;Preservation of nullary unions&quot;: The closure of the empty set is empty.
:If &quot;c&quot; is a function from the power set of &quot;X&quot; to itself, then &quot;c&quot; is a closure operator if it satisfies the Kuratowski closure axioms. The Kuratowski closure axioms can then be used to define a topology on &quot;X&quot; by declaring the closed sets to be the fixed points of this operator, i.e. a set &quot;A&quot; is closed if and only if &quot;c&quot;(&quot;A&quot;) = &quot;A&quot;.

;Kolmogorov topology
:T&quot;Kol&quot; = {R, formula_25}{(a,): a is real number}; the pair (R,T&quot;Kol&quot;) is named &quot;Kolmogorov Straight&quot;.

== L ==

;L-space: An &quot;L-space&quot; is a hereditarily Lindelf space which is not hereditarily separable. A Suslin line would be an L-space.

;Larger topology: See Finer topology.

;Limit point: A point &quot;x&quot; in a space &quot;X&quot; is a limit point of a subset &quot;S&quot; if every open set containing &quot;x&quot; also contains a point of &quot;S&quot; other than &quot;x&quot; itself. This is equivalent to requiring that every neighbourhood of &quot;x&quot; contains a point of &quot;S&quot; other than &quot;x&quot; itself.

;Limit point compact: See Weakly countably compact.

;Lindelf: A space is Lindelf if every open cover has a countable subcover.

;Local base: A set &quot;B&quot; of neighbourhoods of a point &quot;x&quot; of a space &quot;X&quot; is a local base (or local basis, neighbourhood base, neighbourhood basis) at &quot;x&quot; if every neighbourhood of &quot;x&quot; contains some member of &quot;B&quot;.

;Local basis: See Local base.

;Locally (P) space: There are two definitions for a space to be &quot;locally (P)&quot; where (P) is a topological or set-theoretic property: that each point has a neighbourhood with property (P), or that every point has a neighourbood base for which each member has property (P). The first definition is usually taken for locally compact, countably compact, metrizable, separable, countable; the second for locally connected.

;Locally closed subset: A subset of a topological space that is the intersection of an open and a closed subset. Equivalently, it is a relatively open subset of its closure.

;Locally compact: A space is locally compact if every point has a compact neighbourhood: the alternative definition that each point has a local base consisting of compact neighbourhoods is sometimes used: these are equivalent for Hausdorff spaces. Every locally compact Hausdorff space is Tychonoff.

;Locally connected: A space is locally connected if every point has a local base consisting of connected neighbourhoods.

; Locally dense: see &quot;Preopen&quot;.

; Locally finite: A collection of subsets of a space is locally finite if every point has a neighbourhood which has nonempty intersection with only finitely many of the subsets. See also countably locally finite, point finite.

;Locally metrizable/Locally metrisable: A space is locally metrizable if every point has a metrizable neighbourhood.

;Locally path-connected: A space is locally path-connected if every point has a local base consisting of path-connected neighbourhoods. A locally path-connected space is connected if and only if it is path-connected.

;Locally simply connected: A space is locally simply connected if every point has a local base consisting of simply connected neighbourhoods.

;Loop: If &quot;x&quot; is a point in a space &quot;X&quot;, a loop at &quot;x&quot; in &quot;X&quot; (or a loop in &quot;X&quot; with basepoint &quot;x&quot;) is a path &quot;f&quot; in &quot;X&quot;, such that &quot;f&quot;(0) = &quot;f&quot;(1) = &quot;x&quot;. Equivalently, a loop in &quot;X&quot; is a continuous map from the unit circle &quot;S&quot;1 into &quot;X&quot;.

== M ==

;Meagre: If &quot;X&quot; is a space and &quot;A&quot; is a subset of &quot;X&quot;, then &quot;A&quot; is meagre in &quot;X&quot; (or of first category in &quot;X&quot;) if it is the countable union of nowhere dense sets. If &quot;A&quot; is not meagre in &quot;X&quot;, &quot;A&quot; is of second category in &quot;X&quot;.

;Metacompact: A space is metacompact if every open cover has a point finite open refinement.

;Metric: See Metric space.

;Metric invariant: A metric invariant is a property which is preserved under isometric isomorphism.

;Metric map: If &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; are metric spaces with metrics &quot;d&quot;&quot;X&quot; and &quot;d&quot;&quot;Y&quot; respectively, then a metric map is a function &quot;f&quot; from &quot;X&quot; to &quot;Y&quot;, such that for any points &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; in &quot;X&quot;, &quot;d&quot;&quot;Y&quot;(&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;), &quot;f&quot;(&quot;y&quot;))  &quot;d&quot;&quot;X&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;). A metric map is strictly metric if the above inequality is strict for all &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; in &quot;X&quot;.

;Metric space: A metric space (&quot;M&quot;, &quot;d&quot;) is a set &quot;M&quot; equipped with a function &quot;d&quot; :&quot;M&quot;&quot;M&quot;R satisfying the following axioms for all &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, and &quot;z&quot; in &quot;M&quot;:
:# &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;)  0
:# &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;x&quot;) = 0
:# if  &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;) = 0  then  &quot;x&quot; = &quot;y&quot;  (&quot;identity of indiscernibles&quot;)
:# &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;) = &quot;d&quot;(&quot;y&quot;, &quot;x&quot;)  (&quot;symmetry&quot;)
:# &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;z&quot;)  &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;) + &quot;d&quot;(&quot;y&quot;, &quot;z&quot;)  (&quot;triangle inequality&quot;)

:The function &quot;d&quot; is a metric on &quot;M&quot;, and &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;) is the distance between &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot;. The collection of all open balls of &quot;M&quot; is a base for a topology on &quot;M&quot;; this is the topology on &quot;M&quot; induced by &quot;d&quot;. Every metric space is Hausdorff and paracompact (and hence normal and Tychonoff). Every metric space is first-countable.

;Metrizable/Metrisable: A space is metrizable if it is homeomorphic to a metric space. Every metrizable space is Hausdorff and paracompact (and hence normal and Tychonoff). Every metrizable space is first-countable.

;Monolith: Every non-empty ultra-connected compact space &quot;X&quot; has a largest proper open subset; this subset is called a monolith.

;Moore space: A Moore space is a developable regular Hausdorff space.

== N ==

; Nearly open: see &quot;preopen&quot;. See also: almost open map.

;Neighbourhood/Neighborhood: A neighbourhood of a point &quot;x&quot; is a set containing an open set which in turn contains the point &quot;x&quot;. More generally, a neighbourhood of a set &quot;S&quot; is a set containing an open set which in turn contains the set &quot;S&quot;. A neighbourhood of a point &quot;x&quot; is thus a neighbourhood of the singleton set {&quot;x&quot;}. (Note that under this definition, the neighbourhood itself need not be open. Many authors require that neighbourhoods be open; be careful to note conventions.)

;Neighbourhood base/basis: See Local base.

;Neighbourhood system for a point &quot;x&quot;: A neighbourhood system at a point &quot;x&quot; in a space is the collection of all neighbourhoods of &quot;x&quot;.

;Net: A net in a space &quot;X&quot; is a map from a directed set &quot;A&quot; to &quot;X&quot;. A net from &quot;A&quot; to &quot;X&quot; is usually denoted (&quot;x&quot;), where  is an index variable ranging over &quot;A&quot;. Every sequence is a net, taking &quot;A&quot; to be the directed set of natural numbers with the usual ordering.

;Normal: A space is normal if any two disjoint closed sets have disjoint neighbourhoods. Every normal space admits a partition of unity.

;Normal Hausdorff: A normal Hausdorff space (or T4 space) is a normal T1 space. (A normal space is Hausdorff if and only if it is T1, so the terminology is consistent.) Every normal Hausdorff space is Tychonoff.

;Nowhere dense: A nowhere dense set is a set whose closure has empty interior.

== O ==

; Open cover: An open cover is a cover consisting of open sets.

; Open ball: If (&quot;M&quot;, &quot;d&quot;) is a metric space, an open ball is a set of the form &quot;B&quot;(&quot;x&quot;; &quot;r&quot;) := {&quot;y&quot; in &quot;M&quot; : &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;) &lt; &quot;r&quot;}, where &quot;x&quot; is in &quot;M&quot; and &quot;r&quot; is a positive real number, the radius of the ball. An open ball of radius &quot;r&quot; is an open &quot;r&quot;-ball. Every open ball is an open set in the topology on &quot;M&quot; induced by &quot;d&quot;.
; Open condition: See open property.
; Open set: An open set is a member of the topology.
; Open function: A function from one space to another is open if the image of every open set is open.
; Open property: A property of points in a topological space is said to be &quot;open&quot; if those points which possess it form an open set. Such conditions often take a common form, and that form can be said to be an &quot;open condition&quot;; for example, in metric spaces, one defines an open ball as above, and says that &quot;strict inequality is an open condition&quot;.

;Orthocompact
: A space is orthocompact, if every open cover has an interior-preserving open refinement.

== P ==

;Paracompact: A space is paracompact if every open cover has a locally finite open refinement. Paracompact implies metacompact. Paracompact Hausdorff spaces are normal.

;Partition of unity: A partition of unity of a space &quot;X&quot; is a set of continuous functions from &quot;X&quot; to [0, 1] such that any point has a neighbourhood where all but a finite number of the functions are identically zero, and the sum of all the functions on the entire space is identically 1.

;Path: A path in a space &quot;X&quot; is a continuous map &quot;f&quot; from the closed unit interval [0, 1] into &quot;X&quot;. The point &quot;f&quot;(0) is the initial point of &quot;f&quot;; the point &quot;f&quot;(1) is the terminal point of &quot;f&quot;.

;Path-connected: A space &quot;X&quot; is path-connected if, for every two points &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot; in &quot;X&quot;, there is a path &quot;f&quot; from &quot;x&quot; to &quot;y&quot;, i.e., a path with initial point &quot;f&quot;(0) = &quot;x&quot; and terminal point &quot;f&quot;(1) = &quot;y&quot;. Every path-connected space is connected.

;Path-connected component: A path-connected component of a space is a maximal nonempty path-connected subspace. The set of path-connected components of a space is a partition of that space, which is finer than the partition into connected components. The set of path-connected components of a space &quot;X&quot; is denoted 0(&quot;X&quot;).

;Perfectly normal: a normal space which is also a G.

;-base: A collection &quot;B&quot; of nonempty open sets is a -base for a topology  if every nonempty open set in  includes a set from &quot;B&quot;.

;Point: A point is an element of a topological space. More generally, a point is an element of any set with an underlying topological structure; e.g. an element of a metric space or a topological group is also a &quot;point&quot;.

;Point of closure: See Closure.

;Polish: A space is Polish if it is separable and completely metrizable, i.e. if it is homeomorphic to a separable and complete metric space.

;Polyadic: A space is polyadic if it is the continuous image of the power of a one-point compactification of a locally compact, non-compact Hausdorff space.

;Polytopological space: A polytopological space is a set formula_7 together with a family formula_27 of topologies on formula_7 that is linearly ordered by the inclusion relation where formula_29 is an arbitrary index set.

;P-point: A point of a topological space is a P-point if its filter of neighbourhoods is closed under countable intersections.

;Pre-compact: See Relatively compact.

;: A subset &quot;A&quot; of a topological space &quot;X&quot; is preopen if formula_30.

;Prodiscrete topology: The prodiscrete topology on a product &quot;A&quot;&quot;G&quot; is the product topology when each factor &quot;A&quot; is given the discrete topology.

;Product topology: If formula_31 is a collection of spaces and &quot;X&quot; is the (set-theoretic) Cartesian product of formula_32 then the product topology on &quot;X&quot; is the coarsest topology for which all the projection maps are continuous.

;Proper function/mapping: A continuous function &quot;f&quot; from a space &quot;X&quot; to a space &quot;Y&quot; is proper if formula_33 is a compact set in &quot;X&quot; for any compact subspace &quot;C&quot; of &quot;Y&quot;.

;Proximity space: A proximity space (&quot;X&quot;,d) is a set &quot;X&quot; equipped with a binary relation d between subsets of &quot;X&quot; satisfying the following properties:

:For all subsets &quot;A&quot;, &quot;B&quot; and &quot;C&quot; of &quot;X&quot;,
:#&quot;A&quot; d &quot;B&quot; implies &quot;B&quot; d &quot;A&quot;
:#&quot;A&quot; d &quot;B&quot; implies &quot;A&quot; is non-empty
:#If &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; have non-empty intersection, then &quot;A&quot; d &quot;B&quot;
:#&quot;A&quot; d (&quot;B&quot;formula_34&quot;C&quot;) if and only if (&quot;A&quot; d &quot;B&quot; or &quot;A&quot; d &quot;C&quot;)
:#If, for all subsets &quot;E&quot; of &quot;X&quot;, we have (&quot;A&quot; d &quot;E&quot; or &quot;B&quot; d &quot;E&quot;), then we must have &quot;A&quot; d (&quot;X&quot;  &quot;B&quot;)

;Pseudocompact: A space is pseudocompact if every real-valued continuous function on the space is bounded.

;Pseudometric: See Pseudometric space.

;Pseudometric space: A pseudometric space (&quot;M&quot;, &quot;d&quot;) is a set &quot;M&quot; equipped with a real-valued function formula_35 satisfying all the conditions of a metric space, except possibly the identity of indiscernibles. That is, points in a pseudometric space may be &quot;infinitely close&quot; without being identical. The function &quot;d&quot; is a pseudometric on &quot;M&quot;. Every metric is a pseudometric.

;Punctured neighbourhood/Punctured neighborhood: A punctured neighbourhood of a point &quot;x&quot; is a neighbourhood of &quot;x&quot;, minus {&quot;x&quot;}. For instance, the interval (1, 1) = {&quot;y&quot; : 1 &lt; &quot;y&quot; &lt; 1} is a neighbourhood of &quot;x&quot; = 0 in the real line, so the set formula_36 is a punctured neighbourhood of 0.

== Q ==

;Quasicompact: See compact. Some authors define &quot;compact&quot; to include the Hausdorff separation axiom, and they use the term quasicompact to mean what we call in this glossary simply &quot;compact&quot; (without the Hausdorff axiom). This convention is most commonly found in French, and branches of mathematics heavily influenced by the French.

;Quotient map: If &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; are spaces, and if &quot;f&quot; is a surjection from &quot;X&quot; to &quot;Y&quot;, then &quot;f&quot; is a quotient map (or identification map) if, for every subset &quot;U&quot; of &quot;Y&quot;, &quot;U&quot; is open in &quot;Y&quot; if and only if &quot;f&quot;1(&quot;U&quot;) is open in &quot;X&quot;. In other words, &quot;Y&quot; has the &quot;f&quot;-strong topology. Equivalently, formula_37 is a quotient map if and only if it is the transfinite composition of maps formula_38, where formula_39 is a subset. Note that this does not imply that &quot;f&quot; is an open function.

;Quotient space: If &quot;X&quot; is a space, &quot;Y&quot; is a set, and &quot;f&quot; :&quot;X&quot;&quot;Y&quot; is any surjective function, then the Quotient topology on &quot;Y&quot; induced by &quot;f&quot; is the finest topology for which &quot;f&quot; is continuous. The space &quot;X&quot; is a quotient space or identification space. By definition, &quot;f&quot; is a quotient map. The most common example of this is to consider an equivalence relation on &quot;X&quot;, with &quot;Y&quot; the set of equivalence classes and &quot;f&quot; the natural projection map. This construction is dual to the construction of the subspace topology.

== R ==

; Refinement: A cover &quot;K&quot; is a refinement of a cover &quot;L&quot; if every member of &quot;K&quot; is a subset of some member of &quot;L&quot;.
; Regular: A space is regular if, whenever &quot;C&quot; is a closed set and &quot;x&quot; is a point not in &quot;C&quot;, then &quot;C&quot; and &quot;x&quot; have disjoint neighbourhoods.
; Regular Hausdorff: A space is regular Hausdorff (or T3) if it is a regular T0 space. (A regular space is Hausdorff if and only if it is T0, so the terminology is consistent.)
; : A subset of a space &quot;X&quot; is regular open if it equals the interior of its closure; dually, a regular closed set is equal to the closure of its interior. An example of a non-regular open set is the set &quot;U&quot; =  in R with its normal topology, since 1 is in the interior of the closure of &quot;U&quot;, but not in &quot;U&quot;. The regular open subsets of a space form a complete Boolean algebra.
; Relatively compact: A subset &quot;Y&quot; of a space &quot;X&quot; is relatively compact in &quot;X&quot; if the closure of &quot;Y&quot; in &quot;X&quot; is compact.
; Residual: If &quot;X&quot; is a space and &quot;A&quot; is a subset of &quot;X&quot;, then &quot;A&quot; is residual in &quot;X&quot; if the complement of &quot;A&quot; is meagre in &quot;X&quot;. Also called comeagre or comeager.
; Resolvable: A topological space is called resolvable if it is expressible as the union of two disjoint dense subsets.
; Rim-compact: A space is rim-compact if it has a base of open sets whose boundaries are compact.

== S ==

;S-space: An &quot;S-space&quot; is a hereditarily separable space which is not hereditarily Lindelf.

;Scattered: A space &quot;X&quot; is scattered if every nonempty subset &quot;A&quot; of &quot;X&quot; contains a point isolated in &quot;A&quot;.

;Scott: The Scott topology on a poset is that in which the open sets are those Upper sets inaccessible by directed joins.

;Second category: See Meagre.

;Second-countable: A space is second-countable or perfectly separable if it has a countable base for its topology. Every second-countable space is first-countable, separable, and Lindelf.

;Semilocally simply connected: A space &quot;X&quot; is semilocally simply connected if, for every point &quot;x&quot; in &quot;X&quot;, there is a neighbourhood &quot;U&quot; of &quot;x&quot; such that every loop at &quot;x&quot; in &quot;U&quot; is homotopic in &quot;X&quot; to the constant loop &quot;x&quot;. Every simply connected space and every locally simply connected space is semilocally simply connected. (Compare with locally simply connected; here, the homotopy is allowed to live in &quot;X&quot;, whereas in the definition of locally simply connected, the homotopy must live in &quot;U&quot;.)

;Semi-open: A subset &quot;A&quot; of a topological space &quot;X&quot; is called semi-open if formula_40.

;Semi-preopen: A subset &quot;A&quot; of a topological space &quot;X&quot; is called semi-preopen if formula_41

;Semiregular: A space is semiregular if the regular open sets form a base.

;Separable: A space is separable if it has a countable dense subset.

;Separated: Two sets &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; are separated if each is disjoint from the other&#x27;s closure.

;Sequentially compact: A space is sequentially compact if every sequence has a convergent subsequence. Every sequentially compact space is countably compact, and every first-countable, countably compact space is sequentially compact.

;Short map: See metric map

;Simply connected: A space is simply connected if it is path-connected and every loop is homotopic to a constant map.

;Smaller topology: See Coarser topology.

;Sober: In a sober space, every irreducible closed subset is the closure of exactly one point: that is, has a unique generic point.

;Star: The star of a point in a given cover of a topological space is the union of all the sets in the cover that contain the point. See star refinement.

;formula_37-Strong topology: Let formula_43 be a map of topological spaces. We say that formula_44 has the formula_37-strong topology if, for every subset formula_46, one has that formula_47 is open in formula_44 if and only if formula_49 is open in formula_7

;Stronger topology: See Finer topology. Beware, some authors, especially analysts, use the term weaker topology.

;Subbase: A collection of open sets is a subbase (or subbasis) for a topology if every non-empty proper open set in the topology is the union of a finite intersection of sets in the subbase. If formula_51 is &quot;any&quot; collection of subsets of a set &quot;X&quot;, the topology on &quot;X&quot; generated by formula_51 is the smallest topology containing formula_53 this topology consists of the empty set, &quot;X&quot; and all unions of finite intersections of elements of formula_54 Thus formula_51 is a subbase for the topology it generates.

;Subbasis: See Subbase.

;Subcover: A cover &quot;K&quot; is a subcover (or subcovering) of a cover &quot;L&quot; if every member of &quot;K&quot; is a member of &quot;L&quot;.

;Subcovering: See Subcover.
;Submaximal space: A topological space is said to be submaximal if every subset of it is locally closed, that is, every subset is the intersection of an open set and a closed set.

Here are some facts about submaximality as a property of topological spaces:

* Every door space is submaximal.
* Every submaximal space is &quot;weakly submaximal&quot; viz every finite set is locally closed.
* Every submaximal space is irresolvable.

;Subspace: If &quot;T&quot; is a topology on a space &quot;X&quot;, and if &quot;A&quot; is a subset of &quot;X&quot;, then the subspace topology on &quot;A&quot; induced by &quot;T&quot; consists of all intersections of open sets in &quot;T&quot; with &quot;A&quot;. This construction is dual to the construction of the quotient topology.

;Suslin line

== T ==

;T0: A space is T0 (or Kolmogorov) if for every pair of distinct points &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; in the space, either there is an open set containing &quot;x&quot; but not &quot;y&quot;, or there is an open set containing &quot;y&quot; but not &quot;x&quot;.

;T1: A space is T1 (or Frchet or accessible) if for every pair of distinct points &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; in the space, there is an open set containing &quot;x&quot; but not &quot;y&quot;. (Compare with T0; here, we are allowed to specify which point will be contained in the open set.) Equivalently, a space is T1 if all its singletons are closed. Every T1 space is T0.

;T2: See Hausdorff space.

;T3: See Regular Hausdorff.

;T3: See Tychonoff space.

;T4: See Normal Hausdorff.

;T5: See Completely normal Hausdorff.

;Top: See Category of topological spaces.

;-cluster point, -closed, -open: A point &quot;x&quot; of a topological space &quot;X&quot; is a -cluster point of a subset &quot;A&quot; if formula_56 for every open neighborhood &quot;U&quot; of &quot;x&quot; in &quot;X&quot;. The subset &quot;A&quot; is -closed if it is equal to the set of its -cluster points, and -open if its complement is -closed.

;Topological invariant: A topological invariant is a property which is preserved under homeomorphism. For example, compactness and connectedness are topological properties, whereas boundedness and completeness are not. Algebraic topology is the study of topologically invariant abstract algebra constructions on topological spaces.

;Topological space: A topological space (&quot;X&quot;, &quot;T&quot;) is a set &quot;X&quot; equipped with a collection &quot;T&quot; of subsets of &quot;X&quot; satisfying the following axioms:

:# The empty set and &quot;X&quot; are in &quot;T&quot;.
:# The union of any collection of sets in &quot;T&quot; is also in &quot;T&quot;.
:# The intersection of any pair of sets in &quot;T&quot; is also in &quot;T&quot;.

:The collection &quot;T&quot; is a topology on &quot;X&quot;.

;Topological sum: See Coproduct topology.

;Topologically complete: Completely metrizable spaces (i. e. topological spaces homeomorphic to complete metric spaces) are often called &quot;topologically complete&quot;; sometimes the term is also used for ech-complete spaces or completely uniformizable spaces.

;Topology: See Topological space.

;Totally bounded: A metric space &quot;M&quot; is totally bounded if, for every &quot;r&quot; &gt; 0, there exist a finite cover of &quot;M&quot; by open balls of radius &quot;r&quot;. A metric space is compact if and only if it is complete and totally bounded.

;Totally disconnected: A space is totally disconnected if it has no connected subset with more than one point.

;Trivial topology: The trivial topology (or indiscrete topology) on a set &quot;X&quot; consists of precisely the empty set and the entire space &quot;X&quot;.

;Tychonoff: A Tychonoff space (or completely regular Hausdorff space, completely T3 space, T3.5 space) is a completely regular T0 space. (A completely regular space is Hausdorff if and only if it is T0, so the terminology is consistent.) Every Tychonoff space is regular Hausdorff.

== U ==

;Ultra-connected: A space is ultra-connected if no two non-empty closed sets are disjoint. Every ultra-connected space is path-connected.

;Ultrametric: A metric is an ultrametric if it satisfies the following stronger version of the triangle inequality: for all &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, &quot;z&quot; in &quot;M&quot;, &quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;z&quot;)  max(&quot;d&quot;(&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;), &quot;d&quot;(&quot;y&quot;, &quot;z&quot;)).

;Uniform isomorphism: If &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; are uniform spaces, a uniform isomorphism from &quot;X&quot; to &quot;Y&quot; is a bijective function &quot;f&quot; : &quot;X&quot;  &quot;Y&quot; such that &quot;f&quot; and &quot;f&quot;1 are uniformly continuous. The spaces are then said to be uniformly isomorphic and share the same uniform properties.

;Uniformizable/Uniformisable: A space is uniformizable if it is homeomorphic to a uniform space.

;Uniform space: A uniform space is a set &quot;X&quot; equipped with a nonempty collection  of subsets of the Cartesian product &quot;X&quot;  &quot;X&quot; satisfying the following axioms:

:# if &quot;U&quot; is in , then &quot;U&quot; contains { (&quot;x&quot;, &quot;x&quot;) | &quot;x&quot; in &quot;X&quot; }.
:# if &quot;U&quot; is in , then { (&quot;y&quot;, &quot;x&quot;) | (&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;) in &quot;U&quot; } is also in 
:# if &quot;U&quot; is in  and &quot;V&quot; is a subset of &quot;X&quot;  &quot;X&quot; which contains &quot;U&quot;, then &quot;V&quot; is in 
:# if &quot;U&quot; and &quot;V&quot; are in , then &quot;U&quot;  &quot;V&quot; is in 
:# if &quot;U&quot; is in , then there exists &quot;V&quot; in  such that, whenever (&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;) and (&quot;y&quot;, &quot;z&quot;) are in &quot;V&quot;, then (&quot;x&quot;, &quot;z&quot;) is in &quot;U&quot;.

:The elements of  are called entourages, and  itself is called a uniform structure on &quot;X&quot;. The uniform structure induces a topology on &quot;X&quot; where the basic neighborhoods of &quot;x&quot; are sets of the form {&quot;y&quot; : (&quot;x&quot;,&quot;y&quot;)&quot;U&quot;} for &quot;U&quot;.

;Uniform structure: See Uniform space.

== W ==

; Weak topology: The weak topology on a set, with respect to a collection of functions from that set into topological spaces, is the coarsest topology on the set which makes all the functions continuous.
; Weaker topology: See Coarser topology. Beware, some authors, especially analysts, use the term stronger topology.
; Weakly countably compact: A space is weakly countably compact (or limit point compact) if every infinite subset has a limit point.
; Weakly hereditary: A property of spaces is said to be weakly hereditary if whenever a space has that property, then so does every closed subspace of it. For example, compactness and the Lindelf property are both weakly hereditary properties, although neither is hereditary.
; Weight: The weight of a space &quot;X&quot; is the smallest cardinal number  such that &quot;X&quot; has a base of cardinal . (Note that such a cardinal number exists, because the entire topology forms a base, and because the class of cardinal numbers is well-ordered.)
; Well-connected: See Ultra-connected. (Some authors use this term strictly for ultra-connected compact spaces.)

== Z ==

;Zero-dimensional: A space is zero-dimensional if it has a base of clopen sets.

== See also ==
* Naive set theory, Axiomatic set theory, and Function for definitions concerning sets and functions. 
* Topology for a brief history and description of the subject area
* Topological spaces for basic definitions and examples
* List of general topology topics
* List of examples in general topology
;Topology specific concepts
* Compact space
* Connected space
* Continuity
* Metric space
* Separated sets
* Separation axiom
* Topological space
* Uniform space
;Other glossaries
* Glossary of algebraic topology
*Glossary of differential geometry and topology
* Glossary of areas of mathematics
* Glossary of Riemannian and metric geometry

== References ==
*
*
* Also available as Dover reprint.

== External links ==
* A glossary of definitions in topology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="55" end="66" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="76" end="84" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q621550" start="186" end="202" title="general topology" label="general topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q212803" start="254" end="272" title="algebraic topology" label="algebraic topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224402" start="274" end="295" title="differential topology" label="differential topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939186" start="300" end="318" title="geometric topology" label="geometric topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036778" start="376" end="406" title="Glossary of algebraic topology" label="Glossary of algebraic topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="455" end="472" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="572" end="581" title="T1 space" label="formula_1"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="609" end="620" title="limit point" label="limit point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532117" start="624" end="643" title="Alexandrov topology" label="Alexandrov topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532117" start="689" end="708" title="Alexandrov topology" label="Alexandrov topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528262" start="916" end="925" title="upper set" label="upper set"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="932" end="937" title="poset" label="poset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781718" start="1270" end="1284" title="Approach space" label="Approach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781718" start="1289" end="1303" title="approach space" label="approach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="1517" end="1526" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150180" start="1571" end="1582" title="Baire space" label="Baire space"/>
<link wikidata="Q803936" start="1723" end="1747" title="Baire space (set theory)" label="Baire space (set theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="1751" end="1755" title="Base (topology)" label="Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="1802" end="1806" title="base (topology)" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="2033" end="2038" title="Basis (topology)" label="Basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="2044" end="2048" title="Base (topology)" label="Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086747" start="2234" end="2247" title="Borel algebra" label="Borel algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086747" start="2253" end="2266" title="Borel algebra" label="Borel algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q217357" start="2317" end="2335" title="Sigma-algebra" label="formula_14-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q875399" start="2529" end="2537" title="Boundary (topology)" label="Boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q875399" start="2543" end="2551" title="boundary (topology)" label="boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q726212" start="2810" end="2817" title="Bounded set" label="Bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q726212" start="2846" end="2853" title="bounded set" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="2864" end="2870" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="2969" end="2977" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267362" start="3013" end="3020" title="bounded function" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="3028" end="3033" title="image (functions)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000555" start="3063" end="3093" title="Category of topological spaces" label="Category of topological spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="3099" end="3107" title="category theory" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000555" start="3108" end="3111" title="Category of topological spaces" label="Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="3116" end="3133" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="3138" end="3145" title="object (category theory)" label="objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="3150" end="3164" title="continuous map" label="continuous map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="3169" end="3177" title="morphism" label="morphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217847" start="3182" end="3197" title="Cauchy sequence" label="Cauchy sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="3201" end="3209" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q217847" start="3293" end="3308" title="Cauchy sequence" label="Cauchy sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193832" start="3323" end="3331" title="positive number" label="positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="3332" end="3343" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="3371" end="3378" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q320369" start="3569" end="3579" title="Clopen set" label="Clopen set"/>
<link wikidata="Q320369" start="3590" end="3596" title="clopen set" label="clopen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="3682" end="3694" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193832" start="3937" end="3945" title="positive number" label="positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="3946" end="3957" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q320346" start="4242" end="4249" title="closure (topology)" label="closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="4314" end="4324" title="Closed set" label="Closed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="4335" end="4341" title="Closed set" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632649" start="4391" end="4406" title="Closed function" label="Closed function"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="4462" end="4467" title="image (mathematics)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q320346" start="4501" end="4508" title="Closure (topology)" label="Closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q320346" start="4514" end="4521" title="closure (topology)" label="closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286397" start="4769" end="4794" title="Kuratowski closure axioms" label="Kuratowski closure axioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="4798" end="4814" title="Coarser topology" label="Coarser topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="4940" end="4947" title="coarser topology" label="coarser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="5072" end="5079" title="mathematical analysis" label="analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="5195" end="5205" title="complement (set theory)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747745" start="5237" end="5243" title="meagre set" label="meagre"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="5269" end="5276" title="Compact space" label="Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="5289" end="5296" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="5323" end="5329" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="5414" end="5429" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669863" start="5466" end="5487" title="Compact-open topology" label="Compact-open topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669863" start="5493" end="5514" title="compact-open topology" label="compact-open topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="6100" end="6108" title="Complete space" label="Complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="6128" end="6136" title="complete space" label="complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="6224" end="6238" title="complete space" label="complete space"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="6321" end="6329" title="Disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="6417" end="6425" title="T5 space" label="T5 space"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="6500" end="6514" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="6547" end="6557" title="consistent" label="consistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="6623" end="6641" title="Completely regular space" label="Completely regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="6654" end="6672" title="Completely regular space" label="completely regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="6836" end="6849" title="Completely T3 space" label="Completely T3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="6855" end="6864" title="Tychonoff space" label="Tychonoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="6883" end="6902" title="Connected space" label="Connected component"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="6931" end="6940" title="Connected (topology)" label="Connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="6953" end="6962" title="connected (topology)" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="6999" end="7007" title="Disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="7128" end="7147" title="connected space" label="Connected component"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="7151" end="7170" title="connected space" label="connected component"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795644" start="7187" end="7194" title="maximal set" label="maximal"/>
<link wikidata="Q381060" start="7312" end="7321" title="partition of a set" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="7339" end="7349" title="Continuity (topology)" label="Continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="7391" end="7401" title="continuity (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="7409" end="7417" title="preimage" label="preimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165551" start="7447" end="7456" title="Continuum (topology)" label="Continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q230689" start="7534" end="7546" title="Contractible space" label="Contractible"/>
<link wikidata="Q321119" start="7593" end="7605" title="identity function" label="identity map"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282259" start="7703" end="7721" title="Coproduct topology" label="Coproduct topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q842620" start="7822" end="7836" title="disjoint union" label="disjoint union"/>
<link wikidata="Q117312499" start="8069" end="8087" title="Core-compact space" label="Core-compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174145" start="8090" end="8102" title="Cosmic space" label="Cosmic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="8106" end="8116" title="continuous function" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="8117" end="8122" title="Image (mathematics)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q680081" start="8131" end="8140" title="Separable space" label="separable"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="8141" end="8153" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176824" start="8157" end="8182" title="Countable chain condition" label="Countable chain condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q859275" start="8321" end="8338" title="Countably compact" label="Countably compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="8378" end="8387" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="8405" end="8411" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="8650" end="8659" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="8732" end="8737" title="Cover (topology)" label="Cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="9462" end="9471" title="Dense set" label="Dense set"/>
<link wikidata="Q936674" start="9616" end="9631" title="Dense-in-itself" label="Dense-in-itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142889" start="9675" end="9689" title="isolated point" label="isolated point"/>
<link wikidata="Q680081" start="9793" end="9808" title="separable space" label="separable space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266672" start="10061" end="10072" title="Development (topology)" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266672" start="10076" end="10087" title="Development (topology)" label="Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="10091" end="10100" title="countable set" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="10115" end="10125" title="open cover" label="open cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="10342" end="10350" title="disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="10520" end="10528" title="supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="10783" end="10784" title="real number" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q175116" start="11054" end="11068" title="Discrete space" label="Discrete space"/>
<link wikidata="Q175116" start="11095" end="11103" title="discrete space" label="discrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q175116" start="11205" end="11222" title="Discrete topology" label="Discrete topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q175116" start="11228" end="11242" title="discrete space" label="discrete space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282582" start="11297" end="11313" title="Dispersion point" label="Dispersion point"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="11594" end="11606" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302693" start="11610" end="11622" title="Dowker space" label="Dowker space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314691" start="11625" end="11645" title="Dunce hat (topology)" label="Dunce hat (topology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="11657" end="11666" title="Entourage (topology)" label="Entourage"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="11672" end="11685" title="Uniform space" label="Uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392123" start="11767" end="11785" title="F-sigma set" label="&amp;quot;F&amp;quot; set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392123" start="11790" end="11808" title="F-sigma set" label="&amp;quot;F&amp;quot; set"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="11814" end="11823" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q16545258" start="11848" end="11854" title="Filter (set theory)" label="Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901581" start="11866" end="11885" title="Filters in topology" label="Filters in topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="12032" end="12041" title="empty set" label="empty set"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="12094" end="12100" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416138" start="12291" end="12305" title="Final topology" label="Final topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="12391" end="12406" title="finest topology" label="finest topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="12452" end="12462" title="continuous function (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450128" start="12466" end="12498" title="Fine topology (potential theory)" label="Fine topology (potential theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="12503" end="12518" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q753658" start="12564" end="12584" title="subharmonic function" label="subharmonic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="12643" end="12657" title="Finer topology" label="Finer topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="12783" end="12788" title="finer topology" label="finer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="12907" end="12914" title="mathematical analysis" label="analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532117" start="12964" end="12983" title="Alexandrov topology" label="Alexandrov topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747745" start="12987" end="13001" title="First category" label="First category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747745" start="13007" end="13013" title="Meagre set" label="Meagre"/>
<link wikidata="Q926996" start="13017" end="13032" title="First-countable space" label="First-countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q926996" start="13045" end="13060" title="First-countable space" label="first-countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="13082" end="13091" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="13119" end="13121" title="T1 space" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q875399" start="13139" end="13147" title="Boundary (topology)" label="Boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="13163" end="13170" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="13199" end="13212" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="13235" end="13245" title="complement (set theory)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390323" start="13277" end="13293" title="closed unit disk" label="closed unit disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q203425" start="13313" end="13324" title="unit circle" label="unit circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q127244" start="13613" end="13631" title="G-delta set" label="&amp;quot;G&amp;quot; set"/>
<link wikidata="Q127244" start="13635" end="13653" title="G-delta set" label="&amp;quot;G&amp;quot; set"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="13681" end="13690" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q449470" start="13803" end="13816" title="Generic point" label="Generic point"/>
<link wikidata="Q449470" start="13820" end="13833" title="generic point" label="generic point"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="13958" end="13967" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="13971" end="13986" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="13991" end="13993" title="T2 space" label="T2"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="14048" end="14056" title="Disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627859" start="14104" end="14112" title="H-closed space" label="H-closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711485" start="14235" end="14246" title="Hemicompact space" label="Hemicompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439792" start="14515" end="14525" title="Hereditary property" label="Hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="14708" end="14721" title="Homeomorphism" label="Homeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="14772" end="14785" title="homeomorphism" label="homeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="14827" end="14836" title="bijection" label="bijective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324364" start="15099" end="15110" title="Homogeneous space" label="Homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324364" start="15137" end="15148" title="Homogeneous space" label="homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="15402" end="15419" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q746083" start="15438" end="15452" title="homotopic" label="Homotopic maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q746083" start="15541" end="15550" title="homotopic" label="homotopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q746083" start="16020" end="16034" title="homotopic" label="Homotopic maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673182" start="16038" end="16052" title="Hyperconnected space" label="Hyperconnected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="16200" end="16212" title="Quotient map (topology)" label="Quotient map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="16216" end="16236" title="Quotient space (topology)" label="Identification space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="16242" end="16256" title="Quotient space (topology)" label="Quotient space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418327" start="16260" end="16276" title="Indiscrete space" label="Indiscrete space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418327" start="16282" end="16298" title="Trivial topology" label="Trivial topology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16302" end="16331" title="Infinite-dimensional topology" label="Infinite-dimensional topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554824" start="16337" end="16353" title="Hilbert manifold" label="Hilbert manifold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16358" end="16369" title="Q-manifolds" label="Q-manifolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q862761" start="16514" end="16522" title="Interior (topology)" label="Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q862761" start="16528" end="16536" title="interior (topology)" label="interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q862761" start="16771" end="16779" title="Interior (topology)" label="Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142889" start="16783" end="16797" title="Isolated point" label="Isolated point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142889" start="16827" end="16841" title="isolated point" label="isolated point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="16849" end="16858" title="singleton (mathematics)" label="singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="17281" end="17290" title="bijection" label="bijective"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="17930" end="17939" title="Injective function" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="17972" end="17982" title="surjection" label="surjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="17995" end="18011" title="Kolmogorov space" label="Kolmogorov axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="18017" end="18019" title="T0 space" label="T0"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286397" start="18023" end="18048" title="Kuratowski closure axioms" label="Kuratowski closure axioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286397" start="18054" end="18079" title="Kuratowski closure axioms" label="Kuratowski closure axioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="18092" end="18097" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q194404" start="18191" end="18202" title="Isotone function" label="Isotonicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q368988" start="18258" end="18269" title="Idempotent function" label="Idempotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="18592" end="18601" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q217608" start="18842" end="18853" title="fixed point (mathematics)" label="fixed point"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="18908" end="18922" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19174" end="19186" title="Hereditary property#In topology" label="hereditarily"/>
<link wikidata="Q936155" start="19187" end="19201" title="Lindelf space" label="Lindelf space"/>
<link wikidata="Q680081" start="19228" end="19237" title="Separable space" label="separable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296408" start="19241" end="19252" title="Suslin line" label="Suslin line"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="19297" end="19311" title="Finer topology" label="Finer topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="19315" end="19326" title="Limit point" label="Limit point"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="19380" end="19391" title="limit point" label="limit point"/>
<link wikidata="Q936155" start="19729" end="19737" title="Lindelf space" label="Lindelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q936155" start="19750" end="19758" title="Lindelf space" label="Lindelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="19785" end="19794" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275652" start="19807" end="19817" title="Local base" label="Local base"/>
<link wikidata="Q113518200" start="20538" end="20559" title="Locally closed subset" label="Locally closed subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="20713" end="20728" title="Locally compact space" label="Locally compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="20741" end="20756" title="Locally compact space" label="locally compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q865967" start="21014" end="21031" title="Locally connected" label="Locally connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q865967" start="21044" end="21061" title="locally connected" label="locally connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q643300" start="21180" end="21194" title="Locally finite collection" label="Locally finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q643300" start="21234" end="21248" title="Locally finite collection" label="locally finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="21326" end="21332" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207903" start="21391" end="21403" title="point finite" label="point finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q865967" start="21525" end="21547" title="Locally path-connected" label="Locally path-connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q865967" start="21560" end="21582" title="locally path-connected" label="locally path-connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="21704" end="21718" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664703" start="21743" end="21767" title="Locally simply connected" label="Locally simply connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558786" start="21886" end="21890" title="Loop (topology)" label="Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558786" start="21948" end="21952" title="loop (topology)" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q203425" start="22217" end="22228" title="unit circle" label="unit circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747745" start="22275" end="22281" title="Meagre set" label="Meagre"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="22458" end="22467" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822437" start="22602" end="22613" title="Metacompact space" label="Metacompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="22708" end="22720" title="Metric space" label="Metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713824" start="22825" end="22835" title="Metric map" label="Metric map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713824" start="22982" end="22992" title="metric map" label="metric map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713824" start="23296" end="23311" title="metric map" label="strictly metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="23406" end="23418" title="Metric space" label="Metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="23422" end="23434" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="23562" end="23563" title="real number" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="24182" end="24201" title="triangle inequality" label="triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194053" start="24653" end="24663" title="Metrizable" label="Metrizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194053" start="24687" end="24697" title="metrizable" label="metrizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908267" start="25010" end="25021" title="Moore space (topology)" label="Moore space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908267" start="25025" end="25036" title="Moore space (topology)" label="Moore space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266672" start="25042" end="25053" title="developable space" label="developable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="25054" end="25077" title="regular Hausdorff space" label="regular Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q105806667" start="25139" end="25154" title="almost open map" label="almost open map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="25158" end="25171" title="Neighbourhood (mathematics)" label="Neighbourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="25512" end="25521" title="singleton (mathematics)" label="singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275652" start="25705" end="25723" title="Local base" label="Neighbourhood base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275652" start="25735" end="25745" title="Local base" label="Local base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275652" start="25799" end="25819" title="neighbourhood system" label="neighbourhood system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191147" start="25916" end="25919" title="Net (mathematics)" label="Net"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191147" start="25923" end="25926" title="net (mathematics)" label="net"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513048" start="25968" end="25980" title="directed set" label="directed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q21285678" start="26106" end="26120" title="index set" label="index variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="26155" end="26163" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="26221" end="26235" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="26264" end="26270" title="Normal space" label="Normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="26283" end="26289" title="normal space" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191690" start="26380" end="26398" title="partition of unity" label="partition of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="26402" end="26418" title="T4 space" label="Normal Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="26422" end="26438" title="T4 space" label="normal Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="26449" end="26457" title="T4 space" label="T4 space"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="26510" end="26524" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991405" start="26615" end="26628" title="Nowhere dense set" label="Nowhere dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991405" start="26632" end="26649" title="nowhere dense set" label="nowhere dense set"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="26705" end="26715" title="Open cover" label="Open cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="26720" end="26730" title="open cover" label="open cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193832" start="27077" end="27085" title="positive number" label="positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="27086" end="27097" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="27320" end="27328" title="Open set" label="Open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="27333" end="27341" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632649" start="27373" end="27386" title="Open map" label="Open function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632649" start="27428" end="27432" title="open map" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="27440" end="27445" title="image (mathematics)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="27516" end="27533" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="27606" end="27614" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="27737" end="27749" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104431" start="27855" end="27867" title="Orthocompact space" label="Orthocompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="27904" end="27914" title="open cover" label="open cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="27947" end="27957" title="Refinement (topology)" label="refinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q970119" start="27970" end="27981" title="Paracompact space" label="Paracompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q970119" start="27994" end="28005" title="paracompact space" label="paracompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q191690" start="28140" end="28158" title="Partition of unity" label="Partition of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="28324" end="28330" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366002" start="28450" end="28454" title="Path (topology)" label="Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366002" start="28458" end="28462" title="Path (topology)" label="path"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="28543" end="28551" title="interval (mathematics)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="28714" end="28728" title="Path-connected space" label="Path-connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="28755" end="28769" title="path-connected space" label="path-connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q381060" start="29234" end="29243" title="partition of a set" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q381060" start="29268" end="29273" title="partition of a set" label="finer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626416" start="29393" end="29410" title="homotopy groups" label="0(&amp;quot;X&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q320346" start="29878" end="29885" title="Closure (topology)" label="Closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207972" start="29889" end="29895" title="Polish space" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303805" start="30032" end="30040" title="Polyadic space" label="Polyadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864919" start="30110" end="30136" title="one-point compactification" label="one-point compactification"/>
<link wikidata="Q85793898" start="30190" end="30211" title="Polytopological space" label="Polytopological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="30242" end="30245" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q739925" start="30272" end="30278" title="family of sets" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30293" end="30303" title="Topological_space#Definition_via_open_sets" label="topologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="30325" end="30341" title="Total order" label="linearly ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="30349" end="30367" title="Subset" label="inclusion relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21285678" start="30401" end="30410" title="index set" label="index set"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275652" start="30474" end="30498" title="Neighbourhood system" label="filter of neighbourhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q610232" start="30559" end="30577" title="Relatively compact" label="Relatively compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="30847" end="30863" title="Product topology" label="Product topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="30946" end="30963" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="30987" end="31003" title="product topology" label="product topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252877" start="31328" end="31343" title="Proximity space" label="Proximity space"/>
<link wikidata="Q130901" start="31421" end="31436" title="binary relation" label="binary relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="31889" end="31903" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362132" start="32165" end="32178" title="Pseudocompact" label="Pseudocompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="32214" end="32225" title="real number" label="real-valued"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397059" start="32313" end="32331" title="Pseudometric space" label="Pseudometric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="32424" end="32428" title="Real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="32887" end="32892" title="Set subtraction" label="minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="32928" end="32936" title="interval (mathematics)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="33041" end="33050" title="real line" label="real line"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="33138" end="33145" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="33202" end="33211" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="33475" end="33487" title="Quotient map (topology)" label="Quotient map"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="33562" end="33572" title="surjection" label="surjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="33763" end="33777" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="34118" end="34132" title="Quotient space (topology)" label="Quotient space"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="34244" end="34254" title="surjection" label="surjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139111" start="34274" end="34291" title="Quotient topology" label="Quotient topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="34563" end="34583" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="34632" end="34649" title="equivalence class" label="equivalence class"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="34821" end="34831" title="refinement (topology)" label="refinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="34937" end="34944" title="Regular space" label="Regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="34957" end="34964" title="regular space" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="35101" end="35109" title="Disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="35128" end="35145" title="T3 space" label="Regular Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="35158" end="35175" title="T3 space" label="regular Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="35243" end="35257" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156447" start="35695" end="35719" title="complete Boolean algebra" label="complete Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q610232" start="35723" end="35741" title="Relatively compact" label="Relatively compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q610232" start="35794" end="35812" title="relatively compact" label="relatively compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="36140" end="36157" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977124" start="36168" end="36178" title="resolvable space" label="resolvable"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="36220" end="36228" title="disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="36229" end="36241" title="dense subset" label="dense subset"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36390" end="36402" title="Hereditary property#In topology" label="hereditarily"/>
<link wikidata="Q680081" start="36403" end="36418" title="separable space" label="separable space"/>
<link wikidata="Q936155" start="36445" end="36453" title="Lindelf space" label="Lindelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841945" start="36457" end="36466" title="Scattered space" label="Scattered"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841945" start="36493" end="36502" title="scattered space" label="scattered"/>
<link wikidata="Q895815" start="36605" end="36610" title="Scott continuity" label="Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q895815" start="36616" end="36630" title="Scott topology" label="Scott topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="36636" end="36641" title="poset" label="poset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528262" start="36683" end="36692" title="Upper set" label="Upper set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363919" start="36759" end="36775" title="Second-countable space" label="Second-countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363919" start="36788" end="36804" title="second-countable space" label="second-countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="36840" end="36849" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449310" start="36949" end="36977" title="Semilocally simply connected" label="Semilocally simply connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449310" start="37004" end="37032" title="semilocally simply connected" label="semilocally simply connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458396" start="37781" end="37792" title="semiregular space" label="Semiregular"/>
<link wikidata="Q680081" start="37857" end="37866" title="Separable (topology)" label="Separable"/>
<link wikidata="Q680081" start="37879" end="37888" title="separable (topology)" label="separable"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="37901" end="37910" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q257272" start="37927" end="37936" title="Separated sets" label="Separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q257272" start="37983" end="37992" title="separated sets" label="separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="38004" end="38012" title="Disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135427" start="38046" end="38066" title="Sequentially compact" label="Sequentially compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="38109" end="38117" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713824" start="38281" end="38290" title="Short map" label="Short map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713824" start="38296" end="38306" title="metric map" label="metric map"/>
<link wikidata="Q912058" start="38309" end="38325" title="Simply connected space" label="Simply connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q912058" start="38338" end="38354" title="simply connected space" label="simply connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="38450" end="38466" title="Coarser topology" label="Coarser topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778429" start="38470" end="38475" title="Sober space" label="Sober"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778429" start="38482" end="38493" title="sober space" label="sober space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673182" start="38501" end="38512" title="hyperconnected space" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q320346" start="38534" end="38541" title="closure (topology)" label="closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q449470" start="38586" end="38599" title="generic point" label="generic point"/>
<link wikidata="Q331481" start="38640" end="38645" title="cover (topology)" label="cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="38651" end="38668" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601285" start="38739" end="38754" title="star refinement" label="star refinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="39042" end="39056" title="Finer topology" label="Finer topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="39091" end="39098" title="mathematical analysis" label="analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739990" start="39133" end="39140" title="Subbase" label="Subbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739990" start="39173" end="39180" title="subbase" label="subbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="39279" end="39285" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739990" start="39685" end="39693" title="Subbase" label="Subbasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739990" start="39699" end="39706" title="Subbase" label="Subbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q113518200" start="39891" end="39907" title="Submaximal space" label="Submaximal space"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="39911" end="39928" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="40043" end="40051" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="40058" end="40068" title="closed set" label="closed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297210" start="40157" end="40167" title="door space" label="door space"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977124" start="40309" end="40321" title="irresolvable space" label="irresolvable"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="40452" end="40469" title="subspace topology" label="subspace topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296408" start="40666" end="40677" title="Suslin line" label="Suslin line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="40689" end="40691" title="T0 space" label="T0"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="40704" end="40706" title="T0 space" label="T0"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="40956" end="40958" title="T1 space" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="40971" end="40973" title="T1 space" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="41290" end="41299" title="singleton (mathematics)" label="singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="41337" end="41339" title="T2 space" label="T2"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="41345" end="41360" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="41364" end="41366" title="T3 space" label="T3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="41372" end="41389" title="T3 space" label="Regular Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="41393" end="41396" title="Tychonoff space" label="T3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="41402" end="41417" title="Tychonoff space" label="Tychonoff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="41421" end="41423" title="T4 space" label="T4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="41429" end="41445" title="T4 space" label="Normal Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="41449" end="41451" title="T5 space" label="T5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="41457" end="41484" title="T5 space" label="Completely normal Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000555" start="41488" end="41491" title="Category of topological spaces" label="Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000555" start="41497" end="41527" title="Category of topological spaces" label="Category of topological spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q625948" start="41895" end="41916" title="Topological invariant" label="Topological invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212803" start="42113" end="42131" title="Algebraic topology" label="Algebraic topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="42172" end="42188" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="42228" end="42245" title="Topological space" label="Topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="42249" end="42266" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="42415" end="42420" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156532" start="42778" end="42805" title="Completely metrizable space" label="Completely metrizable space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42962" end="42981" title="ech-complete space" label="ech-complete space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156537" start="42986" end="43016" title="completely uniformizable space" label="completely uniformizable space"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="43035" end="43052" title="Topological space" label="Topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="43171" end="43177" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418327" start="43431" end="43447" title="Trivial topology" label="Trivial topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418327" start="43453" end="43469" title="trivial topology" label="trivial topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="43592" end="43601" title="Tychonoff space" label="Tychonoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="43605" end="43620" title="Tychonoff space" label="Tychonoff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="43769" end="43783" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897429" start="44023" end="44034" title="Ultrametric space" label="Ultrametric"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="44117" end="44136" title="triangle inequality" label="triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789884" start="44351" end="44370" title="Uniform isomorphism" label="Uniform isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="44411" end="44424" title="uniform space" label="uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q741865" start="44603" end="44623" title="uniformly continuous" label="uniformly continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281389" start="44696" end="44714" title="uniform properties" label="uniform properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885139" start="44718" end="44731" title="Uniformizable" label="Uniformizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="44816" end="44829" title="Uniform space" label="Uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="44833" end="44846" title="uniform space" label="uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="44926" end="44943" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="44999" end="45004" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="46074" end="46087" title="Uniform space" label="Uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q505760" start="46101" end="46114" title="Weak topology" label="Weak topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q505760" start="46120" end="46133" title="weak topology" label="weak topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="46326" end="46342" title="Coarser topology" label="Coarser topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="46377" end="46384" title="mathematical analysis" label="analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q205" start="46517" end="46525" title="Infinity" label="infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="46843" end="46860" title="weight of a space" label="weight of a space"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="46891" end="46906" title="cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q659746" start="47088" end="47100" title="well order" label="well-ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801244" start="47256" end="47272" title="zero-dimensional" label="zero-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q903783" start="47324" end="47340" title="Naive set theory" label="Naive set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="47342" end="47362" title="Axiomatic set theory" label="Axiomatic set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="47368" end="47376" title="Function (mathematics)" label="Function"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="47427" end="47435" title="Topology" label="Topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="47494" end="47511" title="Topological space" label="Topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621577" start="47550" end="47581" title="List of general topology topics" label="List of general topology topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619095" start="47584" end="47620" title="List of examples in general topology" label="List of examples in general topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="47651" end="47664" title="Compact space" label="Compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="47667" end="47682" title="Connected space" label="Connected space"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="47685" end="47695" title="Continuity (topology)" label="Continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="47698" end="47710" title="Metric space" label="Metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q257272" start="47713" end="47727" title="Separated sets" label="Separated sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140985" start="47730" end="47746" title="Separation axiom" label="Separation axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="47749" end="47766" title="Topological space" label="Topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="47769" end="47782" title="Uniform space" label="Uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036778" start="47803" end="47833" title="Glossary of algebraic topology" label="Glossary of algebraic topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571789" start="47835" end="47881" title="Glossary of differential geometry and topology" label="Glossary of differential geometry and topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571725" start="47884" end="47916" title="Glossary of areas of mathematics" label="Glossary of areas of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237377" start="47919" end="47961" title="Glossary of Riemannian and metric geometry" label="Glossary of Riemannian and metric geometry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30564" wikidata="Q240253" url="?curid=30564" title="Theodore Sturgeon">
<text>Theodore Sturgeon (; born Edward Hamilton Waldo, February 26, 1918  May 8, 1985) was an American fiction author of primarily fantasy, science fiction, and horror, as well as a critic. He wrote approximately 400 reviews and more than 120 short stories, 11 novels, and several scripts for &quot;Star Trek: The Original Series&quot;.

Sturgeon&#x27;s science fiction novel &quot;More Than Human&quot; (1953) won the 1954 International Fantasy Award (for SF and fantasy) as the year&#x27;s best novel, and the Science Fiction Writers of America ranked &quot;Baby Is Three&quot; number five among the &quot;Greatest Science Fiction Novellas of All Time&quot; to 1964. Ranked by votes for all of their pre-1965 novellas, Sturgeon was second among authors, behind Robert Heinlein.

The Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted Sturgeon in 2000, its fifth class of two dead and two living writers.

==Biography==
===Youth and education===
Sturgeon was born Edward Hamilton Waldo in Staten Island, New York, in 1918. His name was legally changed to Theodore Sturgeon at age eleven after his mother&#x27;s divorce and subsequent marriage to William Dicky (&quot;Argyll&quot;) Sturgeon.
Theodore&#x27;s birth father, Edward Waldo, was a color and dye manufacturer of middling success. With his second wife, Anne, he had one daughter, Joan. Theodore&#x27;s mother, Christine Hamilton Dicker (Waldo) Sturgeon, was a well-educated writer, watercolorist, and poet who published journalism, poetry, and fiction under the name Felix Sturgeon. His stepfather, William Dickie Sturgeon (sometimes known as Argyll), was a mathematics teacher at a prep school and then Romance Languages Professor at Drexel Institute (later Drexel Institute of Technology) in Philadelphia. Sturgeon&#x27;s account of his stepfather is included in a posthumous memoir. Sturgeon&#x27;s sibling, Peter Sturgeon, wrote technical material for the pharmaceutical industry and the WHO, and founded the American branch of Mensa.

Upon graduating from high school in 1935, Sturgeon pleaded to be allowed to attend college, but his step-father refused to support him, citing his frivolity.

===Great Depression and the war years===
The young Sturgeon held a wide variety of jobs. As an adolescent, he wanted to be a circus acrobat; an episode of rheumatic fever prevented him from pursuing this. From 1935 (aged 17) to 1938, he was a sailor in the merchant marine, and elements of that experience found their way into several stories. He sold refrigerators door to door. He managed a hotel in Jamaica around 19401941, worked in several construction and infrastructure jobs (driving a bulldozer in Puerto Rico, operating a filling station and truck lubrication center, work at a drydock) for the US Army in the early war years, and by 1944 was an advertising copywriter. In addition to freelance fiction and television writing, in New York City he opened his own literary agency (which was eventually transferred to Scott Meredith), worked for &quot;Fortune&quot; magazine and other Time Inc. properties on circulation, and edited various publications. 

Sturgeon initially had a somewhat irregular output, frequently suffering from writer&#x27;s block. He sold his first story, &quot;Heavy Insurance&quot;, in 1938 to the McClure Syndicate, which bought much of his early work. It appeared in the &quot;Milwaukee Journal&quot; on July 16th. At first he wrote mainly short stories, primarily for genre magazines such as &quot;Astounding&quot; and &quot;Unknown&quot;, but also for general-interest publications such as &quot;Argosy Magazine&quot;. He used the pen name &quot;E. Waldo Hunter&quot; when two of his stories ran in the same issue of &quot;Astounding&quot;. A few of his early stories were signed &quot;Theodore H. Sturgeon&quot;.

===1950s: The boom years===
Although the bulk of Sturgeon&#x27;s short story work dated from the 1940s and &#x27;50s, his original novels were all published between 1950 and 1961. Disliking arguments with John W. Campbell over editorial decisions, Sturgeon only published one story in &quot;Astounding&quot; after 1950. He did, however, take very seriously Campbell&#x27;s enthusiasms for psionics and for L. Ron Hubbard&#x27;s Dianetics (even before it became the Church of Scientology in 1953). Sturgeon was &quot;audited&quot; by Campbell himself, and according to Alec Nevala-Lee, he became more devoted to it than any other science fiction writer other than A.E. van Vogt. He became a trained auditor and defended the Church for decades.

Sturgeon published the &quot;first stories in science fiction which dealt with homosexuality, &#x27;The World Well Lost&#x27; [June 1953] and &#x27;Affair with a Green Monkey&#x27; [May 1957]&quot;, and sometimes put gay subtext in his work, such as the back-rub scene in &quot;Shore Leave&quot;, or in his Western story, &quot;Scars&quot;. 

Carl Sagan later described &quot;To Here and the Easel&quot; (1954) as &quot;a stunning portrait of personality disassociation as perceived from the inside&quot;, and further said that many of Sturgeon&#x27;s works were among the &quot;rare few sciencefiction novels [that] combine a standard sciencefiction theme with a deep human sensitivity&quot;.
According to science fiction writer Samuel R. Delany, a friend of Sturgeon&#x27;s, Sturgeon was bisexual.

Though not as well known to the general public as contemporaries like Isaac Asimov or Ray Bradbury, Sturgeon became well known among readers of mid-20th-century science fiction anthologies. At the height of his popularity in the 1950s he was the most anthologized English-language author alive. 

Three Sturgeon stories were adapted for the 1950s NBC radio anthology &quot;X Minus One&quot;: &quot;A Saucer of Loneliness&quot; (broadcast twice), &quot;The Stars Are the Styx&quot; and &quot;Mr. Costello, Hero&quot;. 

Sturgeon was a member of the all-male literary banqueting club the Trap Door Spiders, which served as the basis of Isaac Asimov&#x27;s fictional group of mystery solvers the Black Widowers. In 1959, Sturgeon moved to Truro, Massachusetts where he met and became friendly with a then unknown Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. (Sturgeon was the inspiration for the recurrent character of Kilgore Trout in Vonnegut&#x27;s novels.)

In 1959, he began to write book reviews for National Review, and continued until 1973.

===1960s and &#x27;70s: Ellery Queen and TV scripts===
Sturgeon ghost-wrote one Ellery Queen mystery novel, &quot;The Player on the Other Side&quot; (Random House, 1963). This novel was praised by critic H. R. F. Keating: &quot;[I] had almost finished writing &quot;Crime and Mystery: The 100 Best Books&quot;, in which I had included &quot;The Player on the Other Side&quot;... placing the book squarely in the Queen canon&quot; when he learned that it had been written by Sturgeon. Similarly, William DeAndrea, author and winner of Mystery Writers of America awards, selecting his ten favorite mystery novels for the magazine &quot;Armchair Detective&quot;, picked &quot;The Player on the Other Side&quot; as one of them. He said: &quot;This book changed my life... and made a raving mystery fan (and therefore ultimately a mystery writer) out of me.... The book must be &#x27;one of the most skillful pastiches in the history of literature. An amazing piece of work, whomever did it&#x27;.&quot;

Sturgeon wrote the screenplays for the &quot;Star Trek: The Original Series&quot; episodes &quot;Shore Leave&quot; (1966) and &quot;Amok Time&quot; (1967, written up and published as a Bantam Books &quot;Star Trek Fotonovel&quot; in 1978). The latter featured the first appearance of pon farr, the Vulcan mating ritual, the sentence &quot;Live long and prosper&quot; and the Vulcan hand symbol. Sturgeon also wrote several more &quot;Star Trek&quot; scripts that were never produced. One of these first introduced the Prime Directive. 

Sturgeon also wrote an episode of the Saturday morning show &quot;Land of the Lost&quot;, &quot;The Pylon Express&quot;, in 1975. His 1944 novella &quot;Killdozer!&quot; was the inspiration for the 1974 made-for-TV movie, Marvel comic book, and alternative rock band of the same name, as well as becoming the colloquial name for Marvin Heemeyer&#x27;s 2004 bulldozer rage incident.

===Later years===
Though Sturgeon continued to write through 1983, his work rate dipped noticeably in the later years of his life; a 1971 story collection entitled &quot;Sturgeon Is Alive and Well...&quot; addressed Sturgeon&#x27;s seeming withdrawal from the public eye in a tongue-in-cheek manner. Two of his stories were adapted for the 1980s revival of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;. One, &quot;A Saucer of Loneliness&quot;, was broadcast in 1986 and was dedicated to his memory. Another short story, &quot;Yesterday Was Monday&quot;, was the inspiration for &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; episode &quot;A Matter of Minutes&quot;. 

Sturgeon played guitar and wrote music which he sometimes performed at science fiction conventions. He lived for several years in Springfield, Oregon. He died on May 8, 1985, of lung fibrosis, at Sacred Heart General Hospital in the neighboring city of Eugene. He had been a lifelong pipe smoker and his death from lung fibrosis may have been caused by exposure to asbestos during his merchant marine years.

John Clute wrote in &quot;The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction&quot;: &quot;His influence upon writers like Harlan Ellison and Samuel R. Delany was seminal, and in his life and work he was a powerful and generally liberating influence in post-WWII US sf&quot;. He won comparatively few genre awards; one was the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement from the 1985 World Fantasy Convention.

==Sturgeon&#x27;s Law==

In 1957, Sturgeon coined what is now known as &quot;Sturgeon&#x27;s Law&quot;:

This was originally known as &quot;Sturgeon&#x27;s Revelation&quot;; Sturgeon has said that &quot;Sturgeon&#x27;s Law&quot; was originally

However, the former statement is now widely referred to as Sturgeon&#x27;s Law. He is also known for his dedication to a credo of critical thinking that challenged all normative assumptions: &quot;Ask the next question.&quot; This was the subject of an essay published in Cavalier Magazine in June 1967. He represented this credo by the symbol of a Q with an arrow through it, an example of which he wore around his neck and used as part of his signature in the last 15years of his life.

==Personal life==
;Wives and partners
Sturgeon was married three times, had two long-term committed relationships outside of marriage, divorced once, and fathered a total of seven children. His first wife was Dorothe Fillingame (married 1940, divorced 1945) with whom he had two daughters. He was married to singer Mary Mair from 1949 until an annulment in 1951. In 1953, he wed Marion McGahan with whom he had two sons and two daughters. In 1969, he began living with Wina Golden, a journalist, with whom he had a son.

Finally, his last long-term committed relationship was with writer and educator Jayne Englehart Tannehill, with whom he remained until the time of his death. She joined Sturgeon at book signings for his collection &quot;Maturity&quot;, and signed as &quot;Jayne Sturgeon&quot;. Englehart had her own biological son prior to her partnership with Sturgeon, to whom Sturgeon became like a stepfather.

;Relationship with Kurt Vonnegut
In 1965, Kurt Vonnegut devised the name of his fictional science-fiction writer Kilgore Trout as an obscure reference to Sturgeon&#x27;s name. The two writers had become friends when Sturgeon moved to Truro, Massachusetts in 1957. Vonnegut described Trout as a notably unsuccessful writer, prolifically publishing hackwork only in pulp and pornographic magazines. Since the characterization was unflattering, it was not until after Sturgeon&#x27;s death that Vonnegut explicitly acknowledged the connection; he stated in a 1987 interview that &quot;Yeah, it said so in his obituary in &quot;The New York Times&quot;. I was delighted that it said in the middle of it that he was the inspiration for the Kurt Vonnegut character of Kilgore Trout.&quot; In 2000, Vonnegut wrote an admiring introduction to Volume VII of &quot;The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon&quot;.

==Works==
===Novels===
* &quot;The Dreaming Jewels&quot; (1950) 
* &quot;More Than Human&quot; (1953) 
* &quot;The Cosmic Rape&quot; (1958) 
* &quot;Venus Plus X&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Some of Your Blood&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Godbody&quot; (1986) 

====Novelizations====
Sturgeon, under his own name, was hired to write novelizations of the following movies based on their scripts (links go to articles about the movies):
* &quot;The King and Four Queens&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea&quot; (1961) The book is described in &quot;Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea (novel)&quot;.
* &quot;The Rare Breed&quot; (1966)

====Pseudonymous novels====
* &quot;I, Libertine&quot; (1956): Historical novel created as a for-hire hoax. Credited to &quot;Frederick R. Ewing&quot;, written from a premise by Jean Shepherd.
* &quot;The Player on The Other Side&quot; (1963): Mystery novel credited to Ellery Queen and ghost-written with Queen&#x27;s assistance and supervision.

===Short stories===

Sturgeon published numerous short story collections during his lifetime, many drawing on his most prolific writing years of the 1940s and 1950s.

Note that some reprints of these titles (especially paperback editions) may cut one or two stories from the line-up. Statistics herein refer to the original editions only.

====Collections published during Sturgeon&#x27;s lifetime====

The following table includes sixteen volumes (one of them collecting western stories). These are considered &quot;original&quot; collections of Sturgeon material, in that they compiled previously uncollected stories. However, some volumes did contain a few reprinted stories: this list includes books that collected only previously uncollected material, as well as those volumes that collected &quot;mostly&quot; new material, but also contained up to three stories (representing no more than half the book) that were previously published in a Sturgeon collection.

The following six collections consisted entirely of reprints of previously collected material:

====Complete short stories====
North Atlantic Books released the chronologically assembled &quot;The Complete Short Stories of Theodore Sturgeon&quot;, edited by Paul Williams. The series consisted of 13 volumes published between 1994 and 2010. Introductions were provided by Harlan Ellison, Samuel R. Delany, Kurt Vonnegut, Gene Wolfe, Connie Willis, Jonathan Lethem, and others. Extensive story notes were provided by Paul Williams and, in the last two volumes, Sturgeon&#x27;s daughter Nol.

* Volume I  &quot;The Ultimate Egoist&quot; (1937 to 1940)
* Volume II  &quot;Microcosmic God&quot; (1940 to 1941)
* Volume III  &quot;Killdozer&quot; (1941 to 1946)
* Volume IV  &quot;Thunder and Roses&quot; (1946 to 1948)
* Volume V  &quot;The Perfect Host&quot; (1948 to 1950)
* Volume VI  &quot;Baby is Three&quot; (1950 to 1952)
* Volume VII  &quot;A Saucer of Loneliness&quot; (1953)
* Volume VIII  &quot;Bright Segment&quot; (1953 to 1955, as well as two &quot;lost&quot; stories from 1946)
* Volume IX  &quot;And Now the News...&quot; (1955 to 1957)
* Volume X  &quot;The Man Who Lost the Sea&quot; (1957 to 1960)
* Volume XI  &quot;The Nail and the Oracle&quot; (1961 to 1969)
* Volume XII  &quot;Slow Sculpture&quot; (1970 to 1972, plus one 1954 novella and one unpublished story)
* Volume XIII  &quot;Case and The Dreamer&quot; (1972 to 1983, plus one 1960 story and three unpublished stories)

===Representative short stories===
Sturgeon was best known for his short stories and novellas. The best-known include:
* &quot;Ether Breather&quot; (September 1939, his first published science-fiction story)
* &quot;Derm Fool&quot; (March 1940)
* &quot;It&quot; (August 1940)
* &quot;Shottle Bop&quot; (February 1941)
* &quot;Microcosmic God&quot; (April 1941)
* &quot;Yesterday Was Monday&quot; (1941)
* &quot;Killdozer!&quot; (November, 1944)
* &quot;Maturity&quot; (February, 1947)
* &quot;Bianca&#x27;s Hands&quot; (May, 1947)
* &quot;Thunder and Roses&quot; (November 1947)
* &quot;The Perfect Host&quot; (November 1948)
* &quot;It Wasn&#x27;t Syzygy&quot; (January 1948)
* &quot;Minority Report&quot; (June 1949, no connection to the 2002 movie, which was based on a later story by Philip K. Dick)
* &quot;One Foot and the Grave&quot; (September 1949)
* &quot;Baby Is Three&quot; (October 1952)
* &quot;A Saucer of Loneliness&quot; (February 1953)
* &quot;The World Well Lost&quot; (June 1953)
* &quot;Mr. Costello, Hero&quot; (December 1953)
* &quot;The [Widget], The [Wadget], and Boff&quot; (1955)
* &quot;The Skills of Xanadu&quot; (July 1956)
* &quot;The Other Man&quot; (September 1956)
* &quot;And Now The News&quot; (December 1956)
* &quot;The Girl Had Guts&quot; (January 1957)
* &quot;The Man Who Lost the Sea&quot; (October 1959)
* &quot;Need&quot; (1960)
* &quot;How to Forget Baseball&quot; (&quot;Sports Illustrated&quot;, December 1964)
* &quot;The Nail and the Oracle&quot; (&quot;Playboy&quot;, October 1964)
* &quot;If All Men Were Brothers, Would You Let One Marry Your Sister?&quot; (1967, &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot; anthology edited by Harlan Ellison)Nebula Award 1967 Nominee Novella
* &quot;The Man Who Learned Loving&quot;Nebula Award 1969 Nominee Short Story
* &quot;Slow Sculpture&quot; (&quot;Galaxy&quot;, February 1970)  winner of a Hugo Award and a Nebula Award
* &quot;Occam&#x27;s Scalpel&quot; (August, 1971, with an introduction by Terry Carr)
* &quot;Vengeance Is.&quot; (1980, &quot;Dark Forces&quot; anthology edited by Kirby McCauley)

===Autobiography===
* &quot;Argyll: A Memoir&quot; (pamphlet, Sturgeon Project, 1993), an autobiographical sketch about Sturgeon&#x27;s relationship with his stepfather. Introduction by his editor Paul Williams. Afterword by Samuel R. Delany. Cover art by Donna Nassar. The memoir, written for his psychotherapist, has many suggestions about his life, starting from his family&#x27;s move from Staten Island to Philadelphia when his stepfather got a job at Drexel University and Sturgeon and his brother were still in the local public school to their attempts to catch poison ivy to delay the move&quot;Then we moved to Philadelphia, a little apartment on 34 Street with a sort of sun room, which was Argyll&#x27;s study and had a single couch which was his and Mother&#x27;s bed, and a kind of living room with a kitchenette built into one wall, where we slept on the floor on mattresses.&quot; and his father&#x27;s treatment of a puppy he couldn&#x27;t discipline&quot;... he used to whip her with a wire after rubbing her nose in itso he got rid of her&quot; (p. 14). These go on to include Sturgeon&#x27;s first gay experiences in his 14th year&quot;So [20-year-old] Bert blew me practically continuously from Friday evening until dinner time Sunday; we kept score and I came 14 times. Sweet are the uses of respectability. My God! It never occurred to me until this minute that Dr. Taft was probably the onethe only one, as sole mentor, who could possibly have insured Argyll&#x27;s total ignorance!&quot; (p.52); and in his long letter to his mother and Argyll, included in the same volume, Sturgeon harshly critiques his first novel, &quot;The Dreaming Jewels&quot;: &quot;My use of one detested Argyll would have been fine, but one wasn&#x27;t enough; there had to be two, and as a result the balance of the work was destroyed and its literary worth was lost in vengeful polemic&quot; (p. 62).

==See also==

* Theodore Sturgeon Award

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Cited sources ===

* An overview of Sturgeon&#x27;s work to 1965.
*
== Further reading ==


==External links==

* The Theodore Sturgeon Page - an informative and comprehensive fan site
* The Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust  owners of Sturgeon copyrights, information on Sturgeon publications
* Theodore Sturgeon Papers (MS 303 and MS 254) housed at the Kenneth Spencer Research Library, University of Kansas
* 
* 

* Theodore Sturgeon&#x27;s online fiction at Free Speculative Fiction Online
* Gary Westfahl&#x27;s Biographical Encyclopedia of Science Fiction Film
* The Work of Theodore Sturgeon  lengthy biographical and critical study of Sturgeon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q240253" start="0" end="17" title="Theodore Sturgeon" label="Theodore Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q240253" start="26" end="47" title="Theodore Sturgeon" label="Edward Hamilton Waldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="126" end="133" title="fantasy fiction" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="135" end="150" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="156" end="162" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="" start="294" end="324" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek: The Original Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q845613" start="377" end="392" title="More Than Human" label="More Than Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666525" start="419" end="446" title="International Fantasy Award" label="International Fantasy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="507" end="541" title="Science Fiction Writers of America" label="Science Fiction Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385090" start="555" end="568" title="Baby Is Three" label="Baby Is Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762564" start="603" end="648" title="The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume Two" label="Greatest Science Fiction Novellas of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="729" end="749" title="The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume Two#Authors" label="second among authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="758" end="773" title="Robert Heinlein" label="Robert Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384356" start="780" end="820" title="Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="984" end="1007" title="Staten Island, New York" label="Staten Island, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q603034" start="1712" end="1742" title="Drexel Institute of Technology" label="Drexel Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172446" start="1864" end="1878" title="Peter A. Sturgeon" label="Peter Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="1945" end="1948" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q184194" start="1985" end="1990" title="Mensa International" label="Mensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q193036" start="2284" end="2291" title="acrobatics" label="acrobat"/>
<link wikidata="Q753904" start="2307" end="2322" title="rheumatic fever" label="rheumatic fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="2409" end="2424" title="merchant marine" label="merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="2504" end="2516" title="refrigerator" label="refrigerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="2554" end="2561" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="2659" end="2670" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q205495" start="2684" end="2699" title="filling station" label="filling station"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="2740" end="2747" title="drydock" label="drydock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436861" start="2977" end="2991" title="Scott Meredith" label="Scott Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="3011" end="3018" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q178927" start="3194" end="3213" title="writer&amp;#x27;s block" label="writer&amp;#x27;s block"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800399" start="3284" end="3301" title="McClure Syndicate" label="McClure Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="3487" end="3497" title="Astounding" label="Astounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629880" start="3514" end="3521" title="Unknown magazine" label="Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q649812" start="3586" end="3601" title="Argosy Magazine" label="Argosy Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="3621" end="3629" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q435056" start="4010" end="4026" title="John W. Campbell" label="John W. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q220623" start="4194" end="4202" title="psionics" label="psionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="4211" end="4225" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q284451" start="4233" end="4242" title="Dianetics" label="Dianetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="4270" end="4291" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347046" start="4315" end="4334" title="Auditing (Scientology)" label="&amp;quot;audited&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28606872" start="4373" end="4388" title="Alec Nevala-Lee" label="Alec Nevala-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q315059" start="4468" end="4481" title="A.E. van Vogt" label="A.E. van Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021079" start="4649" end="4668" title="The World Well Lost" label="The World Well Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452270" start="4770" end="4777" title="subtext" label="subtext"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4827" end="4838" title="Shore Leave (Star Trek: The Original Series)" label="Shore Leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="4892" end="4902" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="5281" end="5297" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="5422" end="5434" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="5438" end="5450" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042761" start="5725" end="5736" title="X Minus One" label="X Minus One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659345" start="5750" end="5772" title="A Saucer of Loneliness" label="A Saucer of Loneliness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283878" start="5938" end="5955" title="Trap Door Spiders" label="Trap Door Spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="5986" end="5998" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q798399" start="6045" end="6059" title="Black Widowers" label="Black Widowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329666" start="6088" end="6108" title="Truro, Massachusetts" label="Truro, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="6162" end="6179" title="Kurt Vonnegut, Jr" label="Kurt Vonnegut, Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q965465" start="6242" end="6255" title="Kilgore Trout" label="Kilgore Trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="6329" end="6344" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="6437" end="6448" title="ghost-writer" label="ghost-wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q586362" start="6453" end="6465" title="Ellery Queen" label="Ellery Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585139" start="6466" end="6473" title="Mystery (fiction)" label="mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q955307" start="6577" end="6593" title="H. R. F. Keating" label="H. R. F. Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720621" start="6908" end="6934" title="Mystery Writers of America" label="Mystery Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7421" end="7451" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek: The Original Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487395" start="7473" end="7484" title="Shore Leave (Star Trek)" label="Shore Leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747498" start="7508" end="7517" title="Amok Time" label="Amok Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609948" start="7561" end="7573" title="Bantam Books" label="Bantam Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497384" start="7660" end="7668" title="pon farr" label="pon farr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497384" start="7674" end="7680" title="Vulcan (Star Trek)" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529436" start="7751" end="7769" title="Vulcan salute" label="Vulcan hand symbol"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7810" end="7819" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q891149" start="7894" end="7909" title="Prime Directive" label="Prime Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q451943" start="7979" end="7995" title="Land of the Lost (1974 TV series)" label="Land of the Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576411" start="8009" end="8026" title="The Pylon Express" label="The Pylon Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407365" start="8066" end="8076" title="Killdozer! (story)" label="Killdozer!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277907" start="8116" end="8133" title="Killdozer (film)" label="made-for-TV movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="8135" end="8147" title="Marvel comic" label="Marvel comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336827" start="8158" end="8179" title="Killdozer (band)" label="alternative rock band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616969" start="8242" end="8257" title="Marvin Heemeyer" label="Marvin Heemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q559270" start="8659" end="8676" title="The Twilight Zone (1985 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659345" start="8695" end="8717" title="A Saucer of Loneliness" label="A Saucer of Loneliness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255565" start="8903" end="8922" title="A Matter of Minutes" label="A Matter of Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958056" start="9003" end="9029" title="science fiction convention" label="science fiction convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q40268" start="9062" end="9081" title="Springfield, Oregon" label="Springfield, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q32446" start="9110" end="9123" title="lung fibrosis" label="lung fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397235" start="9128" end="9157" title="Sacred Heart Medical Center University District" label="Sacred Heart General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q171224" start="9185" end="9191" title="Eugene, Oregon" label="Eugene"/>
<link wikidata="Q104526" start="9216" end="9220" title="smoking pipe (tobacco)" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q32446" start="9247" end="9260" title="lung fibrosis" label="lung fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="9297" end="9305" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133864" start="9341" end="9351" title="John Clute" label="John Clute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="9367" end="9402" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="9448" end="9462" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="9467" end="9483" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625727" start="9652" end="9692" title="World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement" label="World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203037" start="9811" end="9830" title="Sturgeon&amp;#x27;s Law" label="Sturgeon&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054760" start="10251" end="10268" title="Cavalier Magazine" label="Cavalier Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="11431" end="11444" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q965465" start="11502" end="11515" title="Kilgore Trout" label="Kilgore Trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329666" start="11623" end="11643" title="Truro, Massachusetts" label="Truro, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="12013" end="12031" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002824" start="12325" end="12344" title="The Dreaming Jewels" label="The Dreaming Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q845613" start="12367" end="12382" title="More Than Human" label="More Than Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q692201" start="12405" end="12420" title="The Cosmic Rape" label="The Cosmic Rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q429159" start="12443" end="12455" title="Venus Plus X" label="Venus Plus X"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559511" start="12477" end="12495" title="Some of Your Blood" label="Some of Your Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892979" start="12517" end="12524" title="Godbody" label="Godbody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699939" start="12721" end="12745" title="The King and Four Queens" label="The King and Four Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8873426" start="12767" end="12798" title="Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea" label="Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25217824" start="12843" end="12882" title="Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea (novel)" label="Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q634325" start="12898" end="12912" title="The Rare Breed" label="The Rare Breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q280894" start="12963" end="12975" title="I, Libertine" label="I, Libertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355015" start="13105" end="13118" title="Jean Shepherd" label="Jean Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q586362" start="13197" end="13209" title="Ellery Queen" label="Ellery Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="13214" end="13227" title="ghost-writer" label="ghost-written"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="13747" end="13754" title="Western (genre)" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053987" start="14371" end="14391" title="North Atlantic Books" label="North Atlantic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154386" start="14502" end="14515" title="Paul Williams (Crawdaddy! creator)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="14616" end="14630" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="14632" end="14648" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="14650" end="14663" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q361149" start="14665" end="14675" title="Gene Wolfe" label="Gene Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q234700" start="14677" end="14690" title="Connie Willis" label="Connie Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q440100" start="14692" end="14707" title="Jonathan Lethem" label="Jonathan Lethem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154386" start="14760" end="14773" title="Paul Williams (Crawdaddy! creator)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386419" start="16008" end="16010" title="It! (story)" label="It"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502586" start="16039" end="16050" title="Shottle Bop" label="Shottle Bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839399" start="16081" end="16096" title="Microcosmic God" label="Microcosmic God"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407365" start="16166" end="16176" title="Killdozer! (story)" label="Killdozer!"/>
<link wikidata="Q244604" start="16495" end="16505" title="Minority Report (film)" label="2002 movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="16543" end="16557" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385090" start="16621" end="16634" title="Baby Is Three" label="Baby Is Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659345" start="16664" end="16686" title="A Saucer of Loneliness" label="A Saucer of Loneliness"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021079" start="16717" end="16736" title="The World Well Lost" label="The World Well Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963662" start="17056" end="17080" title="The Man Who Lost the Sea" label="The Man Who Lost the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="17172" end="17190" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="17258" end="17265" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386233" start="17295" end="17357" title="If All Men Were Brothers, Would You Let One Marry Your Sister?" label="If All Men Were Brothers, Would You Let One Marry Your Sister?"/>
<link wikidata="Q745250" start="17377" end="17394" title="Dangerous Visions" label="Dangerous Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="17421" end="17435" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="17437" end="17449" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="17512" end="17524" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542071" start="17558" end="17572" title="Slow Sculpture" label="Slow Sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="17586" end="17592" title="Galaxy (magazine)" label="Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="17629" end="17639" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="17646" end="17658" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292432" start="17733" end="17743" title="Terry Carr" label="Terry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="18066" end="18082" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18097" end="18109" title="Paul Williams (Crawdaddy! creator)#Family" label="Donna Nassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002824" start="19496" end="19515" title="The Dreaming Jewels" label="The Dreaming Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q582610" start="19768" end="19791" title="Theodore Sturgeon Award" label="Theodore Sturgeon Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30565" wikidata="Q892228" url="?curid=30565" title="The Yellow Kid">
<text>The Yellow Kid (Mickey Dugan) is an American comic-strip character that appeared from 1895 to 1898 in Joseph Pulitzer&#x27;s &quot;New York World&quot;, and later William Randolph Hearst&#x27;s &quot;New York Journal&quot;. Created and drawn by Richard F. Outcault in the comic strip Hogan&#x27;s Alley (and later under other names as well), the strip was one of the first Sunday supplement comic strips in an American newspaper, although its graphical layout had already been thoroughly established in political and other, purely-for-entertainment cartoons. Outcault&#x27;s use of word balloons in &quot;The Yellow Kid&quot; influenced the basic appearance and use of balloons in subsequent newspaper comic strips and comic books.

&quot;The Yellow Kid&quot; is also famous for its connection to the coining of the term &quot;yellow journalism&quot;. The idea of &quot;yellow journalism&quot; referred to stories that were sensationalized for the sake of selling papers, and was so named after the &quot;Yellow Kid&quot; cartoons. Through his cartoons, Outcault&#x27;s work aimed his humor and social commentary at Pulitzer&#x27;s adult readership. The strip has been described as &quot;a turn-of-the-century theater of the city, in which class and racial tensions of the new urban, consumerist environment were acted out by a mischievous group of New York City kids from the wrong side of the tracks&quot;.

== Character ==

The Yellow Kid was a bald, snaggle-toothed, barefoot boy who wore an oversized yellow nightshirt and hung around in a slum alley typical of certain areas of squalor that existed in late 19th-century New York City. &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; was filled with equally odd characters, mostly other children. With a goofy grin, the Kid habitually spoke in a ragged, peculiar slang, which was printed on his shirt, a device meant to lampoon advertising billboards.

The Yellow Kid&#x27;s head was drawn wholly shaved, as if recently having been ridden of lice, a common sight among children in New York&#x27;s tenement ghettos at the time. His nightshirt, a hand-me-down from an older sister, was white or pale blue in the first color strips.

== Publication history ==


The character who would later become the Yellow Kid first appeared on the scene in a minor supporting role in a single-panel cartoon published in the strip &quot;Feudal Pride in Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; on 2 June 1894 in &quot;Truth&quot; magazine. There were a few more &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; cartoons featuring the &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; kids over the rest of 1894 and the beginning of 1895. The four different black-and-white single-panel cartoons were deemed popular, and one of them, &quot;Fourth Ward Brownies&quot;, was reprinted on 17 February 1895 in Joseph Pulitzer&#x27;s &quot;New York World&quot;, where Outcault worked as a technical drawing artist. The &quot;World&quot; published another, newer &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; cartoon less than a month later, and this was followed by the strip&#x27;s first color printing on 5 May 1895. &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; gradually became a full-page Sunday color cartoon with the Yellow Kid (who was also appearing several times a week) as its lead character.

In 1896, Outcault was hired away at a much higher salary to William Randolph Hearst&#x27;s &quot;New York Journal&quot; where he drew the Yellow Kid in a new full-page color strip which was significantly violent and even vulgar compared to his first panels for &quot;Truth&quot; magazine. Because Outcault failed in his attempt to copyright the Yellow Kid, Pulitzer was able to hire George Luks to continue drawing the original (and now less popular) version of the strip for the &quot;World&quot; and hence the Yellow Kid appeared simultaneously in two competing papers for about a year. Luks&#x27;s version of the Yellow Kid introduced a pair of twins, Alex and George, also dressed in yellow nightshirts. Outcault produced three subsequent series of Yellow Kid strips at the &quot;Journal&quot;, each lasting no more than four months:

* &quot;McFadden&#x27;s Row of Flats&quot; (18 October 1896  10 January 1897)
* &quot;Around the World with the Yellow Kid&quot;  a strip that sent the Kid on a world tour in the manner of Nellie Bly (17 January  30 May 1897)
* A half-page strip which eventually adopted the title &quot;Ryan&#x27;s Arcade&quot; (28 September 1897  23 January 1898).

Publication of both versions stopped abruptly after only three years in early 1898, as circulation wars between the rival papers dwindled. Moreover, Outcault may have lost interest in the character when he realized he could not retain exclusive commercial control over it. The Yellow Kid&#x27;s last appearance is most often noted as 23 January 1898 in a strip about hair tonic. On 1 May 1898, the character was featured in a rather satirical cartoon called &quot;Casey Corner Kids Dime Museum&quot; but he was drawn as a bearded, balding old man wearing a green nightshirt which bore the words: &quot;Gosh I&#x27;ve growed old in making dis collection.&quot;

The Yellow Kid appeared sporadically in Outcault&#x27;s later cartoon strips, most notably &quot;Buster Brown&quot;.

== Yellow journalism ==
The two newspapers that ran the Yellow Kid, Pulitzer&#x27;s &quot;World&quot; and Hearst&#x27;s &quot;Journal&quot;, quickly became known as the &quot;yellow kid papers&quot;. This was contracted to the &quot;yellow papers&quot; and the term &quot;yellow kid journalism&quot; was at last shortened to &quot;yellow journalism&quot;, describing the two newspapers&#x27; editorial practices of taking (sometimes even fictionalized) sensationalism and profit as priorities in journalism.

==Merchandising==
The Yellow Kid&#x27;s image was an early example of lucrative merchandising and appeared on mass market retail objects in the greater New York City area such as &quot;billboards, buttons, cigarette packs, cigars, cracker tins, ladies&#x27; fans, matchbooks, postcards, chewing gum cards, toys, whiskey and many other products&quot;. With the Yellow Kid&#x27;s merchandising success as an advertising icon, the strip came to represent the crass commercial world it had originally lampooned.

== Legacy==

Entertainment entrepreneur Gus Hill staged vaudeville plays based on the comic strip. His version of &quot;McFadden&#x27;s Flats&quot; was made into films in 1927 and 1935.

The Yellow Kid made an appearance in the Marvel Universe in the Joss Whedon-written &quot;Runaways&quot; story (volume 2, issue 27). In this take on the character, he exhibits superhuman powers.

In the &quot;Ziggy&quot; of 16 February 1990, Ziggy points to a smiling old man seated next to him on a park bench and says, &quot;No kidding... You were The Yellow Kid!&quot;

Writer Chris Yambar and editorial cartoonist Randy Bish attempted to revive the series in 2020 as a comic book for the character&#x27;s 125th anniversary, in which The Yellow Kid is pulled into the modern day by a magician; however, only one issue was published before Yambar&#x27;s death in March of 2021.

=== Yellow Kid Awards ===
The Yellow Kid Awards are Italian comics awards presented by the Italian International Comics and Cartooning Exhibition and distributed at the annual Italian comic book and gaming convention Lucca Comics &amp; Games.

==See also==
* &quot;Ally Sloper&quot;
* &quot;Histoire de Mr. Vieux Bois&quot;
* &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; (magazine)
* &quot;Max and Moritz&quot;
* &quot;The Katzenjammer Kids&quot;
* &quot;The Little Bears&quot;
* &quot;Little Nemo&quot;
* Platinum Age of Comic Books
==References==
==External links==

* Radio piece detailing the story behind the Yellow Kid, particularly his role in commercial advertising
* The Ohio State University Billy Ireland Cartoon Library &amp; Museum: Digital album of 88 Yellow Kid tearsheets from the San Francisco Academy of Comic Art Collection 
* &quot;New York Times Book Review&quot;: &quot;The Kid From Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; by John Canemaker
* Yellow Kid Pinbacks
* The Yellow Kid at Comic Vine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q892228" start="0" end="14" title="The Yellow Kid" label="The Yellow Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q892228" start="16" end="28" title="The Yellow Kid" label="Mickey Dugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="45" end="56" title="comic-strip" label="comic-strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q173417" start="102" end="117" title="Joseph Pulitzer" label="Joseph Pulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066835" start="131" end="145" title="New York World" label="New York World"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="163" end="186" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984695" start="200" end="216" title="New York Journal" label="New York Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q737068" start="245" end="264" title="Richard F. Outcault" label="Richard F. Outcault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916094" start="503" end="512" title="political cartoons" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="549" end="557" title="cartoons" label="cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q827198" start="582" end="594" title="word balloon" label="word balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="719" end="729" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q231443" start="827" end="844" title="yellow journalism" label="yellow journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1349" end="1362" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="1545" end="1549" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="1801" end="1806" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q623149" start="1878" end="1888" title="billboard (advertising)" label="billboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481228" start="1980" end="1984" title="lice" label="lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078374" start="2035" end="2043" title="tenement" label="tenement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088601" start="2424" end="2429" title="Truth (magazine)" label="Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q173417" start="2773" end="2788" title="Joseph Pulitzer" label="Joseph Pulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066835" start="2802" end="2816" title="New York World" label="New York World"/>
<link wikidata="Q192521" start="2851" end="2868" title="technical drawing" label="technical drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="3297" end="3320" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984695" start="3334" end="3350" title="New York Journal" label="New York Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q337733" start="3620" end="3631" title="George Luks" label="George Luks"/>
<link wikidata="Q230299" start="4267" end="4277" title="Nellie Bly" label="Nellie Bly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056607" start="4798" end="4808" title="hair tonic" label="hair tonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017766" start="5189" end="5201" title="Buster Brown" label="Buster Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q231443" start="5541" end="5558" title="yellow journalism" label="yellow journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q427532" start="5663" end="5677" title="sensationalism" label="sensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864451" start="6268" end="6276" title="Gus Hill" label="Gus Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253018" start="6399" end="6403" title="McFadden&amp;#x27;s Flats (1927 film)" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q931597" start="6456" end="6471" title="Marvel Universe" label="Marvel Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q298025" start="6479" end="6490" title="Joss Whedon" label="Joss Whedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140112" start="6505" end="6513" title="Runaways (comics)" label="Runaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385403" start="6624" end="6629" title="Ziggy (comic strip)" label="Ziggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292083" start="6833" end="6843" title="Randy Bish" label="Randy Bish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070962" start="7313" end="7337" title="Lucca Comics &amp;amp; Games" label="Lucca Comics &amp;amp; Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838747" start="7361" end="7372" title="Ally Sloper" label="Ally Sloper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929716" start="7387" end="7413" title="Histoire de Mr. Vieux Bois" label="Histoire de Mr. Vieux Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877041" start="7422" end="7463" title="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Alley (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Hogan&amp;#x27;s Alley&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q316894" start="7472" end="7486" title="Max and Moritz" label="Max and Moritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315973" start="7501" end="7522" title="The Katzenjammer Kids" label="The Katzenjammer Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747575" start="7537" end="7553" title="The Little Bears" label="The Little Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q113531" start="7568" end="7579" title="Little Nemo" label="Little Nemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791599" start="7588" end="7615" title="Platinum Age of Comic Books" label="Platinum Age of Comic Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30566" wikidata="Q7747575" url="?curid=30566" title="The Little Bears">
<text>The Little Bears is an American comic strip created by Jimmy Swinnerton, one of the first American comic strips featuring talking animals and one of the first with recurring characters  the titular bears. The feature emerged from a series of spot illustrations of a bear cub that began appearing in &quot;The San Francisco Examiner&quot; starting October 14, 1893. The strip was launched as a regular feature on the children&#x27;s page starting June 2, 1895, and ran through June 7, 1897.

==History==
Jimmy Swinnerton started his career in 1892 as a young illustrator for the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot;, one of William Randolph Hearst&#x27;s newspapers. His chief task was to provide drawings for news stories in the days before photoengraving, however, he also drew editorial cartoons and other illustrations for the paper.

In 1893, the &quot;Examiner&quot; used an illustration by Frank &quot;Cozy&quot; Noble of a bear as the paper&#x27;s mascot for the San Francisco Mid-Winter Exposition of 1894. Following this, Swinnerton was asked to provide a bear illustration every day to accompany the paper&#x27;s coverage of the fair. Swinnerton&#x27;s first bear illustration appeared on October 14, 1893, and rapidly evolved into a cute little bear cub. When the fair closed, the Little Bear disappeared from the paper, but he returned on September 10, 1894, and started accompanying the weather report from October 2, 1894 until May 1895.

Starting June 2, 1895, &quot;The Little Bears&quot; became a regular feature on the children&#x27;s page; each strip consisted of multiple illustrations of the bears, connected by a theme for the day. Human children were introduced to the strip on January 26, 1896, and the title changed to &quot;Little Bears &amp; Tykes&quot;.

The &quot;Little Bears&quot; strip continued until June 7, 1897, when Swinnerton moved to New York City to draw cartoons for another Hearst paper, the &quot;New York Journal&quot;. In the &quot;Journal&quot;, Swinnerton&#x27;s feature switched from bears to tigers as he launched &quot;The Little Tigers&quot; on February 20, 1898. The change of animals apparently took place at the request of Hearst. Gradually a defined, philandering character emerged from the strip, and on October 4, 1903, the Sunday feature was retitled &quot;Mr. Jack&quot;.

After Swinnerton ended the regular &quot;Little Bears&quot; strip, he continued to draw sporadic strips for the &quot;Examiner&quot;. The Little Bear continued to appear in spot cartoons and with the weather forecast for several years, drawn by other artists including Grant Wallace, Ralph Yardley and Bob Edgren.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="32" end="43" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161438" start="55" end="71" title="Jimmy Swinnerton" label="Jimmy Swinnerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679853" start="122" end="137" title="talking animals in fiction" label="talking animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="306" end="332" title="The San Francisco Examiner" label="The San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161438" start="504" end="520" title="Jimmy Swinnerton" label="Jimmy Swinnerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q644687" start="559" end="570" title="illustrator" label="illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="585" end="607" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="622" end="645" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439639" start="740" end="754" title="photoengraving" label="photoengraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916094" start="778" end="795" title="editorial cartoon" label="editorial cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1872" end="1885" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984695" start="1939" end="1955" title="New York Journal" label="New York Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928775" start="2068" end="2085" title="Mr. Jack" label="The Little Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928775" start="2314" end="2322" title="Mr. Jack" label="Mr. Jack"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30569" wikidata="Q172713" url="?curid=30569" title="Tr">
<text> (; Old Norse: , ) is a god in Germanic mythology and member of the . In Norse mythology, which provides most of the surviving narratives about gods among the Germanic peoples, sacrifices his right hand to the monstrous wolf , who bites it off when he realizes the gods have bound him. is foretold of being consumed by the similarly monstrous dog during the events of Ragnark.

The generally renders the god as &quot;Mars&quot;, the ancient Roman war god, and it is through that lens that most Latin references to the god occur. For example, the god may be referenced as (Latin &#x27;Mars of the Assembly Thing]&#x27;) on 3rd century Latin inscription, reflecting a strong association with the Germanic thing, a legislative body among the ancient Germanic peoples. By way of the opposite process of , Tuesday is named after (&quot;s day&#x27;), rather than Mars, in English and other Germanic languages.

In Old Norse sources, is alternately described as the son of the (in ) or of the god Odin (in ). makes reference to an unnamed and otherwise unknown consort, perhaps also reflected in the continental Germanic record (see Zisa).

Due to the etymology of the god&#x27;s name and the shadowy presence of the god in the extant Germanic corpus, some scholars propose that may have once held a more central place among the deities of early Germanic mythology.

==Name==
In wider Germanic mythology, he is known in Old English as &#x27; and in Old High German as &#x27;, both stemming from the Proto-Germanic theonym , meaning &#x27;God&#x27;. Little information about the god survives beyond Old Norse sources. could be the eponym of the Tiwaz rune (), a letter of the runic alphabet corresponding to the Latin letter &quot;T&quot;.

Various place names in Scandinavia refer to the god, and a variety of objects found in England and Scandinavia seem to depict or invoke him.

=== Etymology ===
The Old Norse theonym stems from an earlier Proto-Norse form reconstructed as , which derives  like its Germanic cognates (Old English) and (Old High German)  from the Proto-Germanic theonym , meaning &#x27;God&#x27;. The name of a Gothic deity named (later ) may also be reconstructed based on the associated rune &quot;tiwaz&quot;. In Old Norse poetry, the plural is used for &#x27;the gods&#x27;, and the singular , meaning &#x27;(a) god&#x27;, occurs in kennings for Odin and Thor. Modern English writers frequently anglicize the god&#x27;s name by dropping the proper noun&#x27;s diacritic, rendering Old Norse&#x27;s &quot;&quot; as &quot;Tyr&quot;.

The Proto-Germanic masculine noun ( ) means &#x27;a god, a deity&#x27;, and probably also served as a title or epithet that came to be associated with a specific deity whose original name is now lost. It stems from Proto-Indo-European , meaning &#x27;celestial, heavenly one&#x27;, hence a &#x27;god&#x27; (cf. Sanskrit: &#x27;heavenly, divine&#x27;, Old Lithuanian: , &#x27;a god, deity&#x27;), itself a derivation from , meaning &#x27;diurnal sky&#x27;, hence &#x27;daylight-sky god&#x27; (cf. , , ). The Germanic noun is further attested in the Finnic loanword , found as a suffix in the deities and . The Romano-Germanic deity may also be related, although its origin remains unclear.

Due to linguistic evidence and early native comparisons between and the Roman god Mars, especially under the name , a number of scholars have interpreted as a Proto-Germanic sky-, war- and thing-god. Other scholars reject however his identification as a &#x27;sky-god&#x27;, since was likely not his original name but rather an epithet that came to be associated with him and eventually replaced it.

=== Origin of &quot;Tuesday&quot; ===
The modern English weekday name &quot;Tuesday&quot; comes from the Old English , meaning &#x27;day of Tw&#x27;. It is cognate with Old Norse , Old Frisian , and Old High German (Middle High German ). All of them stem from Late Proto-Germanic (&#x27;Day of &#x27;), a calque of Latin (&#x27;Day of Mars&#x27;; cf. modern Italian , French , Spanish ). This attests to an early Germanic identification of with Mars.

Germanic weekday names for &quot;Tuesday&quot; that do not transparently extend from the above lineage may also ultimately refer to the deity, including Middle Dutch and , Middle Low German , and Old High German (modern ). These forms may refer to the god&#x27;s association with the thing (), a traditional legal assembly common among the ancient Germanic peoples with which the god is associated. This may be either explained by the existence of an epithet, ( &#x27;thing-god&#x27;), frequently attached to Mars (), or simply by the god&#x27;s strong association with the assembly.

=== T-rune ===

The god is the namesake of the rune representing (the Tiwaz rune) in the runic alphabets, the indigenous alphabets of the ancient Germanic peoples prior to their adaptation of the Latin alphabet. On runic inscriptions, often appears as a magical symbol. The name first occurs in the historical record as &quot;tyz&quot;, a character in the Gothic alphabet (4th century), and it was also known as or in Old English, and in Old Norse. The name of may also occur in runes as on the 8th century Ribe skull fragment.

=== Toponyms ===
A variety of place names in Scandinavia refer to the god. For example, , in Viby, Jutland, Denmark (Old Norse , &quot;s meadow&#x27;) was once a stretch of meadow near a stream called (&#x27;stream of the dead&#x27; or &#x27;dead stream&#x27;). Viby also contained another theonym, (&quot;Odin&#x27;s Holt&quot;), and religious practices associated with Odin and may have occurred in these places. A spring dedicated to Holy Niels that was likely a Christianization of prior indigenous pagan practice also exists in Viby. may mean &#x27;the settlement by the sacred site&#x27;. Archaeologists have found traces of sacrifices going back 2,500 years in Viby.

The forest , between Nrke and Vstergtland, in Sweden, may mean &#x27;Tyr&#x27;s forest&#x27;, but its etymology is uncertain, and debated. may refer to meaning &#x27;god&#x27; generally, and so the name may derive from Proto-Indo-European , meaning &#x27;the forest of the gods&#x27;. According to Rudolf Simek, the existence of a cult of the deity is also evidenced by place names such as (&quot;s grove&#x27;), which is frequent in Denmark, or (&quot;s peninsula&#x27;) and (&#x27;Tysnes island&#x27;) in Norway, where the cult appears to have been imported from Denmark.

==Attestations==
===Roman era===
While &#x27;s etymological heritage reaches back to the Proto-Indo-European period, very few direct references to the god survive prior to the Old Norse period. Like many other non-Roman deities, receives mention in Latin texts by way of the process of , in which Latin texts refer to the god by way of a perceived counterpart in Roman mythology. Latin inscriptions and texts frequently refer to as Mars.

The first example of this occurs on record in Roman senator Tacitus&#x27;s ethnography :
:Among the gods Mercury is the one they principally worship. They regard it as a religious duty to sacrifice to him, on fixed days, human as well as other sacrificial victims. Hercules and Mars they appease by animal offerings of the permitted kind. Part of the Suebi sacrifice to Isis as well.
These deities are generally understood by scholars to refer to (known widely today as &quot;Odin&quot;), (known today widely as &quot;Thor&quot;), and , respectively. The identity of the &quot;Isis&quot; of the Suebi remains a topic of debate among scholars. Later in , Tacitus also mentions a deity referred to as venerated by the Semnones in a grove of fetters, a sacred grove. Some scholars propose that this deity is in fact .

A votive altar has been discovered during excavations at Housesteads Roman Fort at Hadrian&#x27;s Wall in England that had been erected at the behest of Frisian legionaries. The altar dates from the 3rd century CE and bears the Latin inscription . In this instance, the epithet is a Latin rendering of Proto-Germanic theonym . This deity is generally interpreted by scholars to refer to . The goddesses referred to as and are otherwise unknown, but their names may refer to Old Frisian legal terms.

In the sixth century, the Roman historian Jordanes writes in his that the Goths, an east Germanic people, saw the same &quot;Mars&quot; as an ancestral figure:

:Moreover so highly were the Getae praised that Mars, whom the fables of poets call the god of war, was reputed to have been born among them. Hence Vergil says:
::&quot;Father Gradivus rules the Getic fields.&quot;
:Now Mars has always been worshipped by the Goths with cruel rites, and captives were slain as his victims. They thought that he who was lord of war ought to be appeased by the shedding of human blood. To him they devoted the first share of the spoil, and in his honor arms stripped from the foe were suspended from trees. And they had more than all races a deep spirit of religion, since the worship of this god seemed to be really bestowed upon their ancestor.

=== Old English ===
The Latin deity Mars was occasionally glossed by Old English writers by the name or . The genitive also appears in the name for Tuesday, .

===Viking Age and post-Viking Age===
By the Viking Age, had developed among the North Germanic peoples into . The god receives numerous mentions in North Germanic sources during this period, but far less than other deities, such as Odin, Freyja, or Thor. The majority of these mentions occur in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;, compiled in the 13th century from traditional source material reaching into the pagan period, and the &quot;Prose Edda&quot;, composed by Icelandic skald and politician Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century.

====&quot;Poetic Edda&quot;====

Although receives several mentions in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;, of the three poems in which he is mentioned, , and only the incomplete poem, , features him in a prominent role. In , says that his father, , owns a tremendous cauldron with which he and his fellow gods can brew fathoms of ale. Thor and set out to retrieve it. meets his nine-hundred headed grandmother (&quot;who hates him&quot;), and a girl clad in gold helps the two hide from .

Upon his return from hunting, &#x27;s wife (unnamed) tells that his son has come to visit, that has brought with him Thor, and that the two are behind a pillar. With just one glance, immediately smashes the pillar and eight nearby kettles. The kettle containing and Thor, particularly strong in its construction, does not break, and out of it the two gods stride.

 sees Thor and his heart jumps. The orders three headless oxen boiled for his guests, and Thor eats two of the beasts. tells the two that the following night, &quot;we&#x27;ll have to hunt for us three to eat&quot;. Thor asks for bait so that he might row out into the bay. says that the god can take one of his oxen for bait; Thor immediately chooses a black ox, and the poem continues without further mention of .

In , the valkyrie imparts in the hero Sigurd knowledge of various runic charms. One charm invokes the god :
:&#x27;You must know victory-runes
:if you want to know victory. Carve them
:into your sword&#x27;s hilt, on the blade guards
:and the blades, invoking Tyr&#x27;s name twice.&#x27;

In , the gods hold a feast. Loki bursts in and engages in flyting, a contest of insults, with the gods. The prose introduction to the poem mentions that &quot;Tyr was in attendance, even though he had only one hand because the wolf Fenrir had recently ripped off the other while the wolf was being bound.&quot; Loki exchanges insults with each of the gods. After Loki insults the god , comes to &#x27;s defense. Loki says that &quot;you can&#x27;t be the right hand of justice among the people&quot; because his right hand was torn off by Fenrir, elsewhere described as Loki&#x27;s child. says that although he misses his hand, Loki misses , who is now bound and will remain so until the events of Ragnark.

====&quot;Prose Edda&quot;====

The &quot;Prose Edda&quot; sections and reference several times. The god is introduced in part 25 of the section of the book:
:High said: &#x27;There is also an As called Tyr. He is the bravest and most valiant, and he has great power over victory in battles. It is good for men of action to pray to him. There is a saying that a man is &quot;ty&quot;-valiant who surpasses other men and does not hesitate. He was so clever that a man who is clever is said to be &quot;ty&quot;-wise. It is one proof of his bravery that the were luring Fenriswolf so as to get the fetter on him, he did not trust them that they would let him go until they placed Tyr&#x27;s hand in the wolf&#x27;s mouth as a pledge. And when the refused to let him go then he bit off the hand at the place that is now called the wolf-joint [wrist], and he is one-handed and he is not considered a promoter of settlements between people.

This tale receives further treatment in section 34 of (&quot;The brought up the wolf at home, and it was only Tyr who had the courage to approach the wolf and give it food.&quot;). Later still in , High discusses &#x27;s foreseen death during the events of Ragnark:
:Then will also have got free the dog Garm, which is bound in front of . This is the most evil creature. He will have a battle with Tyr and they will each be the death of each other.

 opens with a narrative wherein twelve gods sit upon thrones at a banquet, including . Later in , the skald god tells (described earlier in as a man from the island of ) how kennings function. By way of kennings, explains, one might refer to the god Odin as &quot;Victory-Tyr&quot;, &quot;Hanged-Tyr&quot;, or &quot;Cargo-Tyr&quot;; and Thor may be referred to as &quot;Chariot-Tyr&quot;.

Section nine of provides skalds with a variety of ways in which to refer to , including &quot;the one handed As&quot;, &quot;feeder of the wolf&quot;, &quot;battle-god&quot;, and &quot;son of Odin&quot;. The narrative found in occurs in prose later in . Like in , appears here among around a dozen other deities. Similarly, appears among a list of in section 75.

In addition to the above mentions, &#x27;s name occurs as a kenning element throughout in reference to the god Odin.

==Archaeological record==

Scholars propose that a variety of objects from the archaeological record depict . For example, a Migration Period gold bracteate from Trollhttan, Sweden, features a person receiving a bite on the hand from a beast, which may depict and .
A Viking Age hogback in Sockburn, County Durham, England may depict and . In a similar fashion, a silver button was found in Hornsherred, Denmark, during 2019 that is interpreted to portray Tr fighting against the wolf .

==Scholarly reception==
Due in part to the etymology of the god&#x27;s name, scholars propose that once held a far more significant role in Germanic mythology than the scant references to the deity indicate in the Old Norse record. Some scholars propose that the prominent god Odin may have risen to prominence over in prehistory, at times absorbing elements of the deity&#x27;s domains. For example, according to scholar Hermann Reichert, due to the etymology of the god&#x27;s name and its transparent meaning of &quot;&quot;the&quot; god&quot;, &quot;Odin ... must have dislodged from his pre-eminent position. The fact that Tacitus names two divinities to whom the enemy&#x27;s army was consecrated ... may signify their co-existence around 1 A.D.&quot;

The passage above has resulted in some discourse among runologists. For example, regarding the passage, runologists Mindy MacLeod and Bernard Mees say:
:Similar descriptions of runes written on swords for magical purposes are known from other Old Norse and Old English literary sources, though not in what seem to be religious contexts. In fact very few swords from the middle ages are engraved with runes, and those that are tend to carry rather prosaic maker&#x27;s formulas rather than identifiable &#x27;runes of victory&#x27;. The call to invoke Tyr here is often thought to have something to do with T-runes, rather than Tyr himself, given that this rune shares his name. In view of Tyr&#x27;s martial role in Norse myth, however, this line seems simply to be a straightforward religious invocation with &#x27;twice&#x27; alliterating with &#x27;Tyr&#x27;.

==In popular culture==
The 15th studio album by the English heavy metal band Black Sabbath, &quot;Tyr&quot;, released in 1990, is named after .

 is featured in several video games.

* (spelled Tyr in the English version of the game) is one of nine minor gods Norse players can worship in Ensemble Studios&#x27; 2002 game &quot;Age of Mythology&quot; 
* (spelled Tyr in game) is also one of the playable gods in the third-person multiplayer online battle arena game &quot;Smite&quot;.
* Tr is mentioned several times in Santa Monica Studio&#x27;s 2018 game &quot;God of War&quot; and appears in its sequel &quot;God of War Ragnark&quot;, which was released in 2022. 
* Tr (spelled Tyr in game) is one of the available healer mechs in Pixonic&#x27;s &quot;War Robots&quot; (released as &quot;Walking War Robots&quot; in 2014).

== See also ==

* Mitra-Varuna (Binding of evil)
* Nuada Airgetlm

==Notes==
==References==

==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* MyNDIR (My Norse Digital Image Repository) Illustrations of Tr from manuscripts and early print books.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172713" start="0" end="0" title="Tr" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="4" end="13" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551960" start="31" end="49" title="Germanic mythology" label="Germanic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="73" end="88" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="159" end="175" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="368" end="376" title="Ragnark" label="Ragnark"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="412" end="428" title="Mars (mythology)" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="573" end="578" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="606" end="611" title="[thing (assembly)" label="Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="704" end="709" title="thing (assembly)" label="thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q127" start="802" end="809" title="Tuesday" label="Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="991" end="995" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q572378" start="1127" end="1131" title="Zisa (goddess)" label="Zisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551960" start="1379" end="1397" title="Germanic mythology" label="Germanic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1414" end="1425" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="1443" end="1458" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="1493" end="1507" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12160552" start="1508" end="1515" title="theonym" label="theonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1592" end="1601" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398014" start="1638" end="1648" title="Tiwaz rune" label="Tiwaz rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="1669" end="1683" title="runic alphabet" label="runic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1705" end="1710" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12160552" start="1908" end="1915" title="theonym" label="theonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671294" start="1938" end="1949" title="Proto-Norse" label="Proto-Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="2008" end="2015" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2018" end="2029" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="2064" end="2078" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398014" start="2217" end="2222" title="Tiwaz (rune)" label="tiwaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084639" start="2233" end="2249" title="Old Norse poetry" label="Old Norse poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q952912" start="2354" end="2362" title="kennings" label="kennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="2367" end="2371" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="2376" end="2380" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="2481" end="2490" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2502" end="2511" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="2768" end="2787" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048501" start="2860" end="2863" title="cf." label="cf."/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="2864" end="2872" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="2904" end="2918" title="Old Lithuanian" label="Old Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33328" start="3101" end="3107" title="Finnic languages" label="Finnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="3130" end="3136" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q707955" start="3162" end="3177" title="Romano-Germanic Museum" label="Romano-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="3325" end="3329" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="3432" end="3437" title="Thing (assembly)" label="thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30722989" start="3701" end="3708" title="weekday" label="weekday"/>
<link wikidata="Q127" start="3720" end="3727" title="Tuesday" label="Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q35133" start="3826" end="3837" title="Old Frisian" label="Old Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q837985" start="3861" end="3879" title="Middle High German" label="Middle High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="3950" end="3956" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="3980" end="3984" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="4003" end="4010" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4013" end="4019" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="4022" end="4029" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q178806" start="4250" end="4262" title="Middle Dutch" label="Middle Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q505674" start="4269" end="4286" title="Middle Low German" label="Middle Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="4381" end="4386" title="Thing (assembly)" label="thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="4548" end="4555" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398014" start="4752" end="4762" title="Tiwaz rune" label="Tiwaz rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="4771" end="4786" title="runic alphabets" label="runic alphabets"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="4878" end="4892" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q467784" start="5038" end="5053" title="Gothic alphabet" label="Gothic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q85797076" start="5189" end="5208" title="Ribe skull fragment" label="Ribe skull fragment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860611" start="5304" end="5308" title="Viby J" label="Viby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="5529" end="5533" title="Woodland" label="Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q124714" start="5628" end="5634" title="Spring (hydrosphere)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5648" end="5658" title="Holy Niels" label="Holy Niels"/>
<link wikidata="Q216687" start="5907" end="5912" title="Nrke" label="Nrke"/>
<link wikidata="Q213551" start="5917" end="5930" title="Vstergtland" label="Vstergtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q113803" start="6187" end="6199" title="Rudolf Simek" label="Rudolf Simek"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="6827" end="6842" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="6896" end="6900" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="6963" end="6970" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="7254" end="7259" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540291" start="7474" end="7503" title="&amp;quot;Isis&amp;quot; of the Suebi" label="&amp;quot;Isis&amp;quot; of the Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q855704" start="7619" end="7627" title="Semnones" label="Semnones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269421" start="7633" end="7649" title="grove of fetters" label="grove of fetters"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590735" start="7653" end="7665" title="Sacred trees and groves in Germanic paganism and mythology" label="sacred grove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7721" end="7733" title="votive altar" label="votive altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812832" start="7776" end="7798" title="Housesteads Roman Fort" label="Housesteads Roman Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="7802" end="7821" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="8261" end="8269" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="8293" end="8298" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="9095" end="9099" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="9169" end="9177" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908400" start="9299" end="9321" title="North Germanic peoples" label="North Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="9451" end="9455" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647325" start="9457" end="9463" title="Freyja" label="Freyja"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="9468" end="9472" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="9524" end="9535" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="9691" end="9696" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="9712" end="9728" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="11056" end="11062" title="Sigurd" label="Sigurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="11084" end="11096" title="runic alphabet" label="runic charms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463686" start="11366" end="11373" title="flyting" label="flyting"/>
<link wikidata="Q182560" start="11540" end="11546" title="Fenrir" label="Fenrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="12006" end="12014" title="Ragnark" label="Ragnark"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="13211" end="13219" title="Ragnark" label="Ragnark"/>
<link wikidata="Q952912" start="13579" end="13586" title="kenning" label="kenning"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="14402" end="14418" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q848960" start="14424" end="14433" title="bracteate" label="bracteate"/>
<link wikidata="Q54339" start="14439" end="14450" title="Trollhttan" label="Trollhttan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570646" start="14557" end="14564" title="Hogback (sculpture)" label="hogback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847391" start="14568" end="14576" title="Sockburn" label="Sockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="14578" end="14591" title="County Durham" label="County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374447" start="15581" end="15592" title="runology" label="runologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="16450" end="16461" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="16467" end="16480" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q838304" start="16488" end="16491" title="Tyr (album)" label="Tyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q308913" start="16679" end="16695" title="Ensemble Studios" label="Ensemble Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q271062" start="16718" end="16734" title="Age of Mythology" label="Age of Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9086092" start="16806" end="16818" title="Third-person view" label="third-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189206" start="16819" end="16850" title="multiplayer online battle arena" label="multiplayer online battle arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357719" start="16862" end="16867" title="Smite (video game)" label="Smite"/>
<link wikidata="Q656710" start="16911" end="16930" title="Santa Monica Studio" label="Santa Monica Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345138" start="16954" end="16964" title="God of War (2018 video game)" label="God of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q99397916" start="17003" end="17022" title="God of War Ragnark" label="God of War Ragnark"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344663" start="17127" end="17134" title="Pixonic" label="Pixonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640476" start="17148" end="17158" title="War Robots" label="War Robots"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17238" end="17268" title="Mitra-Varuna (Indo-European)#Binding of evil" label="Mitra-Varuna (Binding of evil)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075322" start="17271" end="17286" title="Nuada Airgetlm" label="Nuada Airgetlm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30570" wikidata="Q1425" url="?curid=30570" title="Trajan">
<text>Trajan ( ; born Marcus Ulpius Traianus, 18 September53) was a Roman emperor from AD98 to 117, remembered as the second of the Five Good Emperors of the NervaAntonine dynasty. He was a philanthropic ruler and a successful soldier-emperor who presided over one of the greatest military expansions in Roman history, during which, by the time of his death, the Roman Empire reached its maximum territorial extent. He was given the title of (&#x27;the best&#x27;) by the Roman Senate.

Trajan was born in the of Italica in the present-day Andalusian province of Seville in southern Spain, an Italic settlement in Hispania Baetica; his came from the town of Tuder in the Umbria region of central Italy. His namesake father, Marcus Ulpius Traianus, was a general and distinguished senator. Trajan rose to prominence during the reign of Domitian; in AD 89, serving as a in , he supported the emperor against a revolt on the Rhine led by Antonius Saturninus. He then served as governor of Germania and Pannonia. In September 96, Domitian was succeeded by the elderly and childless Nerva, who proved to be unpopular with the army. After a revolt by members of the Praetorian Guard, Nerva decided to adopt as his heir and successor the more popular Trajan, who had distinguished himself in military campaigns against Germanic tribes.

As emperor of Rome, Trajan oversaw the construction of building projects such as the forum named after him, the introduction of social welfare policies such as the , and new military conquests. He annexed Nabataea and Dacia, and his war against the Parthian Empire ended with the incorporation of Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria as Roman provinces. In August AD117, while sailing back to Rome, Trajan fell ill and died of a stroke in the city of Selinus. He was deified by the senate and his successor Hadrian (Trajan&#x27;s cousin). According to historical tradition, Trajan&#x27;s ashes were entombed in a small room beneath Trajan&#x27;s Column.

== Sources ==
As an emperor, Trajan&#x27;s reputation has enduredhe is one of the few rulers whose reputation has survived 19 centuries. Every new emperor after him was honoured by the Senate with the wish &quot;felicior Augusto, melior Traiano&quot; (that he be &quot;luckier than Augustus and better than Trajan&quot;). Among medieval Christian theologians, Trajan was considered a virtuous pagan. In the Renaissance, Machiavelli, speaking on the advantages of adoptive succession over heredity, mentioned the five successive good emperors &quot;from Nerva to Marcus&quot;a trope out of which the 18th-century historian Edward Gibbon popularized the notion of the Five Good Emperors, of whom Trajan was the second.

An account of the Dacian Wars, the &quot;Commentarii de bellis Dacicis&quot;, written by Trajan himself or a ghostwriter and modelled after Caesar&#x27;s &quot;Commentarii de Bello Gallico&quot;, is lost with the exception of one sentence. Only fragments remain of the &quot;Getica&quot;, a book by Trajan&#x27;s personal physician Titus Statilius Criton. The &quot;Parthica&quot;, a 17-volume account of the Parthian Wars written by Arrian, has met a similar fate. Book68 in Greek author Cassius Dio&#x27;s &quot;Roman History&quot;, which survives mostly as Byzantine abridgements and epitomes, is the main source for the political history of Trajan&#x27;s rule. Besides this, Pliny the Younger&#x27;s &quot;Panegyricus&quot; and Dio Chrysostom&#x27;s orations are the best surviving contemporary sources. Both are adulatory perorations, typical of the High Imperial period, that describe an idealized monarch and an equally idealized view of Trajan&#x27;s rule, and concern themselves more with ideology than with fact.

The 10th volume of Pliny&#x27;s letters contains his correspondence with Trajan, which deals with various aspects of imperial Roman government. It is generally agreed that Pliny, being part of the emperor&#x27;s inner circle, provides a unique and valuable source of information through his letters with Trajan, the only surviving correspondence between a governor and his emperor. However, it has been argued that Pliny&#x27;s correspondence with Trajan is neither intimate nor candid, but rather an exchange of official mail in which Pliny&#x27;s stance borders on the servile. Some authors have even proposed that much of the text was written and/or edited by Trajan&#x27;s Imperial secretary, his &quot;ab epistulis&quot;. Given the scarcity of literary sources, discussion of Trajan and his rule in modern historiography cannot avoid speculation. Non-literary sources such as archaeology, epigraphy, and numismatics are also useful for reconstructing his reign.
== Early life ==

Marcus Ulpius Traianus was born on 18 September AD53 in the Roman province of Hispania Baetica (in what is now Andalusia in modern Spain), in the &quot;municipium&quot; of Italica (now in the municipal area of Santiponce, in the outskirts of Seville), a Roman colony established in 206BC by Scipio Africanus. At the time of Trajan&#x27;s birth it was a small town, without baths, theatre and amphitheatre, and with a very narrow territory under its direct administration. Trajan&#x27;s year of birth is not reliably attested and may instead have been AD 56.

The epitome of Cassius Dio&#x27;s Roman history describes Trajan as &quot;an Iberian and neither an Italian nor even an Italiote&quot;, but this claim is contradicted by other ancient sources and rejected by modern scholars, who have reconstructed Trajan&#x27;s Italic lineage. Appian states that Trajan&#x27;s hometown of Italica was settled by and named after Italic veterans who fought in Spain under Scipio, and new settlers arrived there from Italy in the following centuries. Among the Italic settlers were the Ulpii and the Traii, who were either part of the original colonists or arrived as late as the end of the 1st century BC. Their original home, according to the description of Trajan as &quot;Ulpius Traianus ex urbe Tudertina&quot; in the Epitome de Caesaribus, was the town of Tuder (Todi) in the Umbria region of central Italy. This is confirmed by archeology, with epigraphic evidence placing both the Ulpii and the Traii in Umbria generally and Tuder specifically, and by linguistic studies of the family names &quot;Ulpius&quot; and &quot;Traius&quot; which show that both are of Osco-Umbrian origin. 

It is unknown whether Trajan&#x27;s ancestors were Roman citizens or not at their arrival in Spain. They would have certainly possessed Roman citizenship in case they arrived after the Social War (9187 BC), when Tuder became a municipium of Roman citizens. In Spain they may well have intermarried with native Iberians, in which case they would have lost their citizenship. Had they lacked or lost the status of Roman citizens, they would have achieved it or recovered it when Italica became a municipium with Latin rights in the mid-1st century BC.

Trajan&#x27;s paternal grandfather Ulpius married a Traia. Their son, Trajan&#x27;s namesake father Marcus Ulpius Traianus, was born at Italica during the reign of Tiberius and became a prominent senator and general, commanding the Legio X Fretensis under Vespasian in the First Jewish-Roman War. Trajan&#x27;s mother was Marcia, a Roman noblewoman of the gens Marcia and a sister-in-law of the second Flavian Emperor Titus. Little is known of her. Her father is believed to be Quintus Marcius Barea Sura. Her mother was Antonia Furnilla, daughter of Aulus Antonius Rufus and Furnia. Trajan owned some lands called &quot;Figlinae Marcianae&quot; in Ameria, another Umbrian town, located near both Tuder and Reate (the home of the Flavian dynasty) and believed to be the home of Marcia&#x27;s family.

The line of the Ulpii continued long after Trajan&#x27;s death. His elder sister was Ulpia Marciana, and his niece was Salonia Matidia. Very little is known about Trajan&#x27;s early formative years, but it is thought likely that he spent his first months or years in Italica before moving to Rome and then, perhaps at around eight or nine years of age, he almost certainly would have returned temporarily to Italica with his father during Trajanus&#x27;s governorship of Baetica (ca. 6465). The lack of a strong local power base, caused by the size of the town from which they came, made it necessary for the Ulpii (and for the Aelii, the other important senatorial family of Italica with whom they were allied) to weave local alliances, in the Baetica (with the Annii, the Ucubi and perhaps the Dasumii from Corduba), the Tarraconense and the Narbonense, here above all through Pompeia Plotina, Trajan&#x27;s wife. Many of these alliances were made not in Spain, but in Rome. The family home in Rome, the Domus Traiana, was on the Aventine Hill; excavations under the Piazza del Tempio di Diana found remains thought to be of the family&#x27;s large suburban villa, with evidence of highly decorated rooms.

=== Military career ===

As a young man Trajan rose through the ranks of the Roman army, serving in some of the most contested parts of the empire&#x27;s frontier. In 7677, his father was Governor of Syria (&quot;Legatus pro praetore Syriae&quot;), where Trajan himself remained as &quot;Tribunus legionis&quot;. From there, after his father&#x27;s replacement, he seems to have been transferred to an unspecified Rhine province, and Pliny implies that he engaged in active combat duty during both commissions.

In about 86, Trajan&#x27;s cousin Aelius Afer died, leaving his young children Hadrian and Paulina orphans. Trajan and his colleague Publius Acilius Attianus became co-guardians of the two children. Trajan, in his late thirties, was created ordinary consul for the year 91. This early appointment may reflect the prominence of his father&#x27;s career, as his father had been instrumental to the ascent of the ruling Flavian dynasty, held consular rank himself and had just been made a patrician. Around this time Trajan brought the architect and engineer Apollodorus of Damascus with him to Rome, and married Pompeia Plotina, a noblewoman from the Roman settlement at Nmes; the marriage ultimately remained childless.

The historian Cassius Dio later noted that Trajan was a lover of young men, in contrast to the usual bisexual activity that was common among upper-class Roman men of the period. The emperor Julian also made a sardonic reference to his predecessor&#x27;s sexual preference, stating that Zeus himself would have had to be on guard had his Ganymede come within Trajan&#x27;s vicinity. This distaste reflected a change of mores that began with the Severan dynasty, Trajan&#x27;s putative lovers included the future emperor, Hadrian, pages of the imperial household, the actor Pylades, a dancer called Apolaustus, Lucius Licinius Sura, and Trajan&#x27;s predecessor Nerva. Cassius Dio also relates that Trajan made an ally out of Abgar VII on account of the latter&#x27;s beautiful son, Arbandes, who would then dance for Trajan at a banquet.

The details of Trajan&#x27;s early military career are obscure, save for the fact that in 89, as legate of Legio VII Gemina in Hispania Tarraconensis, he supported Domitian against an attempted coup by Lucius Antonius Saturninus, the governor of Germania Superior. Trajan probably remained in the region after the revolt was quashed, to engage with the Chatti who had sided with Saturninus, before returning the VII Gemina legion to Legio in Hispania Tarraconensis. In 91 he held a consulate with Acilius Glabrio, a rarity in that neither consul was a member of the ruling dynasty. He held an unspecified consular commission as governor of either Pannonia or Germania Superior, or possibly both. Plinywho seems to deliberately avoid offering details that would stress personal attachment between Trajan and the &quot;tyrant&quot; Domitianattributes to him, at the time, various (and unspecified) feats of arms.

=== Rise to power ===

Domitian&#x27;s successor, Nerva, was unpopular with the army, and had been forced by his Praetorian Prefect Casperius Aelianus to execute Domitian&#x27;s killers. Nerva needed the army&#x27;s support to avoid being ousted. He accomplished this in the summer of 97 by naming Trajan as his adoptive son and successor, claiming that this was entirely due to Trajan&#x27;s outstanding military merits. There are hints, however, in contemporary literary sources that Trajan&#x27;s adoption was imposed on Nerva. Pliny implied as much when he wrote that, although an emperor could not be coerced into doing something, if this was the way in which Trajan was raised to power, then it was worth it. Alice Knig argues that the notion of a natural continuity between Nerva&#x27;s and Trajan&#x27;s reigns was an &quot;ex post facto&quot; fiction developed by authors writing under Trajan, including Tacitus and Pliny.

According to the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, the future Emperor Hadrian brought word to Trajan of his adoption. Trajan retained Hadrian on the Rhine frontier as a military tribune, and Hadrian thus became privy to the circle of friends and relations with whom Trajan surrounded himself. Among them was Lucius Licinius Sura, a Roman senator born in Spain and the governor of Germania Inferior, who was Trajan&#x27;s personal friend and became an official adviser of the Emperor. Sura was highly influential, and was appointed consul for a third term in 107. Some senators may have resented Sura&#x27;s activities as a kingmaker and minence grise, among them the historian Tacitus, who acknowledged Sura&#x27;s military and oratorical talents, but compared his rapacity and devious ways to those of Vespasian&#x27;s minence grise Licinius Mucianus. Sura is said to have informed Hadrian in 108 that he had been chosen as Trajan&#x27;s imperial heir.

As governor of Upper Germany (Germania Superior) during Nerva&#x27;s reign, Trajan received the impressive title of &quot;Germanicus&quot; for his skilful management and rule of the volatile Imperial province. When Nerva died on 28 January 98, Trajan succeeded to the role of emperor without any outward adverse incident. The fact that he chose not to hasten towards Rome, but made a lengthy tour of inspection on the Rhine and Danube frontiers, may suggest that he was unsure of his position, both in Rome and with the armies at the front. Alternatively, Trajan&#x27;s keen military mind understood the importance of strengthening the empire&#x27;s frontiers. His vision for future conquests required the diligent improvement of surveillance networks, defences and transport along the Danube. Prior to his frontier tours, Trajan ordered his Prefect Aelianus to attend him in Germany, where he was apparently executed forthwith (&quot;put out of the way&quot;), and his now-vacant post taken by Attius Suburanus. Trajan&#x27;s accession, therefore, could qualify more as a successful coup than an orderly succession.

== Roman emperor ==

On his entry to Rome, Trajan granted the plebs a direct gift of money. The traditional donative to the troops, however, was reduced by half. There remained the issue of the strained relations between the emperor and the Senate, especially after the supposed bloodiness that had marked Domitian&#x27;s reign and his dealings with the Curia. By feigning reluctance to hold power, Trajan was able to start building a consensus around him in the Senate. His belated ceremonial entry into Rome in 99 was notably understated, something on which Pliny the Younger elaborated. By not openly supporting Domitian&#x27;s preference for equestrian officers, Trajan appeared to conform to the idea (developed by Pliny) that an emperor derived his legitimacy from his adherence to traditional hierarchies and senatorial morals. Therefore, he could point to the allegedly republican character of his rule.

In a speech at the inauguration of his third consulship, on 1January 100, Trajan exhorted the senate to share the care-taking of the empire with himan event later celebrated on a coin. In reality, Trajan did not share power in any meaningful way with the senate, something that Pliny admits candidly: &quot;[E]verything depends on the whims of a single man who, on behalf of the common welfare, has taken upon himself all functions and all tasks&quot;. One of the most significant trends of his reign was his encroachment on the senate&#x27;s sphere of authority, such as his decision to make the senatorial provinces of Achaea and Bithynia into imperial ones in order to deal with the inordinate spending on public works by local magnates and the general mismanagement of provincial affairs by various proconsuls appointed by the Senate.

=== &quot;Optimus princeps&quot; ===

In the formula developed by Pliny, however, Trajan was a &quot;good&quot; emperor in that, by himself, he approved or blamed the same things that the Senate would have approved or blamed. If in reality Trajan was an autocrat, his deferential behavior towards his peers qualified him to be viewed as a virtuous monarch. The idea is that Trajan wielded autocratic power through &quot;moderatio&quot; instead of &quot;contumacia&quot;moderation instead of insolence. In short, according to the ethics for autocracy developed by most political writers of the Imperial Roman Age, Trajan was a good ruler in that he ruled less by fear, and more by acting as a role model, for, according to Pliny, &quot;men learn better from examples&quot;. Eventually, Trajan&#x27;s popularity among his peers was such that the Roman Senate bestowed upon him the honorific of &quot;optimus&quot;, meaning &quot;the best&quot;, which appears on coins from 105 on. This title had mostly to do with Trajan&#x27;s role as benefactor, such as in the case of his returning confiscated property.

Pliny states that Trajan&#x27;s ideal role was a conservative one, argued as well by the orations of Dio Chrysostomin particular his four &quot;Orations on Kingship&quot;, composed early during Trajan&#x27;s reign. Dio, as a Greek notable and intellectual with friends in high places, and possibly an official friend to the emperor (&quot;amicus caesaris&quot;), saw Trajan as a defender of the &quot;status quo&quot;. In his third kingship oration, Dio describes an ideal king ruling by means of &quot;friendship&quot;that is, through patronage and a network of local notables who act as mediators between the ruled and the ruler. Dio&#x27;s notion of being &quot;friend&quot; to Trajan (or any other Roman emperor), however, was that of an &quot;informal&quot; arrangement, that involved no formal entry of such &quot;friends&quot; into the Roman administration. Trajan ingratiated himself with the Greek intellectual elite by recalling to Rome many (including Dio) who had been exiled by Domitian, and by returning (in a process begun by Nerva) a great deal of private property that Domitian had confiscated. He also had good dealings with Plutarch, who, as a notable of Delphi, seems to have been favoured by the decisions taken on behalf of his home-place by one of Trajan&#x27;s legates, who had arbitrated a boundary dispute between Delphi and its neighbouring cities.

However, it was clear to Trajan that Greek intellectuals and notables were to be regarded as tools for local administration, and not be allowed to fancy themselves in a privileged position. As Pliny said in one of his letters at the time, it was official policy that Greek civic elites be treated according to their status as notionally free but not put on an equal footing with their Roman rulers. When the city of Apamea complained of an audit of its accounts by Pliny, alleging its &quot;free&quot; status as a Roman colony, Trajan replied by writing that it was by his own wish that such inspections had been ordered. Concern about independent local political activity is seen in Trajan&#x27;s decision to forbid Nicomedia from having a corps of firemen (&quot;If people assemble for a common purpose... they soon turn it into a political society&quot;, Trajan wrote to Pliny) as well as in his and Pliny&#x27;s fears about excessive civic generosities by local notables such as distribution of money or gifts.

Pliny&#x27;s letters suggest that Trajan and his aides were as much bored as they were alarmed by the claims of Dio and other Greek notables to political influence based on what they saw as their &quot;special connection&quot; to their Roman overlords. Pliny tells of Dio of Prusa placing a statue of Trajan in a building complex where Dio&#x27;s wife and son were buried  therefore incurring a charge of treason for placing the emperor&#x27;s statue near a grave. Trajan, however, dropped the charge. Nevertheless, while the office of &quot;corrector&quot; was intended as a tool to curb any hint of independent political activity among local notables in the Greek cities, the &quot;correctores&quot; themselves were all men of the highest social standing entrusted with an exceptional commission. The post seems to have been conceived partly as a reward for senators who had chosen to make a career solely on the emperor&#x27;s behalf. Therefore, in reality the post was conceived as a means for &quot;taming&quot; both Greek notables and Roman senators. It must be added that, although Trajan was wary of the civic oligarchies in the Greek cities, he also admitted into the senate a number of prominent Eastern notables already slated for promotion during Domitian&#x27;s reign by reserving for them one of the twenty posts open each year for minor magistrates (the &quot;vigintiviri&quot;). Such must be the case of the Galatian notable and &quot;leading member of the Greek community&quot; (according to one inscription) Gaius Julius Severus, who was a descendant of several Hellenistic dynasts and client kings.

Severus was the grandfather of the prominent general Gaius Julius Quadratus Bassus, consul in 105. Other prominent Eastern senators included Gaius Julius Alexander Berenicianus, a descendant of Herod the Great, suffect consul in 116. Trajan created at least fourteen new senators from the Greek-speaking half of the empire, an unprecedented recruitment number that opens to question the issue of the &quot;traditionally Roman&quot; character of his reign, as well as the &quot;Hellenism&quot; of his successor Hadrian. But then Trajan&#x27;s new Eastern senators were mostly very powerful and very wealthy men with more than local influence and much interconnected by marriage, so that many of them were not altogether &quot;new&quot; to the Senate. On the local level, among the lower section of the Eastern propertied, the alienation of most Greek notables and intellectuals towards Roman rule, and the fact that the Romans were seen by most such Greek notables as aliens, persisted well after Trajan&#x27;s reign. One of Trajan&#x27;s senatorial creations from the East, the Athenian Gaius Julius Antiochus Epiphanes Philopappos, a member of the Royal House of Commagene, left behind him a funeral monument on the Mouseion Hill that was later disparagingly described by Pausanias as &quot;a monument built to a Syrian man&quot;.

=== Greek-Roman relations ===

As a senatorial Emperor, Trajan was inclined to choose his local base of political support from among the members of the ruling urban oligarchies. In the West, that meant local senatorial families like his own. In the East, that meant the families of Greek notables. The Greeks, though, had their own memories of independenceand a commonly acknowledged sense of cultural superiorityand, instead of seeing themselves as Roman, disdained Roman rule. What the Greek oligarchies wanted from Rome was, above all, to be left in peace, to be allowed to exert their right to self-government (i.e., to be excluded from the provincial government, as was Italy) and to concentrate on their local interests. This was something the Romans were not disposed to do as from their perspective the Greek notables were shunning their responsibilities in regard to the management of Imperial affairsprimarily in failing to keep the common people under control, thus creating the need for the Roman governor to intervene. An excellent example of this Greek alienation was the personal role played by Dio of Prusa in his relationship with Trajan. Dio is described by Philostratus as Trajan&#x27;s close friend, and Trajan as supposedly engaging publicly in conversations with Dio.

Nevertheless, as a Greek local magnate with a taste for costly building projects and pretensions of being an important political agent for Rome, Dio of Prusa was actually a target for one of Trajan&#x27;s authoritarian innovations: the appointing of imperial &quot;correctores&quot; to audit the civic finances of the technically free Greek cities. The main goal was to curb the overenthusiastic spending on public works that served to channel ancient rivalries between neighbouring cities. As Pliny wrote to Trajan, this had as its most visible consequence a trail of unfinished or ill-kept public utilities. Competition among Greek cities and their ruling oligarchies was mainly for marks of pre-eminence, especially for titles bestowed by the Roman emperor. Such titles were ordered in a ranking system that determined how the cities were to be outwardly treated by Rome. The usual form that such rivalries took was that of grandiose building plans, giving the cities the opportunity to vie with each other over &quot;extravagant, needless... structures that would make a show&quot;. A side effect of such extravagant spending was that junior and thus less wealthy members of the local oligarchies felt disinclined to present themselves to fill posts as local magistrates, positions that involved ever-increasing personal expense. Roman authorities liked to play the Greek cities against one anothersomething of which Dio of Prusa was fully aware:
These same Roman authorities had also an interest in assuring the cities&#x27; solvency and therefore ready collection of Imperial taxes. Last but not least, inordinate spending on civic buildings was not only a means to achieve local superiority, but also a means for the local Greek elites to maintain a separate cultural identitysomething expressed in the contemporary rise of the Second Sophistic; this &quot;cultural patriotism&quot; acted as a kind of substitute for the loss of political independence, and as such was shunned by Roman authorities. As Trajan himself wrote to Pliny: &quot;These poor Greeks all love a gymnasium... they will have to content with one that suits their real needs&quot;. The first known &quot;corrector&quot; was charged with a commission &quot;to deal with the situation of the free cities&quot;, as it was felt that the old method of &quot;ad hoc&quot; intervention by the Emperor and/or the proconsuls had not been enough to curb the pretensions of the Greek notables. It is noteworthy that an embassy from Dio&#x27;s city of Prusa was not favourably received by Trajan, and that this had to do with Dio&#x27;s chief objective, which was to elevate Prusa to the status of a free city, an &quot;independent&quot; city-state exempt from paying taxes to Rome. Eventually, Dio gained for Prusa the right to become the head of the assize-district, conventus (meaning that Prusans did not have to travel to be judged by the Roman governor), but &quot;eleutheria&quot; (freedom, in the sense of full political autonomy) was denied.

Eventually, it fell to Pliny, as imperial governor of Bithynia in AD110, to deal with the consequences of the financial mess wrought by Dio and his fellow civic officials. &quot;It&#x27;s well established that [the cities&#x27; finances] are in a state of disorder&quot;, Pliny once wrote to Trajan, plans for unnecessary works made in collusion with local contractors being identified as one of the main problems. One of the compensatory measures proposed by Pliny expressed a thoroughly Roman conservative position: as the cities&#x27; financial solvency depended on the councilmen&#x27;s purses, it was necessary to have more councilmen on the local city councils. According to Pliny, the best way to achieve this was to lower the minimum age for holding a seat on the council, making it possible for more sons of the established oligarchical families to join and thus contribute to civic spending; this was seen as preferable to enrolling non-noble wealthy upstarts. Such an increase in the number of council members was granted to Dio&#x27;s city of Prusa, to the dismay of existing councilmen who felt their status lowered. A similar situation existed in Claudiopolis, where a public bath was built with the proceeds from the entrance fees paid by &quot;supernumerary&quot; members of the council, enrolled with Trajan&#x27;s permission. According to the Digest, Trajan decreed that when a city magistrate promised to achieve a particular public building, his heirs inherited responsibility for its completion.

=== Building projects ===

Trajan was a prolific builder. Many of his buildings were designed and erected by the gifted architect Apollodorus of Damascus, including a massive bridge over the Danube, which the Roman army and its reinforcements could use regardless of weather; the Danube sometimes froze over in winter, but seldom enough to bear the passage of a party of soldiers. Trajan&#x27;s works at the Iron Gates region of the Danube created or enlarged the boardwalk road cut into the cliff-face along the Iron Gate&#x27;s gorge. A canal was built between the Danube&#x27;s Kasajna tributary and Ducis Pratum, circumventing rapids and cataracts.

Trajan&#x27;s Forum Traiani was Rome&#x27;s largest forum. It was built to commemorate his victories in Dacia, and was largely financed from that campaign&#x27;s loot. To accommodate it, parts of the Capitoline and Quirinal Hills had to be removed, the latter enlarging a clear area first established by Domitian. Apollodorus of Damascus&#x27; &quot;magnificent&quot; design incorporated a Triumphal arch entrance, a forum space approximately 120 m long and 90m wide, surrounded by peristyles: a monumentally sized basilica: and later, Trajan&#x27;s Column and libraries. It was started in AD 107, dedicated on 1 January 112, and remained in use for at least 500 years. It still drew admiration when Emperor Constantius II visited Rome in the fourth century. It accommodated Trajan&#x27;s Market, and an adjacent brick market.

Trajan was also a prolific builder of triumphal arches, many of which survive. He built roads, such as the Via Traiana, an extension of the Via Appia from Beneventum to Brundisium and the Via Traiana Nova, a mostly military road between Damascus and Aila, which Rome employed in its annexation of Nabataea and founding of Arabia Province.

Some historians attribute the construction or reconstruction of Old Cairo&#x27;s Roman fortress (also known as &quot;Babylon Fort&quot;) to Trajan, and the building of a canal between the River Nile and the Red Sea. In Egypt, Trajan was &quot;quite active&quot; in constructing and embellishing buildings. He is portrayed, together with Domitian, on the propylon of the Temple of Hathor at Dendera. His cartouche also appears in the column shafts of the Temple of Khnum at Esna.

He built palatial villas outside Rome at Arcinazzo, at Centumcellae and at Talamone.

He also built a bath complex as well as the Aqua Traiana.

=== Games ===
Trajan invested heavily in the provision of popular amusements. He carried out a &quot;massive reconstruction&quot; of the Circus Maximus, which was already the empire&#x27;s biggest and best appointed circuit for the immensely popular sport of chariot racing. The Circus also hosted religious theatrical spectacles and games, and public processions on a grand scale. Trajan&#x27;s reconstruction, completed by 103, was modestly described by Trajan himself as &quot;adequate&quot; for the Roman people. It replaced flammable wooden seating tiers with stone, and increased the Circus&#x27; already vast capacity by about 5,000 seats. Its lofty, elevated Imperial viewing box was rebuilt among the seating tiers, so that spectators could see their emperor sharing their enjoyment of the races, alongside his family and images of the gods,

At some time during 108 or 109, Trajan held 123 days of games to celebrate his Dacian victory. They involved &quot;fully 10,000&quot; gladiators and the slaughter of thousands, &quot;possibly tens of thousands,&quot; of animals, both wild and domestic. Trajan&#x27;s careful management of public spectacles led the orator Fronto to congratulate him for paying equal attention to public entertainments and more serious issues, acknowledging that &quot;neglect of serious matters can cause greater damage, but neglect of amusements greater discontent&quot;. State-funded public entertainments helped to maintain contentment among the populace; the more &quot;serious matter&quot; of the corn dole aimed to satisfy individuals.

===Christians===

During the period of peace that followed the Dacian war, Trajan exchanged letters with Pliny the Younger on how best to deal with the Christians of Pontus. Trajan told Pliny to continue prosecutions of Christians if they merited that, but not to accept anonymous or malicious denunciations. He considered this to be in the interests of justice, and to reflect &quot;the spirit of the age&quot;. Non-citizens who admitted to being Christians and refused to recant were to be executed &quot;for obstinacy&quot;. Citizens were sent to Rome for trial.

Further tests faced by Christians in Pontus are alluded to in correspondence between Pliny the Younger, governor of the Roman province of Bithynia and Pontus, and Emperor Trajan. Writing from Pontus in about AD 112, Pliny reported that the &quot;contagion&quot; of Christianity threatened everyone, regardless of gender, age, or rank. Pliny gave those accused of being Christians opportunity to deny it, and those who would not, he executed. Any who cursed Christ or recited a prayer to the gods or to Trajans statue were released. Pliny acknowledged that these were things that &quot;those who are really Christians cannot be made to do.&quot;

=== Currency and welfare ===

In 107, Trajan devalued the Roman currency, decreasing the silver content of the denarius from 93.5% to 89.0%the actual silver weight dropping from 3.04grams to 2.88grams. This devaluation, along with the massive amounts of gold and silver acquired through his Dacian wars, allowed Trajan to mint many more denarii than his predecessors. He also withdrew from circulation silver denarii minted before Nero&#x27;s devaluation. Trajan&#x27;s devaluation may have had a political intent, enabling planned increases in civil and military spending. Trajan formalised the alimenta, a welfare program that helped orphans and poor children throughout Italy by providing cash, food and subsidized education. The program was supported out of Dacian War booty, estate taxes and philanthropy. The alimenta also relied indirectly on mortgages secured against Italian farms (&quot;fundi&quot;). Registered landowners received a lump sum from the imperial treasury, and in return were expected to repay an annual sum to support the alimentary fund.

== Military campaigns ==

=== Conquest of Dacia ===

The earliest of Trajan&#x27;s conquests were Rome&#x27;s two wars against Dacia, an area that had troubled Roman politics for over a decade in regard to the unstable peace negotiated by Domitian&#x27;s ministers with the powerful Dacian king Decebalus. Dacia would be reduced by Trajan&#x27;s Rome to a client kingdom in the first war (101102), followed by a second war that ended in actual incorporation into the Empire of the trans-Danube border group of Dacia. According to the provisions of Decebalus&#x27;s earlier treaty with Rome, made in the time of Domitian, Decebalus was acknowledged as &quot;rex amicus&quot;, that is, client king; in exchange for accepting client status, he received from Rome both a generous stipend and a steady supply of technical experts. The treaty seems to have allowed Roman troops the right of passage through the Dacian kingdom in order to attack the Marcomanni, Quadi and Sarmatians. However, senatorial opinion never forgave Domitian for paying what was seen as tribute to a barbarian king. Unlike the Germanic tribes, the Dacian kingdom was an organized state capable of developing alliances of its own, thus making it a strategic threat and giving Trajan a strong motive to attack it.

In May of 101, Trajan launched his first campaign into the Dacian kingdom, crossing to the northern bank of the Danube and defeating the Dacian army at Tapae (see Second Battle of Tapae), near the Iron Gates of Transylvania. It was not a decisive victory, however. Trajan&#x27;s troops took heavy losses in the encounter, and he put off further campaigning for the year in order to regroup and reinforce his army. Nevertheless, the battle was considered a Roman victory and Trajan strived to ultimately consolidate his position, including other major engagements, as well as the capture of Decebalus&#x27; sister as depicted on Trajan&#x27;s Column.

The following winter, Decebalus took the initiative by launching a counter-attack across the Danube further downstream, supported by Sarmatian cavalry, forcing Trajan to come to the aid of the troops in his rearguard. The Dacians and their allies were repulsed after two battles in Moesia, at Nicopolis ad Istrum and Adamclisi. Trajan&#x27;s army then advanced further into Dacian territory, and, a year later, forced Decebalus to submit. He had to renounce claim to some regions of his kingdom, return runaways from Rome then under his protection (most of them technical experts), and surrender all his war machines. Trajan returned to Rome in triumph and was granted the title &quot;Dacicus&quot;. The peace of 102 had returned Decebalus to the condition of more or less harmless client king; however, he soon began to rearm, to again harbour Roman runaways, and to pressure his Western neighbours, the Iazyges Sarmatians, into allying themselves with him. Through his efforts to develop an anti-Roman bloc, Decebalus prevented Trajan from treating Dacia as a protectorate instead of an outright conquest. In 104, Decebalus devised an attempt on Trajan&#x27;s life by means of some Roman deserters, a plan that failed. Decebalus also took prisoner Trajan&#x27;s legate Longinus, who eventually poisoned himself while in custody. Finally, in 105, Decebalus undertook an invasion of Roman-occupied territory north of the Danube.

Prior to the campaign, Trajan had raised two entirely new legions: II Traianawhich, however, may have been posted in the East, at the Syrian port of Laodiceaand XXX Ulpia Victrix, which was posted to Brigetio, in Pannonia. By 105, the concentration of Roman troops assembled in the middle and lower Danube amounted to fourteen legions (up from nine in 101)about half of the entire Roman army. Even after the Dacian wars, the Danube frontier would permanently replace the Rhine as the main military axis of the Roman Empire. Including auxiliaries, the number of Roman troops engaged on both campaigns was between 150,000 and 175,000, while Decebalus could dispose of up to 200,000. Other estimates for the Roman forces involved in Trajan&#x27;s second Dacian War cite around 86,000 for active campaigning with large reserves retained in the proximal provinces, and potentially much lower numbers around 50,000 for Decebalus&#x27; depleted forces and absent allies.

In a fierce campaign that seems to have consisted mostly of static warfare, the Dacians, devoid of manoeuvring room, kept to their network of fortresses, which the Romans sought systematically to storm (see also Second Dacian War). The Romans gradually tightened their grip around Decebalus&#x27; stronghold in Sarmizegetusa Regia, which they finally took and destroyed. A controversial scene on Trajan&#x27;s column just before the fall of Sarmizegetusa Regia suggests that Decebalus may have offered poison to his remaining men as an alternative option to capture or death while trying to flee the besieged capital with him. Decebalus fled but, when later cornered by Roman cavalry, committed suicide. His severed head, brought to Trajan by the cavalryman Tiberius Claudius Maximus, was later exhibited in Rome on the steps leading up to the Capitol and thrown on the Gemonian stairs. The famous Dacian treasures were not found in the captured capital and their whereabouts were only revealed when a Dacian nobleman called Bikilis was captured. Decebalus treasures had been buried under a temporarily diverted river and the captive workers executed to retain the secret. Staggering amounts of gold and silver were found and packed off to fill Rome&#x27;s coffers.

Trajan built a new city, Colonia Ulpia Traiana Augusta Dacica Sarmizegetusa, on another site (north of the hill citadel holding the previous Dacian capital), although bearing the same full name, Sarmizegetusa. This capital city was conceived as a purely civilian administrative centre and was provided the usual Romanized administrative apparatus (decurions, aediles, etc.). Urban life in Roman Dacia seems to have been restricted to Roman colonists, mostly military veterans; there is no extant evidence for the existence in the province of peregrine cities. Native Dacians continued to live in scattered rural settlements, according to their own ways. In another arrangement with no parallels in any other Roman province, the existing quasi-urban Dacian settlements disappeared after the Roman conquest.

A number of unorganized urban settlements (&quot;vici&quot;) developed around military encampments in Dacia proper  the most important being Apulum  but were only acknowledged as cities proper well after Trajan&#x27;s reign. The main regional effort of urbanization was concentrated by Trajan at the rearguard, in Moesia, where he created the new cities of Nicopolis ad Istrum and Marcianopolis. A vicus was also created around the Tropaeum Traianum. The garrison city of Oescus received the status of Roman colony after its legionary garrison was redeployed. The fact that these former Danubian outposts had ceased to be frontier bases and were now in the deep rear acted as an inducement to their urbanization and development. Not all of Dacia was permanently occupied. After the post-Trajanic evacuation of lands across the lower Danube, land extending from the Danube to the inner arch of the Carpathian Mountains, including Transylvania, the Metaliferi Mountains and Oltenia was absorbed into the Roman province, which eventually took the form of an &quot;excrescence&quot; with ill-defined limits, stretching from the Danube northwards to the Carpathians. This may have been intended as a basis for further expansion within Eastern Europe, as the Romans believed the region to be much more geographically &quot;flattened&quot;, and thus easier to traverse, than it actually was; they also underestimated the distance from those vaguely defined borders to the ocean.

Defence of the province was entrusted to a single legion, the XIII Gemina, stationed at Apulum, which functioned as an advance guard that could, in case of need, strike either west or east at the Sarmatians living at the borders. Therefore, the indefensible character of the province did not appear to be a problem for Trajan, as the province was conceived more as a sally-base for further attacks. Even in the absence of further Roman expansion, the value of the province depended on Roman overall strength: while Rome was strong, the Dacian salient was an instrument of military and diplomatic control over the Danubian lands; when Rome was weak, as during the Crisis of the Third Century, the province became a liability and was eventually abandoned. Trajan resettled Dacia with Romans and annexed it as a province of the Roman Empire. Aside from their enormous booty (over half a million slaves, according to John Lydus), Trajan&#x27;s Dacian campaigns benefited the Empire&#x27;s finances through the acquisition of Dacia&#x27;s gold mines, managed by an imperial procurator of equestrian rank (&quot;procurator aurariarum&quot;). On the other hand, commercial agricultural exploitation on the villa model, based on the centralized management of a huge landed estate by a single owner (&quot;fundus&quot;) was poorly developed. Therefore, use of slave labor in the province itself seems to have been relatively undeveloped, and epigraphic evidence points to work in the gold mines being conducted by means of labor contracts (&quot;locatio conductio rei&quot;) and seasonal wage-earning. The victory was commemorated by the construction both of the 102 cenotaph generally known as the Tropaeum Traiani in Moesia, as well of the much later (113) Trajan&#x27;s Column in Rome, the latter depicting in stone carved bas-reliefs the Dacian Wars&#x27; most important moments.

=== Nabataean annexation ===

In 106, Rabbel II Soter, one of Rome&#x27;s client kings, died. This event might have prompted the annexation of the Nabataean Kingdom, but the manner and the formal reasons for the annexation are unclear. Some epigraphic evidence suggests a military operation, with forces from Syria and Egypt. What is known is that by 107, Roman legions were stationed in the area around Petra and Bosra, as is shown by a papyrus found in Egypt. The furthest south the Romans occupied (or, better, garrisoned, adopting a policy of having garrisons at key points in the desert) was Hegra, over south-west of Petra. The empire gained what became the province of Arabia Petraea (modern southern Jordan and northwest Saudi Arabia). At this time, a Roman road (&quot;Via Traiana Nova&quot;) was built from Aila (now Aqaba) in Limes Arabicus to Bosrah. As Nabataea was the last client kingdom in Asia west of the Euphrates, the annexation meant that the entire Roman East had been provincialized, completing a trend towards direct rule that had begun under the Flavians.

=== Parthian campaign ===

In 113, Trajan embarked on his last campaign, provoked by Parthia&#x27;s decision to put an unacceptable king on the throne of Armenia, a kingdom over which the two great empires had shared hegemony since the time of Nero some fifty years earlier. Trajan, already in Syria early in 113, consistently refused to accept diplomatic approaches from the Parthians intended to settle the Armenian imbroglio peacefully. As the surviving literary accounts of Trajan&#x27;s Parthian War are fragmentary and scattered, it is difficult to assign them a proper context, something that has led to a long-running controversy about its precise happenings and ultimate aims.

==== Cause of the war ====

Modern historians advance the possibility that Trajan&#x27;s decision to wage war against Parthia had economic motives: after Trajan&#x27;s annexation of Arabia, he built a new road, Via Traiana Nova, that went from Bostra to Aila on the Red Sea. That meant that Charax on the Persian Gulf was the sole remaining western terminus of the Indian trade route outside direct Roman control, and such control was important in order to lower import prices and to limit the supposed drain of precious metals created by the deficit in Roman trade with the Far East. That Charax traded with the Roman Empire, there can be no doubt, as its actual connections with merchants from Palmyra during the period are well documented in a contemporary Palmyrene epigraph, which tells of various Palmyrene citizens honoured for holding office in Charax. Also, Charax&#x27;s rulers&#x27; domains at the time possibly included the Bahrain islands, which offered the possibility of extending Roman hegemony into the Persian Gulf itself. (A Palmyrene citizen held office as satrap over the islands shortly after Trajan&#x27;s death, though the appointment was made by a Parthian king of Charax.) The rationale behind Trajan&#x27;s campaign, in this case, was one of breaking down a system of Far Eastern trade through small Semitic (&quot;Arab&quot;) cities under Parthia&#x27;s control and to put it under Roman control instead.

In his Dacian conquests, Trajan had already resorted to Syrian auxiliary units, whose veterans, along with Syrian traders, had an important role in the subsequent colonization of Dacia. He had recruited Palmyrene units into his army, including a camel unit, therefore apparently procuring Palmyrene support to his ultimate goal of annexing Charax. It has even been ventured that, when earlier in his campaign Trajan annexed Armenia, he was bound to annex the whole of Mesopotamia lest the Parthians interrupt the flux of trade from the Persian Gulf and/or foment trouble at the Roman frontier on the Danube. Other historians reject these motives, as the supposed Parthian &quot;control&quot; over the maritime Far Eastern trade route was, at best, conjectural and based on a selective reading of Chinese sourcestrade by land through Parthia seems to have been unhampered by Parthian authorities and left solely to the devices of private enterprise. Commercial activity in second century Mesopotamia seems to have been a general phenomenon, shared by many peoples within and without the Roman Empire, with no sign of a concerted Imperial policy towards it.

As in the case of the &quot;alimenta&quot;, scholars like Moses Finley and Paul Veyne have considered the idea that a foreign trade policy underlay Trajan&#x27;s war to be anachronistic; according to these scholars, the concern of Roman leaders with the trade in far eastern luxuriesbesides collecting toll taxes and customswas moral in nature, because contemporary Roman mores frowned upon the &quot;softness&quot; of luxuries. In the absence of conclusive evidence, trade between Rome and India might have been far more balanced, in terms of quantities of precious metals exchanged: one of our sources for the notion of the Roman gold drainPliny&#x27;s the Younger&#x27;s uncle Pliny the Elderhad earlier described the Gangetic Plains as one of the gold sources for the Roman Empire. Accordingly  in a controversial book on the Roman economy  Finley considers Trajan&#x27;s &quot;badly miscalculated and expensive assault on Parthia&quot; to be an example of the many Roman &quot;commercial wars&quot; that had in common the fact of existing only in the books of modern historians.

The alternative view is to see the campaign as triggered by the lure of territorial annexation and prestige, the sole motive ascribed by Cassius Dio. As far as territorial conquest involved tax-collecting, especially of the 25% tax levied on all goods entering the Roman Empire, the &quot;tetarte&quot;, one can say that Trajan&#x27;s Parthian War had an &quot;economic&quot; motive. Also, there was the propaganda value of an Eastern conquest that would emulate, in Roman fashion, those of Alexander the Great. The fact that emissaries from the Kushan Empire might have attended to the commemorative ceremonies for the Dacian War may have kindled in some Greco-Roman intellectuals like Plutarchwho wrote about only 70,000 Roman soldiers being necessary to a conquest of India as well as in Trajan&#x27;s closer associates, speculative dreams about the booty to be obtained by reproducing Macedonian Eastern conquests. There could also be Trajan&#x27;s idea to use an ambitious blueprint of conquests as a way to emphasize quasi-divine status, such as with his cultivated association, in coins and monuments, to Hercules.

Also, it is possible that the attachment of Trajan to an expansionist policy was supported by a powerful circle of conservative senators from Hispania committed to a policy of imperial expansion, first among them being the all-powerful Licinius Sura. Alternatively, one can explain the campaign by the fact that, for the Romans, their empire was in principle unlimited, and that Trajan only took advantage of an opportunity to make idea and reality coincide. Finally, there are other modern historians who think that Trajan&#x27;s original aims were purely military and strategic: to assure a more defensible Eastern frontier for the Roman Empire, crossing Northern Mesopotamia along the course of the Khabur River in order to offer cover to a Roman Armenia. This interpretation is backed by the fact that all subsequent Roman wars against Parthia would aim at establishing a Roman presence deep into Parthia itself. It is possible that during the onset of Trajan&#x27;s military experience, as a young tribune, he had witnessed engagement with the Parthians; so any strategic vision was grounded in a tactical awareness of what was needed to tackle Parthia.

==== Course of the war ====
The campaign was carefully planned in advance: ten legions were concentrated in the Eastern theatre; since 111, the correspondence of Pliny the Younger witnesses to the fact that provincial authorities in Bithynia had to organize supplies for passing troops, and local city councils and their individual members had to shoulder part of the increased expenses by supplying troops themselves. The intended campaign, therefore, was immensely costly from its very beginning. Trajan marched first on Armenia, deposed the Parthian-appointed king, Parthamasiris (who was afterwards murdered while kept in the custody of Roman troops in an unclear incident, later described by Fronto as a breach of Roman good faith), and annexed it to the Roman Empire as a province, receiving in passing the acknowledgement of Roman hegemony by various tribes in the Caucasus and on the Eastern coast of the Black Seaa process that kept him busy until the end of 114. At the same time, a Roman column under the legate Lusius Quietusan outstanding cavalry general who had signalled himself during the Dacian Wars by commanding a unit from his native Mauretaniacrossed the Araxes river from Armenia into Media Atropatene and the land of the Mardians (present-day Ghilan). It is possible that Quietus&#x27; campaign had as its goal the extending of the newer, more defensible Roman border eastwards towards the Caspian Sea and northwards to the foothills of the Caucasus. This newer, more &quot;rational&quot; frontier, depended, however, on an increased, permanent Roman presence east of the Euphrates.

The chronology of subsequent events is uncertain, but it is generally believed that early in 115 Trajan launched a Mesopotamian campaign, marching down towards the Taurus mountains in order to consolidate territory between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. He placed permanent garrisons along the way to secure the territory. While Trajan moved from west to east, Lusius Quietus moved with his army from the Caspian Sea towards the west, both armies performing a successful pincer movement, whose apparent result was to establish a Roman presence into the Parthian Empire proper, with Trajan taking the northern Mesopotamian cities of Nisibis and Batnae and organizing a province of Mesopotamia, including the Kingdom of Osrhoenewhere King Abgar VII submitted to Trajan publiclyas a Roman protectorate. This process seems to have been completed at the beginning of 116, when coins were issued announcing that Armenia and Mesopotamia had been put under the authority of the Roman people. The area between the Khabur River and the mountains around Singara seems to have been considered as the new frontier, and as such received a road surrounded by fortresses.

After wintering in Antioch during 115/116 and, according to literary sources, barely escaping from a violent earthquake that claimed the life of one of the consuls, Marcus Pedo VirgilianusTrajan again took to the field in 116, with a view to the conquest of the whole of Mesopotamia, an overambitious goal that eventually backfired on the results of his entire campaign. According to some modern historians, the aim of the campaign of 116 was to achieve a &quot;pre-emptive demonstration&quot; aiming not toward the conquest of Parthia, but for tighter Roman control over the Eastern trade route. However, the overall scarcity of manpower for the Roman military establishment meant that the campaign was doomed from the start. It is noteworthy that no new legions were raised by Trajan before the Parthian campaign, maybe because the sources of new citizen recruits were already over-exploited.

As far as the sources allow a description of this campaign, it seems that one Roman division crossed the Tigris into Adiabene, sweeping south and capturing Adenystrae; a second followed the river south, capturing Babylon; Trajan himself sailed down the Euphrates from Dura-Europoswhere a triumphal arch was erected in his honourthrough Ozogardana, where he erected a &quot;tribunal&quot; still to be seen at the time of Julian the Apostate&#x27;s campaigns in the same area. Having come to the narrow strip of land between the Euphrates and the Tigris, he then dragged his fleet overland into the Tigris, capturing Seleucia and finally the Parthian capital of Ctesiphon. He continued southward to the Persian Gulf, when, after escaping with his fleet a tidal bore on the Tigris, he received the submission of Athambelus, the ruler of Charax. He declared Babylon a new province of the Empire and had his statue erected on the shore of the Persian Gulf, after which he sent the Senate a laurelled letter declaring the war to be at a close and bemoaning that he was too old to go on any further and repeat the conquests of Alexander the Great. Since Charax was a &quot;de facto&quot; independent kingdom whose connections to Palmyra were described above, Trajan&#x27;s bid for the Persian Gulf may have coincided with Palmyrene interests in the region. Another hypothesis is that the rulers of Charax had expansionist designs on Parthian Babylon, giving them a rationale for alliance with Trajan. The Parthian city of Susa was apparently also occupied by the Romans.

According to late literary sources (not backed by numismatic or inscriptional evidence) a province of Assyria was also proclaimed, apparently covering the territory of Adiabene. Some measures seem to have been considered regarding the fiscal administration of Indian tradeor simply about the payment of customs (&quot;portoria&quot;) on goods traded on the Euphrates and Tigris. It is possible that it was this &quot;streamlining&quot; of the administration of the newly conquered lands according to the standard pattern of Roman provincial administration in tax collecting, requisitions and the handling of local potentates&#x27; prerogatives, that triggered later resistance against Trajan. According to some modern historians, Trajan might have busied himself during his stay on the Persian Gulf with ordering raids on the Parthian coasts, as well as probing into extending Roman suzerainty over the mountaineer tribes holding the passes across the Zagros Mountains into the Iranian plateau eastward, as well as establishing some sort of direct contact between Rome and the Kushan Empire. No attempt was made to expand into the Iranian Plateau itself, where the Roman army, with its relative weakness in cavalry, would have been at a disadvantage.

Trajan left the Persian Gulf for Babylonwhere he intended to offer sacrifice to Alexander in the house where he had died in 323BC But a revolt led by Sanatruces, a nephew of the Parthian king Osroes I who had retained a cavalry force, possibly strengthened by the addition of Saka archers, imperilled Roman positions in Mesopotamia and Armenia. Trajan sought to deal with this by forsaking direct Roman rule in Parthia proper, at least partially. Trajan sent two armies towards Northern Mesopotamia: the first, under Lusius Quietus, recovered Nisibis and Edessa from the rebels, probably having King Abgarus deposed and killed in the process, with Quietus probably earning the right to receive the honors of a senator of praetorian rank (&quot;adlectus inter praetorios&quot;). The second army, however, under Appius Maximus Santra (probably a governor of Macedonia) was defeated and Santra killed.

Later in 116, Trajan, with the assistance of Quietus and two other legates, Marcus Erucius Clarus and Tiberius Julius Alexander Julianus, defeated a Parthian army in a battle where Sanatruces was killed (possibly with the assistance of Osroes&#x27; son and Sanatruces&#x27; cousin, Parthamaspates, whom Trajan wooed successfully). After re-taking and burning Seleucia, Trajan then formally deposed Osroes, putting Parthamaspates on the throne as client ruler. This event was commemorated in a coin as the reduction of Parthia to client kingdom status: , &quot;a king is given to the Parthians&quot;. That done, Trajan retreated north in order to retain what he could of the new provinces of Armeniawhere he had already accepted an armistice in exchange for surrendering part of the territory to Sanatruces&#x27; son Vologesesand Mesopotamia. It was at this point that Trajan&#x27;s health started to fail him. The fortress city of Hatra, on the Tigris in his rear, continued to hold out against repeated Roman assaults. He was personally present at the siege, and it is possible that he suffered a heat stroke while in the blazing heat.

=== Diaspora revolt ===


About this same time (AD 116117), Jews in the Eastern provinces of the Roman EmpireEgypt, Cyprus, and Cyrene, which was likely the original trouble hotspotrebelled in what appears to have been an ethnic and religious uprising against the local populations, later known as the Diaspora Revolt. Additionally, Jewish communities in Northern Mesopotamia revolted, likely as part of a broader resistance against Roman occupation. Trajan had to withdraw his army to suppress these revolts, a move he considered a temporary setback. He never returned to command, delegating Eastern operations to Lusius Quietus, who was appointed governor of Judaea in early 117 and likely dealt with Jewish unrest there. Quietus discharged his commissions successfully, leading rabbinic sources to name the conflict in Judaea the &quot;Kitos War,&quot; with &quot;Kitus&quot; being a corruption of &quot;Quietus&quot;. Whether or not the Diaspora revolt included Judea proper, or only the Jewish Eastern diaspora, remains doubtful in the absence of clear epigraphic and archaeological evidence. What is certain is that there was an increased Roman military presence in Judea at the time.

Quietus was promised a consulate in the following year (118) for his victories, but he was killed before this could occur, during the bloody purge that opened Hadrian&#x27;s reign, in which Quietus and three other former consuls were sentenced to death after being tried on a vague charge of conspiracy by the (secret) court of the Praetorian Prefect Attianus. It has been thought that Quietus and his colleagues were executed on Hadrian&#x27;s direct orders, for fear of their popular standing with the army and their close connections to Trajan. In contrast, the next prominent Roman figure in charge of the repression of the Jewish revolt, the equestrian Quintus Marcius Turbo, who had dealt with the rebel leader from Cyrene, Loukuas, retained Hadrian&#x27;s trust, eventually becoming his Praetorian Prefect. As all four consulars were senators of the highest standing and as such generally regarded as able to take imperial power (&quot;capaces imperii&quot;), Hadrian seems to have decided to forestall these prospective rivals.

== Death and succession ==

Early in 117, Trajan grew ill and set sail for Italy. His health declined throughout the spring and summer of 117, possibly acknowledged to the public by the display of a bronze portrait-bust at the public baths of Ancyra, showing an aged and emaciated man, though the identification with Trajan is disputed. He reached Selinus, where he suddenly died, shortly before 11 August. Trajan in person could have lawfully nominated Hadrian as his successor, but Dio claims that Trajan&#x27;s wife, Pompeia Plotina, assured Hadrian&#x27;s succession by keeping Trajan&#x27;s death a secret, long enough for her to produce and sign a document attesting to Hadrian&#x27;s adoption as son and successor. Dio, who tells this narrative, offers his fatherthe governor of Cilicia Apronianusas a source, so his narrative may be based on contemporary rumour. It may also reflect male Roman displeasure that an empresslet alone any woman could presume to meddle in Rome&#x27;s political affairs.

Hadrian held an ambiguous position during Trajan&#x27;s reign. After commanding Legio I Minervia during the Dacian Wars, he had been relieved from front-line duties at the decisive stage of the Second Dacian War, being sent to govern the newly created province of Pannonia Inferior. He had pursued a senatorial career without particular distinction and had not been officially adopted by Trajan although he received from him decorations and other marks of distinction that made him hope for the succession. He received no post after his 108 consulate and no further honours other than being made Archon eponymos for Athens in 111/112. He probably did not take part in the Parthian War. Literary sources relate that Trajan had considered others, such as the jurist Lucius Neratius Priscus, as heir. Hadrian, who was eventually entrusted with the governorship of Syria at the time of Trajan&#x27;s death, was Trajan&#x27;s cousin and was married to Trajan&#x27;s grandniece, which all made him as good as heir designate. Hadrian seems to have been well connected to the powerful and influential coterie of Spanish senators at Trajan&#x27;s court, through his ties to Plotina and the Prefect Attianus. His refusal to sustain Trajan&#x27;s senatorial and expansionist policy during his own reign may account for the &quot;crass hostility&quot; shown him by literary sources.

Hadrian&#x27;s first major act as emperor was to abandon Mesopotamia as too costly and distant to defend, and to restore Armenia and Osrhoene to Parthian hegemony, under Rome&#x27;s suzerainty. The Parthian campaign had been an enormous setback to Trajan&#x27;s policy, proof that Rome had overstretched its capacity to sustain an ambitious program of conquest. According to the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, Hadrian claimed to follow the precedent set by Cato the Elder towards the Macedonians, who &quot;were to be set free because they could not be protected&quot;  something Birley sees as an unconvincing precedent. Other territories conquered by Trajan were retained. According to a well-established historical tradition, Trajan&#x27;s ashes were placed within the small cella that still survives at the base of Trajan&#x27;s column. In some modern scholarship, his ashes were more likely interred near his column, in a mausoleum, temple or tomb built for his cult as a &quot;divus&quot; of the Roman state.

== Legacy ==

Ancient sources on Trajan&#x27;s personality and accomplishments are unanimously positive. Pliny the Younger, for example, celebrates Trajan in his panegyric as a wise and just emperor and a moral man. Cassius Dio added that he always remained dignified and fair. A third-century emperor, Decius, even received from the Senate the name Trajan as a decoration. After the setbacks of the third century, Trajan, together with Augustus, became in the Later Roman Empire the paragon of the most positive traits of the Imperial order. Many emperors after Trajan would, when they were sworn into office, be wished &quot;Felicior Augusto, Melior Traiano&quot; (&quot;May you be more fortunate than Augustus and better than Trajan&quot;). The fourth-century emperor Constantine I is credited with calling him a &quot;plant upon every wall&quot; for the many buildings bearing inscriptions with his name.

=== Iconography ===

All Roman emperors until Trajan, except Nero who occasionally wore sideburns, were depicted clean-shaven, according to the fashion introduced among the Romans by Scipio Africanus (236183 BC). This Imperial fashion was changed by Trajan&#x27;s successor Hadrian who made beards fashionable for emperors.

=== After Rome ===

During the Middle Ages, some theologians such as Thomas Aquinas discussed Trajan as an example of a virtuous pagan. In the &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;, Dante, following this legend, sees the spirit of Trajan in the Heaven of Jupiter with other historical and mythological persons noted for their justice. Also, a mural of Trajan stopping to provide justice for a poor widow is present in the first terrace of Purgatory as a lesson to those who are purged for being proud.

&lt;poem&gt;
I noticed that the inner bank of the curve...

Was of white marble, and so decorated
With carvings that not only Polycletus
But nature herself would there be put to shame...

There was recorded the high glory
Of that ruler of Rome whose worth
Moved Gregory to his great victory;

I mean by this the Emperor Trajan;
And at his bridle a poor widow
Whose attitude bespoke tears and grief...

The wretched woman, in the midst of all this,
Seemed to be saying: &#x27;Lord, avenge my son,
Who is dead, so that my heart is broken..&#x27;

So he said: &#x27;Now be comforted, for I must
Carry out my duty before I go on:
Justice requires it and pity holds me back.&#x27;

&quot;Dante, The Divine Comedy, Purgatorio X, ll. 32 f. and 73 f.&quot;
&lt;/poem&gt;

In the 18th century, King Charles III of Spain commissioned Anton Raphael Mengs to paint &quot;The Triumph of Trajan&quot; on the ceiling of the banquet hall of the Royal Palace of Madridconsidered among the best works of this artist.

It was only during the Enlightenment that this legacy began to be contested, when Edward Gibbon expressed doubts about the militarized character of Trajan&#x27;s reign in contrast to the &quot;moderate&quot; practices of his immediate successors. Mommsen adopted a divided stance towards Trajan, at some point of his posthumously published lectures even speaking about his &quot;vainglory&quot; (&quot;Scheinglorie&quot;). Mommsen also speaks of Trajan&#x27;s &quot;insatiable, unlimited lust for conquest&quot;. Although Mommsen had no liking for Trajan&#x27;s successor Hadrian&quot;a repellent manner, and a venomous, envious and malicious nature&quot;he admitted that Hadrian, in renouncing Trajan&#x27;s conquests, was &quot;doing what the situation clearly required&quot;.

It was exactly this military character of Trajan&#x27;s reign that attracted his early twentieth-century biographer, the Italian historian Roberto Paribeni, who in his 1927 two-volume biography &quot;Optimus Princeps&quot; described Trajan&#x27;s reign as the acme of the Roman principate, which he saw as Italy&#x27;s patrimony. Following in Paribeni&#x27;s footsteps, the German historian Alfred Heuss saw in Trajan &quot;the accomplished human embodiment of the imperial title&quot; (&quot;die ideale Verkrperung des humanen Kaiserbegriffs&quot;). Trajan&#x27;s first English-language biography by Julian Bennett is also a positive one in that it assumes that Trajan was an active policy-maker concerned with the management of the empire as a wholesomething his reviewer Lendon considers an anachronistic outlook that sees in the Roman emperor a kind of modern administrator.

During the 1980s, the Romanian historian Eugen Cizek took a more nuanced view as he described the changes in the &quot;personal&quot; ideology of Trajan&#x27;s reign, stressing the fact that it became ever more autocratic and militarized, especially after 112 and towards the Parthian War (as &quot;only an universal monarch, a &quot;kosmocrator&quot;, could dictate his law to the East&quot;). The biography by the German historian Karl Strobel stresses the continuity between Domitian&#x27;s and Trajan&#x27;s reigns, saying that Trajan&#x27;s rule followed the same autocratic and sacred character as Domitian&#x27;s, culminating in a failed Parthian adventure intended as the crown of his personal achievement. It is in modern French historiography that Trajan&#x27;s reputation becomes most markedly deflated: Paul Petit writes about Trajan&#x27;s portraits as a &quot;lowbrow boor with a taste for booze and boys&quot;. For Paul Veyne, what is to be retained from Trajan&#x27;s &quot;stylish&quot; qualities was that he was the last Roman emperor to think of the empire as a purely Italian and Rome-centred hegemony of conquest. In contrast, his successor Hadrian would stress the notion of the empire as ecumenical and of the emperor as universal benefactor and not &quot;kosmocrator&quot;.

===In Romanian culture===
In Romania, Trajan (Romanian: &quot;Traian&quot;) is regarded as one of the founders of the Romanian nation and a historical figure of great importance to the Romanian people and culture. This is due to his orchestration of the Dacian Wars that led to the foundation of the Daco-Roman culture and the Latin-based Romanian language. The creation of Roman Dacia is therefore seen in the country as the ethnogenesis of the Romanian nation.

=== In Jewish legend ===
In the Jewish homiletical works, such as &quot;Esther Rabbah&quot;, Trajan is described with the epitaph &quot;may his bones be crushed&quot; (). The same epitaph is also used for Hadrian.

== See also ==

* Felicior Augusto, melior Traiano
* Justice of Trajan
* Trajanic art

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources and further reading ==
* 
* Ancel, R. Manning. &quot;Soldiers&quot;. &quot;Military Heritage&quot;. December 2001. Volume 3, No. 3: 12, 14, 16, 20 (Trajan, Emperor of Rome).
* 
* Bowersock, G.W. &quot;Roman Arabia&quot;, Harvard University Press, 1983
* 
* Cizek, Eugen. &quot;L&#x27;poque de Trajan: circonstances politiques et problmes idologiques&quot;. Bucharest, Editura tiinific i Enciclopedic, 1983, 
* 
* Fuller, J.F.C. &quot;A Military History of the Western World&quot;. Three Volumes. New York: Da Capo Press, Inc., 1987 and 1988.
** v. 1. &quot;From the late times to the Battle of Lepanto&quot;; . 255, 266, 269, 270, 273 (Trajan, Roman Emperor).
* 
* Isaac, B. &quot;The Limits of Empire&quot;, The Roman Army in the East, Revised Edition, Oxford University Press, 1990 
* Jackson, N. &quot;Trajan: Rome&#x27;s Last Conqueror&quot;, 1st edition, GreenHill Books, 2022. ISBN 9781784387075
* Kennedy, D. &quot;The Roman Army in Jordan&quot;, Revised Edition, Council for British Research in the Levant, 2004. 
* Lepper, F.A. &quot;Trajan&#x27;s Parthian War&quot;. London: Oxford University Press, 1948. Also available online.
* 
* Minaud, Grard, &quot;Les vies de 12 femmes d&#x27;empereur romainDevoirs, Intrigues &amp; Volupts&quot;, Paris, L&#x27;Harmattan, 2012, ch. 6, &quot;La vie de Plotine, femme de Trajan&quot;, p.147168. .
* 
* 
* 
* Schallmayer, Egon (ed.) (1999). &quot;Traian in Germanien, Traian im Reich&quot;. Saalburg-Schriften, vol. 5. Bad Homburg: Saalburgmuseum, .
* 
* 
* 
* Wildfeuer, C.R.H. &quot;Trajan, Lion of Rome: the Untold Story of Rome&#x27;s Greatest Emperor&quot;, Aquifer Publishing, 2009. Historical fiction.

=== Primary sources ===
* Cassius Dio, &quot;Roman History&quot; Book 68, English translation
* Aurelius Victor (attrib.), &quot;Epitome de Caesaribus&quot; Chapter 13, English translation
* Pliny the Younger, Letters, Book 10, English translation

=== Secondary material ===

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="0" end="6" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="16" end="38" title="Trajan" label="Marcus Ulpius Traianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="63" end="76" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="128" end="146" title="Five Good Emperors" label="Five Good Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="154" end="176" title="NervaAntonine dynasty" label="NervaAntonine dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q646206" start="301" end="314" title="Roman history" label="Roman history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="360" end="372" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="469" end="481" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q658893" start="510" end="517" title="Italica" label="Italica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="537" end="546" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q95088" start="560" end="567" title="province of Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617880" start="590" end="607" title="Italic peoples" label="Italic settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q219415" start="611" end="627" title="Hispania Baetica" label="Hispania Baetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q20579" start="655" end="660" title="Todi" label="Tuder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247527" start="668" end="674" title="Regio VI Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q714856" start="721" end="743" title="Marcus Ulpius Traianus (father of Trajan)" label="Marcus Ulpius Traianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="832" end="840" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="919" end="924" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q312396" start="932" end="951" title="Antonius Saturninus" label="Antonius Saturninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q707801" start="983" end="991" title="limes Germanicus" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="996" end="1004" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424" start="1075" end="1080" title="Nerva" label="Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="1157" end="1173" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1382" end="1399" title="#Building projects" label="building projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q211295" start="1412" end="1433" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum" label="forum named after him"/>
<link wikidata="Q495053" start="1455" end="1478" title="Cura Annonae" label="social welfare policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11029653" start="1532" end="1540" title="Nabataean Kingdom" label="Nabataea"/>
<link wikidata="Q971609" start="1545" end="1550" title="Roman Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651751" start="1556" end="1563" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Parthian campaign" label="his war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="1576" end="1591" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254480" start="1624" end="1631" title="Roman Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q765845" start="1633" end="1644" title="Mesopotamia (Roman province)" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40169" start="1650" end="1657" title="Assyria (Roman province)" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424724" start="1776" end="1783" title="Selinus (Cilicia)" label="Selinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="1792" end="1799" title="Roman imperial cult" label="deified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="1832" end="1839" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="1957" end="1977" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441755" start="2192" end="2224" title="felicior Augusto, melior Traiano" label="felicior Augusto, melior Traiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2262" end="2270" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2308" end="2316" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163671" start="2364" end="2378" title="virtuous pagan" label="virtuous pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2387" end="2398" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="2400" end="2411" title="Niccol Machiavelli" label="Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="2542" end="2548" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q110248179" start="2556" end="2561" title="Trope (literature)" label="trope"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="2602" end="2615" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="2646" end="2664" title="Five Good Emperors" label="Five Good Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q723608" start="2716" end="2727" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Dacian Wars" label="Dacian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q745183" start="2739" end="2768" title="Dacica" label="Commentarii de bellis Dacicis"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="2807" end="2818" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="2838" end="2844" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="2858" end="2886" title="Commentarii de Bello Gallico" label="Commentarii de Bello Gallico"/>
<link wikidata="Q833516" start="3030" end="3052" title="Criton of Heraclea" label="Titus Statilius Criton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192043" start="3107" end="3120" title="RomanParthian Wars" label="Parthian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q31845" start="3132" end="3138" title="Arrian" label="Arrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="3187" end="3198" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3258" end="3267" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124761" start="3285" end="3292" title="epitome" label="epitome"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="3377" end="3394" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q334457" start="3430" end="3444" title="Dio Chrysostom" label="Dio Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3525" end="3536" title="Dispositio#Peroratio" label="perorations"/>
<link wikidata="Q14526933" start="4429" end="4441" title="ab epistulis" label="ab epistulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="4616" end="4625" title="epigraphy" label="epigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q631286" start="4631" end="4642" title="numismatics" label="numismatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q219415" start="4785" end="4801" title="Hispania Baetica" label="Hispania Baetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="4818" end="4827" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="4838" end="4843" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q658893" start="4879" end="4886" title="Italica" label="Italica"/>
<link wikidata="Q568278" start="4917" end="4927" title="Santiponce" label="Santiponce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="4949" end="4956" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="4998" end="5014" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio Africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190368" start="5544" end="5550" title="Appian" label="Appian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273993" start="5783" end="5788" title="Ulpia gens" label="Ulpii"/>
<link wikidata="Q61754609" start="5797" end="5802" title="Traia gens" label="Traii"/>
<link wikidata="Q426008" start="6020" end="6041" title="Epitome de Caesaribus" label="Epitome de Caesaribus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20579" start="6066" end="6070" title="Todi" label="Todi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="6079" end="6085" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="6104" end="6109" title="Roman Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="6149" end="6168" title="epigraphy" label="epigraphic evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q515194" start="6366" end="6378" title="Osco-Umbrian" label="Osco-Umbrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="6440" end="6454" title="Roman citizens" label="Roman citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q677316" start="6574" end="6595" title="Social War (9187 BC)" label="Social War (9187 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273993" start="6976" end="6982" title="Ulpia gens" label="Ulpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q61754609" start="6993" end="6998" title="Traia gens" label="Traia"/>
<link wikidata="Q714856" start="7041" end="7063" title="Marcus Ulpius Trajanus (father of Trajan)" label="Marcus Ulpius Traianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="7105" end="7113" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q977375" start="7173" end="7190" title="Legio X Fretensis" label="Legio X Fretensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="7197" end="7206" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="7214" end="7236" title="First Jewish-Roman War" label="First Jewish-Roman War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132611" start="7263" end="7269" title="Marcia (mother of Trajan)" label="Marcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236024" start="7302" end="7308" title="Marcia gens" label="Marcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="7359" end="7364" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203434" start="7419" end="7445" title="Quintus Marcius Barea Sura" label="Quintus Marcius Barea Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907096" start="7462" end="7478" title="gens Antonia" label="Antonia Furnilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907096" start="7492" end="7512" title="Aulus Antonius Rufus" label="Aulus Antonius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475078" start="7517" end="7523" title="Furnia gens" label="Furnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238" start="7590" end="7596" title="Amelia, Umbria" label="Ameria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13396" start="7648" end="7653" title="Reate" label="Reate"/>
<link wikidata="Q237622" start="7827" end="7841" title="Ulpia Marciana" label="Ulpia Marciana"/>
<link wikidata="Q262368" start="7861" end="7876" title="Salonia Matidia" label="Salonia Matidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219415" start="8214" end="8221" title="Baetica" label="Baetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q380806" start="8372" end="8377" title="Aelia gens" label="Aelii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035133" start="8507" end="8512" title="Annii" label="Annii"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="8567" end="8579" title="Tarraconense" label="Tarraconense"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="8588" end="8598" title="Narbonensian Gaul" label="Narbonense"/>
<link wikidata="Q239448" start="8623" end="8638" title="Pompeia Plotina" label="Pompeia Plotina"/>
<link wikidata="Q194103" start="8776" end="8789" title="Aventine Hill" label="Aventine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216953" start="8813" end="8839" title="Temple of Diana (Rome)" label="Piazza del Tempio di Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="9030" end="9040" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190123" start="9141" end="9149" title="Roman governor" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="9153" end="9158" title="Syria (Roman province)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q212624" start="9166" end="9173" title="Legatus" label="Legatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="9241" end="9249" title="Tribunus" label="Tribunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280800" start="9499" end="9510" title="Publius Aelius Hadrianus Afer" label="Aelius Afer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="9544" end="9551" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087777" start="9556" end="9563" title="Paulina (sister of Hadrian)" label="Paulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q716720" start="9598" end="9622" title="Publius Acilius Attianus" label="Publius Acilius Attianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="9715" end="9721" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="9882" end="9897" title="Flavian dynasty" label="Flavian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="9951" end="9960" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q189375" start="10021" end="10044" title="Apollodorus of Damascus" label="Apollodorus of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="10057" end="10061" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q239448" start="10075" end="10090" title="Pompeia Plotina" label="Pompeia Plotina"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="10134" end="10139" title="Nmes" label="Nmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117546" start="10248" end="10260" title="Homosexuality in ancient Rome" label="of young men"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="10287" end="10295" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="10376" end="10382" title="Julian (emperor)" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131588" start="10523" end="10531" title="Ganymede (mythology)" label="Ganymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q321219" start="10630" end="10645" title="Severan dynasty" label="Severan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970836" start="10911" end="10920" title="Abgar VII" label="Abgar VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234638" start="11132" end="11148" title="Legio VII Gemina" label="Legio VII Gemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="11152" end="11174" title="Hispania Tarraconensis" label="Hispania Tarraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q312396" start="11234" end="11253" title="Antonius Saturninus" label="Antonius Saturninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="11271" end="11288" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q164076" start="11378" end="11384" title="Chatti" label="Chatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q672403" start="11522" end="11537" title="Manius Acilius Glabrio (consul 91)" label="Acilius Glabrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="11672" end="11680" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="11684" end="11701" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424" start="11987" end="11992" title="Nerva" label="Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496376" start="12069" end="12087" title="Casperius Aelianus" label="Casperius Aelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="12851" end="12858" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="12863" end="12868" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="12894" end="12910" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="12937" end="12944" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q849288" start="13036" end="13052" title="military tribune" label="military tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q682680" start="13175" end="13195" title="Lucius Licinius Sura" label="Lucius Licinius Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="13247" end="13264" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409583" start="13490" end="13499" title="kingmaker" label="kingmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543753" start="13504" end="13518" title="minence grise" label="minence grise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="13671" end="13680" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q521520" start="13703" end="13720" title="Licinius Mucianus" label="Licinius Mucianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="14610" end="14616" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q725714" start="14819" end="14835" title="Attius Suburanus" label="Attius Suburanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="15004" end="15009" title="Plebeians" label="plebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240688" start="15050" end="15058" title="Donativum" label="donative"/>
<link wikidata="Q835567" start="15296" end="15301" title="Curia" label="Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204772" start="16476" end="16482" title="Achaea (Roman province)" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="16487" end="16495" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="16658" end="16667" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326966" start="17574" end="17583" title="honorific" label="honorific"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="18945" end="18953" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="18976" end="18982" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q617524" start="19595" end="19601" title="Apamea Myrlea" label="Apamea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209349" start="19896" end="19905" title="Nicomedia" label="Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q536421" start="21571" end="21582" title="Vigintisexviri" label="vigintiviri"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="21776" end="21787" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q549880" start="21868" end="21897" title="Gaius Julius Quadratus Bassus" label="Gaius Julius Quadratus Bassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517441" start="21956" end="21991" title="Gaius Julius Alexander Berenicianus" label="Gaius Julius Alexander Berenicianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="22009" end="22024" title="Herod the Great" label="Herod the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="22893" end="22901" title="Athenian" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q284747" start="22902" end="22946" title="Philopappos" label="Gaius Julius Antiochus Epiphanes Philopappos"/>
<link wikidata="Q332137" start="22979" end="22988" title="Commagene" label="Commagene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760491" start="23008" end="23024" title="Philopappos Monument" label="funeral monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760491" start="23032" end="23045" title="Mouseion Hill" label="Mouseion Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="23088" end="23097" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q878607" start="23129" end="23135" title="Syrian" label="Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274948" start="24324" end="24336" title="Philostratus" label="Philostratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q539371" start="24698" end="24721" title="corrector" label="&amp;quot;correctores&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500203" start="24757" end="24786" title="Free city (antiquity)" label="technically free Greek cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355080" start="26274" end="26290" title="Second Sophistic" label="Second Sophistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q504400" start="26514" end="26523" title="Gymnasium (Ancient Greece)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q429699" start="27272" end="27281" title="conventus iuridicus" label="conventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088749" start="28616" end="28628" title="Claudiopolis (Bithynia)" label="Claudiopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q838526" start="28816" end="28822" title="Digest (Roman law)" label="Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q189375" start="29103" end="29126" title="Apollodorus of Damascus" label="Apollodorus of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849786" start="29140" end="29170" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="massive bridge over the Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q207376" start="29381" end="29391" title="Iron Gates" label="Iron Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="29406" end="29412" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11111030" start="29437" end="29446" title="boardwalk" label="boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q211295" start="29641" end="29654" title="Forum Traiani" label="Forum Traiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="29731" end="29736" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="29827" end="29837" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q207896" start="29842" end="29855" title="Quirinal Hill" label="Quirinal Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q189375" start="29941" end="29964" title="Apollodorus of Damascus" label="Apollodorus of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q143912" start="30017" end="30031" title="Triumphal arch" label="Triumphal arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="30142" end="30150" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="30163" end="30183" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q46418" start="30335" end="30349" title="Constantius II" label="Constantius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q432579" start="30562" end="30573" title="Via Traiana" label="Via Traiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q189417" start="30595" end="30604" title="Via Appia" label="Via Appia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13437" start="30610" end="30620" title="Benevento" label="Beneventum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="30624" end="30634" title="Brundisium" label="Brundisium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561132" start="30643" end="30659" title="Via Traiana Nova" label="Via Traiana Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="30692" end="30700" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180522" start="30705" end="30709" title="Aqaba" label="Aila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30738" end="30760" title="#Annexation of Nabataea" label="annexation of Nabataea"/>
<link wikidata="Q221353" start="30777" end="30792" title="Arabia Petraea" label="Arabia Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993461" start="30859" end="30868" title="Old Cairo" label="Old Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="30983" end="30993" title="River Nile" label="River Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="31002" end="31009" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="31132" end="31140" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q275136" start="31149" end="31157" title="propylon" label="propylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q735254" start="31165" end="31181" title="Dendera Temple complex" label="Temple of Hathor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29019" start="31185" end="31192" title="Dendera" label="Dendera"/>
<link wikidata="Q224104" start="31198" end="31207" title="cartouche" label="cartouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q183097" start="31259" end="31264" title="Khnum" label="Khnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q626031" start="31268" end="31272" title="Esna" label="Esna"/>
<link wikidata="Q21714911" start="31316" end="31325" title="Villa of Trajan" label="Arcinazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q242533" start="31330" end="31342" title="Centumcellae" label="Centumcellae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073211" start="31350" end="31358" title="Talamone" label="Talamone"/>
<link wikidata="Q599035" start="31377" end="31389" title="Baths of Trajan" label="bath complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q622956" start="31405" end="31417" title="Aqua Traiana" label="Aqua Traiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q207808" start="31557" end="31571" title="Circus Maximus" label="Circus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164462" start="31679" end="31693" title="chariot racing" label="chariot racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216498" start="31718" end="31759" title="Ludi" label="religious theatrical spectacles and games"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="32406" end="32415" title="gladiator" label="gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q621672" start="33164" end="33170" title="Pontus (region)" label="Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205007" start="33184" end="33201" title="Pliny the Younger on Christians" label="Pliny to continue"/>
<link wikidata="Q952064" start="34270" end="34284" title="Roman currency" label="Roman currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q187776" start="34323" end="34331" title="denarius" label="denarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q723608" start="34503" end="34514" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Dacian Wars" label="Dacian wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="35404" end="35409" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="35516" end="35524" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="35572" end="35581" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="35633" end="35647" title="satellite state" label="client kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q209851" start="36220" end="36230" title="Marcomanni" label="Marcomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q308885" start="36232" end="36237" title="Quadi" label="Quadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="36242" end="36252" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732913" start="36696" end="36707" title="Dacian warfare" label="Dacian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684406" start="36711" end="36716" title="Tapae" label="Tapae"/>
<link wikidata="Q124759061" start="36722" end="36744" title="Second Battle of Tapae" label="Second Battle of Tapae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684406" start="36756" end="36782" title="Iron Gates of Transylvania" label="Iron Gates of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987323" start="37503" end="37522" title="Nicopolis ad Istrum" label="Nicopolis ad Istrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q351559" start="37527" end="37536" title="Adamclisi" label="Adamclisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q837791" start="38115" end="38122" title="Iazyges" label="Iazyges"/>
<link wikidata="Q179319" start="38707" end="38717" title="Legio II Traiana Fortis" label="II Traiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11931162" start="38789" end="38797" title="Laodicea ad Mare" label="Laodicea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758450" start="38801" end="38818" title="XXX Ulpia Victrix" label="XXX Ulpia Victrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410547" start="38840" end="38848" title="Brigetio" label="Brigetio"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="38853" end="38861" title="Pannonia (Roman province)" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389373" start="39174" end="39181" title="auxilia" label="auxilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078442" start="39817" end="39834" title="Second Dacian War" label="Second Dacian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q739802" start="39916" end="39935" title="Sarmizegetusa Regia" label="Sarmizegetusa Regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372259" start="40363" end="40388" title="Tiberius Claudius Maximus" label="Tiberius Claudius Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="40449" end="40456" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501204" start="40475" end="40490" title="Gemonian stairs" label="Gemonian stairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671791" start="40898" end="40948" title="Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa" label="Colonia Ulpia Traiana Augusta Dacica Sarmizegetusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194738" start="41221" end="41230" title="Decurion (administrative)" label="decurions"/>
<link wikidata="Q205757" start="41232" end="41238" title="aedile" label="aedile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676972" start="41415" end="41424" title="Peregrinus (Roman)" label="peregrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q763590" start="41723" end="41739" title="vicus" label="&amp;quot;vici&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="41822" end="41828" title="Alba Iulia" label="Apulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q431280" start="42063" end="42076" title="Marcianopolis" label="Marcianopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q763590" start="42080" end="42085" title="vicus" label="vicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110806" start="42154" end="42160" title="Oescus" label="Oescus"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="42184" end="42196" title="Roman colony" label="Roman colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q17346959" start="42207" end="42216" title="legionary" label="legionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="42579" end="42599" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="42611" end="42623" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q635800" start="42629" end="42649" title="Metaliferi Mountains" label="Metaliferi Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="42654" end="42661" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="42831" end="42842" title="Carpathians" label="Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q168553" start="43217" end="43228" title="Legio XIII Gemina" label="XIII Gemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="43243" end="43249" title="Alba Julia" label="Apulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q329838" start="43818" end="43845" title="Crisis of the Third Century" label="Crisis of the Third Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389145" start="44068" end="44078" title="John Lydus" label="John Lydus"/>
<link wikidata="Q499165" start="44224" end="44234" title="Procurator (Roman)" label="procurator"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="44238" end="44248" title="Equestrian order" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="44354" end="44359" title="Roman villa" label="villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q932599" start="44845" end="44861" title="Tropaeum Traiani" label="Tropaeum Traiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q887060" start="45069" end="45084" title="Rabbel II Soter" label="Rabbel II Soter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11029653" start="45178" end="45195" title="Nabataean Kingdom" label="Nabataean Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="45350" end="45355" title="Egypt (Roman province)" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="45435" end="45440" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q272680" start="45445" end="45450" title="Bosra" label="Bosra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27356" start="45628" end="45633" title="Mada&amp;#x27;in Saleh" label="Hegra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="45654" end="45659" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q221353" start="45707" end="45721" title="Arabia Petraea" label="Arabia Petraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561132" start="45809" end="45825" title="Via Traiana Nova" label="Via Traiana Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q180522" start="45858" end="45863" title="Aqaba" label="Aqaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309624" start="45868" end="45882" title="Limes Arabicus" label="Limes Arabicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272680" start="45886" end="45891" title="Bosra" label="Bosra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="46198" end="46205" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="46330" end="46338" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="46357" end="46361" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561132" start="47011" end="47027" title="Via Traiana Nova" label="Via Traiana Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q272680" start="47044" end="47050" title="Bosra" label="Bostra"/>
<link wikidata="Q180522" start="47054" end="47058" title="Aqaba" label="Aila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063054" start="47091" end="47097" title="Charax Spasinou" label="Charax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747" start="47496" end="47503" title="Palmyra" label="Palmyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="47877" end="47883" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q739537" start="49466" end="49476" title="Paul Veyne" label="Paul Veyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="50112" end="50127" title="Gangetic Plains" label="Gangetic Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="50969" end="50988" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="51024" end="51037" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="51165" end="51173" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="51590" end="51598" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q685344" start="52303" end="52315" title="Khabur (Euphrates)" label="Khabur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382597" start="53330" end="53343" title="Parthamasiris of Armenia" label="Parthamasiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q317055" start="53458" end="53464" title="Marcus Cornelius Fronto" label="Fronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q446659" start="53784" end="53798" title="Lusius Quietus" label="Lusius Quietus"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="53915" end="53925" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q179751" start="53937" end="53943" title="Aras (river)" label="Araxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q260437" start="53968" end="53984" title="Media Atropatene" label="Media Atropatene"/>
<link wikidata="Q687458" start="54005" end="54013" title="Mardians" label="Mardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q928828" start="54027" end="54033" title="Ghilan" label="Ghilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="54174" end="54185" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553052" start="55002" end="55009" title="Nisibis" label="Nisibis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55014" end="55020" title="Suru#History" label="Batnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q765845" start="55050" end="55061" title="Mesopotamia (Roman province)" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q237234" start="55088" end="55096" title="Osrhoene" label="Osrhoene"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970836" start="55107" end="55116" title="Abgar VII" label="Abgar VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q776614" start="55413" end="55420" title="Singara" label="Singara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547511" start="55628" end="55646" title="115 Antioch earthquake" label="violent earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q691548" start="55692" end="55715" title="Marcus Pedo Vergilianus" label="Marcus Pedo Virgilianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="56528" end="56534" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q149747" start="56540" end="56548" title="Adiabene" label="Adiabene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="56636" end="56643" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="56676" end="56685" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q464266" start="56691" end="56703" title="Dura-Europos" label="Dura-Europos"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="56843" end="56869" title="Julian the Apostate" label="Julian the Apostate&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136681" start="57038" end="57046" title="Seleucia on the Tigris" label="Seleucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192541" start="57083" end="57092" title="Ctesiphon" label="Ctesiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="57124" end="57136" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063054" start="57257" end="57263" title="Charax Spasinu" label="Charax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="57543" end="57562" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="57938" end="57942" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40169" start="58090" end="58097" title="Roman Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="58940" end="58956" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q237660" start="58966" end="58981" title="Iranian plateau" label="Iranian plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896100" start="59390" end="59400" title="Sanatruces II of Parthia" label="Sanatruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q318162" start="59432" end="59440" title="Osroes I" label="Osroes I"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="59516" end="59520" title="Saka" label="Saka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190403" start="59795" end="59801" title="Edessa" label="Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16097094" start="60216" end="60237" title="Marcus Erucius Clarus" label="Marcus Erucius Clarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269411" start="60422" end="60436" title="Parthamaspates of Parthia" label="Parthamaspates"/>
<link wikidata="Q466614" start="61071" end="61076" title="Hatra" label="Hatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="61085" end="61091" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="61193" end="61198" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254" start="61583" end="61598" title="Diaspora revolt" label="Diaspora Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192091" start="62120" end="62129" title="Kitos War" label="Kitos War"/>
<link wikidata="Q716720" start="62824" end="62832" title="Publius Acilius Attianus" label="Attianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284490" start="63139" end="63152" title="Marcius Turbo" label="Marcius Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="63267" end="63285" title="Praetorian Prefect" label="Praetorian Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361597" start="63733" end="63759" title="Roman Baths of Ankara" label="the public baths of Ancyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424724" start="63858" end="63865" title="Selinus (Cilicia)" label="Selinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q239448" start="64030" end="64045" title="Pompeia Plotina" label="Pompeia Plotina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048424" start="64304" end="64314" title="Cassius Apronianus" label="Apronianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263789" start="64598" end="64614" title="Legio I Minervia" label="Legio I Minervia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247297" start="64782" end="64799" title="Pannonia Inferior" label="Pannonia Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q357829" start="65114" end="65129" title="Archon eponymos" label="Archon eponymos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="65134" end="65140" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q63389" start="65282" end="65305" title="Lucius Neratius Priscus" label="Lucius Neratius Priscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="66275" end="66291" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q180081" start="66346" end="66360" title="Cato the Elder" label="Cato the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q329838" start="67306" end="67319" title="Crisis of the Third Century" label="third century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441755" start="67533" end="67565" title="Felicior Augusto, melior Traiano" label="Felicior Augusto, Melior Traiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="67677" end="67690" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="67877" end="67881" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="67999" end="68015" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio Africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="68090" end="68097" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68107" end="68113" title="beard#Rome" label="beards"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="68172" end="68183" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="68210" end="68224" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="68290" end="68303" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="68311" end="68316" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="68384" end="68391" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="68568" end="68577" title="Purgatory" label="Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="69422" end="69442" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q76718" start="69456" end="69475" title="Anton Raphael Mengs" label="Anton Raphael Mengs"/>
<link wikidata="Q171517" start="69561" end="69583" title="Royal Palace of Madrid" label="Royal Palace of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="69655" end="69668" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="69714" end="69727" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351" start="69879" end="69886" title="Theodor Mommsen" label="Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711953" start="71014" end="71028" title="Julian Bennett (archaeologist)" label="Julian Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q739537" start="72223" end="72233" title="Paul Veyne" label="Paul Veyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="72621" end="72628" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="72638" end="72646" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="72777" end="72792" title="Romanians" label="Romanian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972914" start="72797" end="72804" title="Culture of Romania" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q723608" start="72846" end="72857" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Dacian Wars" label="Dacian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q971609" start="72892" end="72910" title="Daco-Roman culture" label="Daco-Roman culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q971609" start="72966" end="72977" title="Roman Dacia" label="Roman Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="73047" end="73053" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058986" start="73128" end="73141" title="Esther Rabbah" label="Esther Rabbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441755" start="73289" end="73321" title="Felicior Augusto, melior Traiano" label="Felicior Augusto, melior Traiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317197" start="73324" end="73341" title="Justice of Trajan" label="Justice of Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624162" start="73344" end="73356" title="Trajanic art" label="Trajanic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852043" start="73473" end="73490" title="Military Heritage" label="Military Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="73619" end="73643" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30571" wikidata="Q284287" url="?curid=30571" title="Tabitha King">
<text>Tabitha &quot;Tabby&quot; Jane King ( Spruce, born March 24, 1949) is an American author.

== Early life ==
Born in Old Town, Maine, Tabitha King is the third eldest daughter of Sarah Jane Spruce (ne White; December 7, 1923  April 14, 2007) and Raymond George Spruce (December 29, 1923  May 29, 2014). King attended John Bapst Memorial High School in Bangor, Maine before enrolling at the University of Maine, where she met her husband Stephen King through her work-study job in the Raymond H. Fogler Library. 

== Career ==
As of 2006, King had published eight novels and two works of non-fiction. She published her first novel, &quot;Small World&quot;, through Signet Books in 1981, and in 2006, &quot;Candles Burning&quot; was published through Berkley Books. The paperback rights for &quot;Small World&quot; were bought by New American Library for $165,000. &quot;Candles Burning&quot; was written predominantly by Michael McDowell, who died in 1999, and the McDowell family requested that King finish the work.

In 2023, she was the executive producer of the independent horror film &quot;The Sudbury Devil&quot;.

=== Partnership with Stephen King ===
Prior to her husband&#x27;s commercial success, Tabitha worked extra shifts at Dunkin&#x27; Donuts so that Stephen could write full-time.As Stephen King recalled the origin of his debut novel, &quot;Carrie&quot;: &quot;Two unrelated ideas, adolescent cruelty and telekinesis, came together.&quot; It began as a short story intended for &quot;Cavalier&quot;; Stephen tossed the first three pages in the trash but Tabitha recovered them, saying she wanted to know what happened next. He followed her advice and expanded it into a novel. She told him: &quot;You&#x27;ve got something here. I really think you do.&quot;

This began a practice that continues today: Tabitha and Stephen review each other&#x27;s drafts and also those of their children. 

=== Reception ===
Reception to King&#x27;s work has ranged from negative to positive. &quot;Pearl&quot; received positive mentions from the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; and the &quot;Bangor Daily News&quot;, while the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; panned &quot;Survivor&quot;. The &quot;Arizona Daily Star&quot; criticized &quot;One on One&quot;, calling King &quot;a hack&quot;, whereas &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;, &quot;Time&quot;, and the &quot;Rocky Mountain News&quot; gave the novel positive reviews. &quot;Caretakers&quot; received positive praise by &quot;The New York Times&quot;, while Bookreporter.com wrote that some readers might be disappointed by the changes made to McDowell&#x27;s &quot;Candles Burning&quot;.

== Awards and recognition ==
*Honorary Doctorates of Humane Letters, University of Maine in Orono (May 1987)
*Dowd Achievement Award (1992)
*Constance H. Carlson Public Humanities Prize (1998)

== Social activism ==
King has served on several boards and committees in the state of Maine, such as the Bangor Public Library board. She also served on the board of the Maine Public Broadcasting System until 1994. In 1998 she received the inaugural Constance H. Carlson Public Humanities Prize, the Maine Humanities Council&#x27;s highest award, for her work with literacy for the state of Maine. In 2019, Tabitha and Stephen donated $1.25M to the New England Historic Genealogical Society. 

She currently serves as vice president of WZON/WZLO/WKIT radio stations, as well as in the administration of two family philanthropic foundations. The Stephen and Tabitha King Foundation, chaired by her and her husband, ranks sixth among Maine charities in terms of average annual giving, with over $2.8million in grants per year, according to The Grantsmanship Center.

== Personal life ==
Tabitha and Stephen King married on January 2, 1971. They have three children: a daughter Naomi and two sons, Joe Hill and Owen King, who are both writers.

== Bibliography ==

=== Novels ===
=== Nonfiction ===
=== Short stories ===
* &quot;The Blue Chair&quot; (1981)
* &quot;The Demonstration&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Road Kill&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Djinn and Tonic&quot; (1998)
* &quot;The Women&#x27;s Room&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Archie Smith, Boy Wonder&quot; (2011)

=== Poetry ===
* &quot;A Gradual Canticle for Augustine&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Elegy for Ike&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Note 1 from Herodotus&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Nonsong&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The Last Vampire: A Baroque Fugue&quot; (1971)

=== Teleplay ===
* &quot;The Passion of Reverend Jimmy&quot; (2004)

=== Contributions and compilations ===
* &quot;Murderess Ink: The Better Half of the Mystery&quot;, Dilys Winn, ed., Bell, 1979
* &quot;Shadows, Volume 4&quot;, C. L. Grant, ed., Doubleday, 1981
* &quot;Midlife Confidential&quot;, ed. David Marsh et al., photographs by Tabitha King, Viking Penguin, 1994

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
*Mcaleer, Patrick. &quot;The Writing Family of Stephen King: A Critical Study of the Fiction of Tabitha King, Joe Hill and Owen King&quot;. McFarland. 2011.

== External links ==
*
* Stephen &amp; Tabitha King Foundation
* Joseph Hillstrom King
* Owen Phillip King</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q284287" start="0" end="7" title="Tabitha King" label="Tabitha"/>
<link wikidata="Q284287" start="14" end="19" title="Tabitha King" label="Tabby"/>
<link wikidata="Q284287" start="26" end="35" title="Tabitha King" label="Jane King"/>
<link wikidata="Q284287" start="38" end="44" title="Tabitha King" label="Spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642029" start="116" end="131" title="Old Town, Maine" label="Old Town, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220568" start="319" end="350" title="John Bapst Memorial High School" label="John Bapst Memorial High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q327012" start="354" end="367" title="Bangor, Maine" label="Bangor, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307345" start="392" end="411" title="University of Maine" label="University of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="439" end="451" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298824" start="486" end="511" title="Raymond H. Fogler Library" label="Raymond H. Fogler Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005314" start="666" end="678" title="Signet Books" label="Signet Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753848" start="751" end="764" title="Berkley Books" label="Berkley Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q276817" start="922" end="938" title="Michael McDowell (author)" label="Michael McDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q127601634" start="1097" end="1114" title="The Sudbury Devil" label="The Sudbury Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q847743" start="1240" end="1259" title="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts" label="Dunkin&amp;#x27; Donuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248657" start="1341" end="1352" title="debut novel" label="debut novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q623394" start="1360" end="1366" title="Carrie (novel)" label="Carrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="2056" end="2073" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="2135" end="2150" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982939" start="2196" end="2214" title="Arizona Daily Star" label="Arizona Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="2303" end="2323" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="2337" end="2341" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883624" start="2363" end="2382" title="Rocky Mountain News" label="Rocky Mountain News"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2479" end="2497" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543389" start="2943" end="2964" title="Bangor Public Library" label="Bangor Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="3014" end="3040" title="Public Broadcasting System" label="Public Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3138" end="3162" title="Maine Humanities Council" label="Maine Humanities Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077377" start="3287" end="3328" title="New England Historic Genealogical Society" label="New England Historic Genealogical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958360" start="3374" end="3378" title="WZON" label="WZON"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958322" start="3379" end="3383" title="WZLO" label="WZLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951694" start="3384" end="3388" title="WKIT" label="WKIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737544" start="3677" end="3701" title="The Grantsmanship Center" label="The Grantsmanship Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q370377" start="3834" end="3842" title="Joe Hill (writer)" label="Joe Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q707117" start="3847" end="3856" title="Owen King" label="Owen King"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30575" wikidata="Q175038" url="?curid=30575" title="12 Monkeys">
<text>12 Monkeys is a 1995 American science fiction thriller film directed by Terry Gilliam from a screenplay by David Peoples and Janet Peoples, inspired by Chris Marker&#x27;s 1962 short film &quot;La Jete&quot;. It stars Bruce Willis, Madeleine Stowe, Brad Pitt, and Christopher Plummer. Set in a post-apocalyptic future devastated by disease, the film follows a convict who is sent back in time to gather information about the man-made virus that wiped out most of the human population on the planet.

&quot;12 Monkeys&quot; was theatrically released in the United States on December 29, 1995, by Universal Pictures. It received positive reviews from critics and grossed over $168.8 million worldwide against a $29 million budget. At the 68th Academy Awards, the film was nominated for Best Supporting Actor (for Pitt) and Best Costume Design. It garnered seven nominations at the 22nd Saturn Awards and won three: Best Science Fiction Film, Best Supporting Actor (for Pitt), and Best Costumes. Pitt also won Best Supporting Actor at the 53rd Golden Globe Awards.

== Plot ==
A deadly virus released in 1996 wiped out almost all of humanity, forcing survivors to live underground. A group known as the Army of the Twelve Monkeys is believed to have released the virus. In 2035, James Cole is a prisoner living in an underground compound beneath Philadelphia. Cole is selected to be sent back in time to find the original virus to help scientists develop a cure in exchange for a reduced sentence. Cole is troubled by dreams involving a foot chase and a shooting at an airport.

Cole arrives in Baltimore in 1990, not 1996 as planned. He is arrested and incarcerated at a mental hospital on the diagnosis of Dr. Kathryn Railly. There he encounters Jeffrey Goines, a mental patient with extreme environmentalist and anti-corporate views. Cole is interviewed by a panel of doctors and tries to explain that the virus outbreak has already happened and cannot be prevented.

After an escape attempt, Cole is sedated and locked in a cell but he disappears and awakens back in 2035. He is interrogated by the scientists, who play a distorted voicemail message that asserts the association of the Army of the 12 Monkeys with the virus. He is also shown photos of numerous people suspected of being involved, including Goines. The scientists offer Cole another chance to complete his mission and send him back in time. Cole briefly arrives at a battlefield during World War I, where he sees another prison inmate who was sent back in time, Jos. Cole is shot in the leg and gets transported to 1996.

In 1996, Railly gives a lecture about the Cassandra complex to a group of scientists. At the post-lecture book-signing, Railly meets Dr. Peters, who tells her that apocalypse alarmists represent the sane vision while humanity&#x27;s gradual destruction of the environment is the real lunacy.

Cole arrives at the venue after seeing flyers publicizing it. When Railly departs, he kidnaps her and forces her to take him to Philadelphia. They learn that Goines is the founder of the Army of the 12 Monkeys before they set out in search of him. When Cole confronts Goines, he denies any involvement with the group and says that in 1990, Cole originated the idea of wiping out humanity with a virus stolen from Goines&#x27; virologist father, Dr. Leland Goines.

Cole is transported back to 2035, where he reaffirms to the scientists his commitment to his mission and asks to be sent back to complete it. When he finds Railly again in 1996, he tells her that he now believes himself crazy as she had suggested. Railly has discovered evidence of his time travel to the Great War which she shows him, believing he is sane. They decide to depart for the Florida Keys before the start of the plague.

Cole and Railly learn that the Army of the 12 Monkeys was not the source of the epidemic; the group&#x27;s major act of protest is releasing animals from a zoo and placing Goines&#x27; father in an animal cage. At the airport, Cole leaves a message telling the scientists that they are on the wrong track following the Army of the 12 Monkeys and he will not return. Cole is confronted by Jos, who gives Cole a handgun and instructs him to follow orders. Railly spots Dr. Peters at the airport and recognizes him from a newspaper as an assistant of Goines&#x27; father. Peters is about to embark on a tour of several cities that matches the viral outbreaks chronologically and geographically.

Cole is informed of Peters by Railly, then forces his way through a security checkpoint in pursuit of Peters. Cole draws his gun, then is shot by police. As he lies dying in Railly&#x27;s arms, she scans the crowd around her. She makes eye contact with a small boy: the young James Cole witnessing the scene of his death, which will replay in his dreams for years to come. Peters, aboard the plane with the virus, sits down next to Jones, one of the scientists from the future, who comments that her job is &quot;insurance&quot;. The young Cole watches a plane take off from the ground outside the airport.
== Cast ==
== Production ==
=== Development ===

The genesis of &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; came from executive producer Robert Kosberg, who had been a fan of the French short film &quot;La Jete&quot; (1962). Kosberg persuaded that film&#x27;s director, Chris Marker, to let him pitch the project to Universal Pictures, seeing it as a perfect basis for a full-length science fiction film. Universal agreed to purchase the remake rights and hired David and Janet Peoples to write the screenplay. Producer Charles Roven chose Terry Gilliam to direct, because he believed the filmmaker&#x27;s style was perfect for &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; nonlinear storyline and time travel subplot. Gilliam had just abandoned a film adaptation of &quot;A Tale of Two Cities&quot; when he signed to direct &quot;12 Monkeys&quot;. Though Gilliam felt the script was &quot;too complex&quot; to take on.

The film represents the second film for which Gilliam did not write or co-write the screenplay. Although he prefers to direct his own scripts, he was captivated by Peoples&#x27; &quot;intriguing and intelligent script. The story is disconcerting. It deals with time, madness and a perception of what the world is or isn&#x27;t. It is a study of madness and dreams, of death and re-birth, set in a world coming apart&quot;.

Universal took longer than expected to approve &quot;12 Monkeys&quot;, although Gilliam had two stars (Willis and Pitt) and a firm budget of $29.5 million (low for a Hollywood science fiction film). Universal&#x27;s production of &quot;Waterworld&quot; (1995) had resulted in various cost overruns. To get &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; approved for production, Gilliam persuaded Willis to lower his normal asking price. Because of Universal&#x27;s strict production incentives and his history with the studio on &quot;Brazil&quot;, Gilliam received final cut privilege. The Writers Guild of America was skeptical of the &quot;inspired by&quot; credit for &quot;La Jete&quot; and Chris Marker. Gilliam said that he had not seen &quot;La Jete&quot; when he made &quot;12 Monkeys&quot;.

=== Casting ===
Gilliam&#x27;s initial casting choices were Nick Nolte as James Cole and Jeff Bridges as Jeffrey Goines, but Universal objected. Other actors were suggested for the roles included Nicolas Cage and Tom Cruise, but Gilliam rejected the choices. Gilliam, who first met Bruce Willis while casting Jeff Bridges&#x27; role in &quot;The Fisher King&quot; (1991), believed Willis evoked Cole&#x27;s characterization as being &quot;somebody who is strong and dangerous but also vulnerable&quot;. Gilliam later stated that he wasn&#x27;t originally interested in casting Willis because of the actor&#x27;s mouth.

Gilliam cast Madeleine Stowe as Dr. Kathryn Railly because he was impressed by her performance in &quot;Blink&quot; (1994). The director first met Stowe when he was casting his abandoned film adaptation of &quot;A Tale of Two Cities&quot;. &quot;She has this incredible ethereal beauty and she&#x27;s incredibly intelligent&quot;, Gilliam said of Stowe. &quot;Those two things rest very easily with her, and the film needed those elements because it has to be romantic.&quot;

Gilliam originally believed that Pitt was not right for the role of Jeffrey Goines, but the casting director convinced him otherwise. Pitt was cast for a comparatively small salary, as he was still relatively unknown at the time. By the time of &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; release, &quot;Interview with the Vampire&quot; (1994), &quot;Legends of the Fall&quot; (1994), and &quot;Se7en&quot; (1995) had been released, making Pitt an A-list actor, which drew greater attention to the film and boosted its box-office standing. In Philadelphia, months before filming, Pitt spent weeks at Temple University&#x27;s hospital, visiting and studying the psychiatric ward to prepare for his role.

=== Filming ===

Principal photography lasted from February 8 to May 6, 1995. Shooting on location in Philadelphia and Baltimore (including the Senator Theatre) in winter was fraught with weather problems. There were also technical glitches with the futuristic mechanical props. Because the film has a nonlinear storyline, continuity errors occurred, and some scenes had to be reshot. Gilliam also injured himself when he went horseback riding. Despite setbacks, the director managed to stay within the budget and was only a week behind his shooting schedule. &quot;It was a tough shoot&quot;, acknowledged Jeffrey Beecroft, the film&#x27;s production designer. &quot;There wasn&#x27;t a lot of money or enough time. Terry is a perfectionist, but he was really adamant about not going over budget. He got crucified for &quot;Munchausen&quot;, and that still haunts him.&quot;

The filmmakers were not allowed access to sound stages; thus, they had to find abandoned buildings or landmarks to use. The exteriors of the climactic airport scene were shot at the BaltimoreWashington International Airport, while the interior scenes were shot at the Pennsylvania Convention Center (formerly Reading Terminal). Filming at the psychiatric hospital was done at the Eastern State Penitentiary and Girard College. Some shots took place in abandoned motels in Camden, New Jersey. &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; was shot in the 1.85:1 format rather than anamorphic.

=== Design ===
Gilliam used the same filmmaking style as he had in &quot;Brazil&quot; (1985), including the art direction and cinematography (specifically using Fresnel lenses). The appearance of the interrogation room where Cole is being interviewed by the scientists was based on the work of Lebbeus Woods; these scenes were shot at three power stations (two in Philadelphia and one in Baltimore). Gilliam intended to show Cole being interviewed through a multi-screen interrogation TV set because he felt the machinery evoked a &quot;nightmarish intervention of technology. You try to see the faces on the screens in front of you, but the real faces and voices are down there and you have these tiny voices in your ear. To me that&#x27;s the world we live in, the way we communicate these days, through technical devices that pretend to be about communication but may not be&quot;.

The art department made sure that the 2035 underground world only used pre-1996 technology, to depict the bleakness of the future. Gilliam, Beecroft and set decorator Crispian Sallis went to several flea markets and salvage warehouses looking for materials to decorate the sets. The majority of visual effects sequences were created by Peerless Camera Company, which Gilliam founded in the late 1970s with Kent Houston, the film&#x27;s visual effects supervisor. Additional digital compositing was done by The Mill, while Cinesite provided film scanning services.

== Music ==
The film&#x27;s score was composed, arranged, and conducted by English musician Paul Buckmaster. The main theme is based on Argentine tango musician/composer Astor Piazzolla&#x27;s &quot;Suite Punta del Este&quot;.

== Themes ==

=== Thematic elements ===
In the biographical novel &quot;Gilliam on Gilliam&quot;, director Terry Gilliam described the film as &quot;very much about the twentieth century&#x27;s inundation of information and about deciphering what among all this noise and imagery is useful and important to our lives&quot;; these themes are expressed in conflicts between the protagonist and antagonistic elements in the relative &#x27;past&#x27; and &#x27;future&#x27;.

References to time, time travel, and monkeys are scattered throughout the film, including the Woody Woodpecker cartoon &quot;Time Tunnel&quot; playing on the TV in a hotel room, the Marx Brothers film &quot;Monkey Business&quot; (1931) on TV in the asylum, and the subplots involving monkeys (drug testing, news stories and animal rights).

=== Allusions to other films and media ===
&quot;12 Monkeys&quot; is inspired by the French short film &quot;La Jete&quot; (1962); as in &quot;La Jete&quot;, characters are haunted by the images of their own deaths. Like &quot;La Jete&quot;, &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; contains references to Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;Vertigo&quot; (1958). Toward the end of the film, Cole and Railly hide in a theater showing a 24-hour Hitchcock marathon and watch scenes from &quot;Vertigo&quot; and &quot;The Birds&quot;. Railly then transforms herself with a blonde wig, as Judy (Kim Novak) transforms herself into blonde Madeleine in &quot;Vertigo&quot;; Cole sees her emerge within a red light, as Scottie (James Stewart) saw Judy emerge within a green light. Brief notes of Bernard Herrmann&#x27;s film score can also be heard. Railly also wears the same coat Novak wore in the first part of &quot;Vertigo&quot;. The scene at Muir Woods National Monument, where Judy (as Madeleine) looks at the growth rings of a felled redwood and traces back events in her past life, resonates with larger themes in &quot;12 Monkeys&quot;. Cole and Railly later have a similar conversation while the same music from &quot;Vertigo&quot; is repeated. The Muir Woods scene in &quot;Vertigo&quot; is also reenacted in &quot;La Jete&quot;. In a previous scene in the film, Cole wakes up in a hospital bed with the scientists talking to him in chorus. This is a direct homage to the &quot;Dry Bones&quot; scene in Dennis Potter&#x27;s &quot;The Singing Detective&quot;. James Cole is a notable Christ figure in the film. The film is significant in the genre of science-fiction film noir, and it alludes to various &quot;canonical noir&quot; films.

==Release==
===Home media===
Universal Pictures released &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; on VHS on January 28, 1997. It was also released on a &quot;Signature Collection&quot; LaserDisc of the film on February 18, 1997, containing an audio commentary by director Terry Gilliam and producer Charles Roven, &quot;The Hamster Factor and Other Tales of Twelve Monkeys&quot; (a making-of documentary), an archive of production art, and production notes.
It was first released on DVD on March 31, 1998, containing the same extras as the LaserDisc. It was re-released as a Special Edition DVD on May 10, 2005, with a new transfer of the film and identical extras. It was also released on HD DVD on March 4, 2008, with the same extras. It was released on Blu-ray Disc on July 28, 2009, with the same extras. Arrow Films released a new Blu-ray of the film on October 15, 2018, containing a new transfer of the film, remastered in 4K from the original negative, all of the previous extras, as well as a vintage 1996 interview with Terry Gilliam, and an interview with Gilliam scholar Ian Christie.

=== Lebbeus Woods lawsuit ===
In the beginning of the film, Cole is brought into an interrogation room and told to sit in a chair attached to a vertical rail on the wall. A spherical machine with screens of varying sizes showing close-ups of the faces of the scientists interrogating Cole, supported by a metal armature is suspended directly in front of him, probing for weaknesses as the inquisitors interrogate him. Architect Lebbeus Woods filed a lawsuit against Universal in February 1996, claiming that his work &quot;Neomechanical Tower (Upper) Chamber&quot; was used without permission. Woods won his lawsuit, requiring Universal to remove the scenes, but he ultimately allowed their inclusion in exchange for a &quot;high six-figure cash settlement&quot; from Universal.

=== Trilogy claims ===
After the release of &quot;The Zero Theorem&quot; in 2013, claims were made that Gilliam had meant it as part of a trilogy. A 2013 review for &quot;The Guardian&quot; said, &quot;Calling it [&quot;The Zero Theorem&quot;] the third part of a trilogy formed by earlier dystopian satires &quot;Brazil&quot; and &quot;Twelve Monkeys&quot; [&quot;sic&quot;]&quot;; but in an interview with Alex Suskind for &quot;Indiewire&quot; in late 2014, Gilliam said, &quot;Well, it&#x27;s funny, this trilogy was never something I ever said, but it&#x27;s been repeated so often it&#x27;s clearly true [laughs]. I don&#x27;t know who started it but once it started it never stopped&quot;.

==Reception==
===Box office===
&quot;12 Monkeys&quot; grossed $57.14 million in the United States and Canada, and $111.69 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $168.83 million. The film held the No.1 spot on box office charts for two weeks in January, before dropping due to competition from &quot;From Dusk till Dawn&quot;, &quot;Mr. Holland&#x27;s Opus&quot;, and &quot;Black Sheep&quot;.

===Critical response===

 Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;B&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

Roger Ebert found &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; depiction of the future similar to &quot;Blade Runner&quot; (1982, also scripted by David Peoples) and &quot;Brazil&quot; (1985, also directed by Terry Gilliam). &quot;The film is a celebration of madness and doom, with a hero who tries to prevail against the chaos of his condition, and is inadequate&quot;, Ebert wrote. &quot;This vision is a cold, dark, damp one, and even the romance between Willis and Stowe feels desperate rather than joyous. All of this is done very well, and the more you know about movies (especially the technical side), the more you&#x27;re likely to admire it. [...] And as entertainment, it appeals more to the mind than to the senses.&quot;

Janet Maslin of &quot;The New York Times&quot; stated, &quot;This apocalyptic nightmare, a vigorous work of dark, surprise-filled science fiction, is much tougher and less fanciful than the director&#x27;s films have often been. [...] &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; is fierce and disturbing, with a plot that skillfully resists following any familiar course. The film&#x27;s hero fears that he&#x27;s half-crazy, and for two hours Mr. Gilliam artfully keeps his audience feeling the same way.&quot; Desson Thomson of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; praised the art direction and set design. &quot;Willis and Pitt&#x27;s performances, Gilliam&#x27;s atmospherics and an exhilarating momentum easily outweigh such trifling flaws in the script&quot;, Thomson wrote. Peter Travers from &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine attributes the film&#x27;s success to Gilliam&#x27;s direction and Willis&#x27; performance. Internet reviewer James Berardinelli believed the filmmakers had an intelligent and creative motive for the time-travel subplot. Rather than being sent to change the past, James Cole is instead observing it to make a better future. Richard Corliss of &quot;Time&quot; magazine felt the film&#x27;s time-travel aspect and apocalyptic depiction of a bleak future were clichs. &quot;In its frantic mix of chaos, carnage and zoo animals, &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; is &quot;Jumanji&quot; for adults&quot;, Corliss wrote.

===Accolades===
Brad Pitt was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, but lost out to Kevin Spacey for his performance in &quot;The Usual Suspects&quot;. Costume designer Julie Weiss was also nominated for her work, but lost out to James Acheson of &quot;Restoration&quot;. However, Pitt won the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture. Terry Gilliam was honored for his direction at the 46th Berlin International Film Festival.

The film also received positive notices from the science fiction community. It was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and the Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Films awarded it the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film at the 22nd Saturn Awards. Pitt and Weiss won awards at the ceremony as well; Gilliam, Bruce Willis, Madeleine Stowe, and writers David and Janet Peoples also received nominations.

== Television series ==
On August 26, 2013, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; announced that Syfy was developing a &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; television series based on the film. Production began in November 2013. The pilot was written by Terry Matalas and Travis Fickett, who had previously written for the series &quot;Terra Nova&quot;. Due to the series being labeled as &quot;cast contingent&quot;, the series did not move forward until the roles of Cole and Goines were cast. In April 2014, Syfy green-lighted the first season, which consisted of 13 episodes, including the pilot filmed in 2013. The series premiered on January 16, 2015. On March 12, 2015, the series was renewed for a second season that began airing in April 2016. Actress Madeleine Stowe made an appearance in one Season 2 episode, being the only cast member of the film to appear on the series. On June 29, 2016, the series was renewed for a 10-episode third season, set to premiere in 2017. The third season aired over three consecutive nights, from May 19 to May 21, 2017. A fourth and final season was announced on March 16, 2017. The eleven-episode fourth season ran from June 15 to July 6, 2018.
== References ==
==Further reading==

== External links ==
* 
* &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; at DailyScript.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="30" end="45" title="Science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="46" end="59" title="thriller film" label="thriller film"/>
<link wikidata="Q25078" start="72" end="85" title="Terry Gilliam" label="Terry Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177114" start="107" end="120" title="David Peoples" label="David Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161925" start="125" end="138" title="Janet Peoples" label="Janet Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q170256" start="152" end="164" title="Chris Marker" label="Chris Marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q451434" start="194" end="202" title="La Jete" label="La Jete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="219" end="231" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209098" start="233" end="248" title="Madeleine Stowe" label="Madeleine Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="250" end="259" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q190523" start="265" end="284" title="Christopher Plummer" label="Christopher Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="295" end="318" title="Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="post-apocalyptic future"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="435" end="440" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="468" end="484" title="World population" label="human population"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="596" end="614" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q903494" start="737" end="756" title="68th Academy Awards" label="68th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="785" end="806" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q277536" start="822" end="841" title="Academy Award for Best Costume Design" label="Best Costume Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226428" start="880" end="898" title="22nd Saturn Awards" label="22nd Saturn Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131772" start="914" end="939" title="Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film" label="Best Science Fiction Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258647" start="941" end="962" title="Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q971008" start="979" end="992" title="Saturn Award for Best Costume Design" label="Best Costumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q723830" start="1008" end="1029" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor  Motion Picture" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q113879" start="1037" end="1061" title="53rd Golden Globe Awards" label="53rd Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1344" end="1356" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="1593" end="1602" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="1792" end="1808" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774345" start="1813" end="1827" title="anti-corporatism" label="anti-corporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2454" end="2465" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522199" start="2633" end="2650" title="Cassandra metaphor" label="Cassandra complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="2808" end="2862" title="Human impact on the environment" label="humanity&amp;#x27;s gradual destruction of the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q537749" start="3737" end="3749" title="Florida Keys" label="Florida Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053574" start="5181" end="5199" title="executive producer" label="executive producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q451434" start="5266" end="5274" title="La Jete" label="La Jete"/>
<link wikidata="Q170256" start="5334" end="5346" title="Chris Marker" label="Chris Marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012083" start="5359" end="5364" title="Pitch (filmmaking)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="5380" end="5398" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709045" start="5502" end="5515" title="film rights" label="remake rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177114" start="5526" end="5531" title="David Peoples" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161925" start="5536" end="5549" title="Janet Peoples" label="Janet Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740357" start="5584" end="5597" title="Charles Roven" label="Charles Roven"/>
<link wikidata="Q25078" start="5604" end="5617" title="Terry Gilliam" label="Terry Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257444" start="5790" end="5805" title="film adaptation" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308918" start="5815" end="5835" title="A Tale of Two Cities" label="A Tale of Two Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q272595" start="6623" end="6633" title="Waterworld" label="Waterworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682100" start="6671" end="6683" title="cost overrun" label="cost overrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q914232" start="6786" end="6798" title="asking price" label="asking price"/>
<link wikidata="Q25057" start="6898" end="6904" title="Brazil (1985 film)" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042860" start="6929" end="6948" title="final cut privilege" label="final cut privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180240" start="6954" end="6978" title="Writers Guild of America" label="Writers Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q188018" start="7227" end="7237" title="Nick Nolte" label="Nick Nolte"/>
<link wikidata="Q174843" start="7256" end="7268" title="Jeff Bridges" label="Jeff Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="7363" end="7375" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="7380" end="7390" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q466297" start="7509" end="7524" title="The Fisher King (film)" label="The Fisher King"/>
<link wikidata="Q209098" start="7800" end="7815" title="Madeleine Stowe" label="Madeleine Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q604155" start="7891" end="7896" title="Blink (1993 film)" label="Blink"/>
<link wikidata="Q308918" start="7999" end="8019" title="A Tale of Two Cities" label="A Tale of Two Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q318910" start="8548" end="8574" title="Interview with the Vampire (film)" label="Interview with the Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q913324" start="8595" end="8614" title="Legends of the Fall" label="Legends of the Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q190908" start="8639" end="8644" title="Seven (1995 film)" label="Se7en"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646993" start="8692" end="8698" title="A-list" label="A-list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="8787" end="8799" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="8844" end="8861" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="8965" end="8986" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="9050" end="9062" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="9067" end="9076" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692390" start="9092" end="9107" title="Senator Theatre" label="Senator Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501051" start="9489" end="9506" title="shooting schedule" label="shooting schedule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686430" start="9555" end="9571" title="Jeffrey Beecroft" label="Jeffrey Beecroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962070" start="9589" end="9608" title="production designer" label="production designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210832" start="9773" end="9783" title="The Adventures of Baron Munchausen" label="Munchausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497985" start="9867" end="9878" title="sound stage" label="sound stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q94895" start="10007" end="10049" title="BaltimoreWashington International Airport" label="BaltimoreWashington International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374781" start="10094" end="10124" title="Pennsylvania Convention Center" label="Pennsylvania Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q339098" start="10135" end="10151" title="Reading Terminal" label="Reading Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q489417" start="10206" end="10232" title="Eastern State Penitentiary" label="Eastern State Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768575" start="10237" end="10251" title="Girard College" label="Girard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q138367" start="10298" end="10316" title="Camden, New Jersey" label="Camden, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10357" end="10363" title="1.85:1" label="1.85:1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11295" start="10383" end="10393" title="anamorphic" label="anamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q706364" start="10504" end="10517" title="art direction" label="art direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="10522" end="10536" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q14672" start="10557" end="10569" title="Fresnel lens" label="Fresnel lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386188" start="10690" end="10703" title="Lebbeus Woods" label="Lebbeus Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="10737" end="10750" title="power station" label="power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797184" start="11286" end="11300" title="art department" label="art department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671948" start="11449" end="11464" title="Crispian Sallis" label="Crispian Sallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q385870" start="11481" end="11492" title="flea market" label="flea market"/>
<link wikidata="Q8311" start="11718" end="11743" title="visual effects supervisor" label="visual effects supervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218427" start="11788" end="11796" title="The Mill (company)" label="The Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120891" start="11804" end="11812" title="Cinesite" label="Cinesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="11863" end="11880" title="Film score" label="film&amp;#x27;s score"/>
<link wikidata="Q374682" start="11939" end="11954" title="Paul Buckmaster" label="Paul Buckmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365041" start="11983" end="11992" title="Argentine people" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14390274" start="11993" end="11998" title="Tango music" label="tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q172505" start="12017" end="12032" title="Astor Piazzolla" label="Astor Piazzolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635565" start="12046" end="12066" title="Suite Punta del Este" label="Suite Punta del Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q741321" start="12641" end="12657" title="Woody Woodpecker" label="Woody Woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="12729" end="12742" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q776964" start="12754" end="12769" title="Monkey Business (1931 film)" label="Monkey Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q451434" start="12997" end="13005" title="La Jete" label="La Jete"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="13179" end="13195" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="13209" end="13216" title="Vertigo (film)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212879" start="13458" end="13467" title="Kim Novak" label="Kim Novak"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="13587" end="13600" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="13655" end="13671" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195839" start="13807" end="13835" title="Muir Woods National Monument" label="Muir Woods National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q282423" start="14350" end="14359" title="Dem Bones" label="Dry Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189442" start="14375" end="14388" title="Dennis Potter" label="Dennis Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040028" start="14402" end="14423" title="The Singing Detective" label="The Singing Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108947" start="14455" end="14468" title="Christ figure" label="Christ figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005797" start="14639" end="14657" title="Universal Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="14835" end="14851" title="audio commentary" label="audio commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464369" start="14974" end="14983" title="making-of" label="making-of"/>
<link wikidata="Q178990" start="15282" end="15288" title="HD DVD" label="HD DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="15348" end="15360" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386188" start="16118" end="16131" title="Lebbeus Woods" label="Lebbeus Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q863811" start="16520" end="16536" title="The Zero Theorem" label="The Zero Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q25057" start="16784" end="16790" title="Brazil (1985 film)" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q196004" start="17484" end="17503" title="From Dusk till Dawn" label="From Dusk till Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q564893" start="17517" end="17540" title="Mr. Holland&amp;#x27;s Opus" label="Mr. Holland&amp;#x27;s Opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q880549" start="17558" end="17569" title="Black Sheep (1996 film)" label="Black Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="17624" end="17635" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="17706" end="17717" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="17789" end="17801" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177114" start="17832" end="17845" title="David Peoples" label="David Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q25057" start="17857" end="17863" title="Brazil (1985 film)" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="18421" end="18433" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="18443" end="18461" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024639" start="18912" end="18926" title="Desson Thomson" label="Desson Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="18936" end="18955" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="19176" end="19189" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="19195" end="19229" title="Rolling Stone (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Rolling Stone&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q711909" start="19341" end="19359" title="James Berardinelli" label="James Berardinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q38670" start="19555" end="19570" title="Richard Corliss" label="Richard Corliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="19574" end="19599" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156351" start="19689" end="19695" title="clich" label="clich"/>
<link wikidata="Q222939" start="19790" end="19797" title="Jumanji (film)" label="Jumanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="19854" end="19863" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="19886" end="19925" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="19943" end="19955" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q132351" start="19985" end="20003" title="The Usual Suspects" label="The Usual Suspects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189284" start="20028" end="20039" title="Julie Weiss" label="Julie Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q346384" start="20089" end="20102" title="James Acheson" label="James Acheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093029" start="20112" end="20123" title="Restoration (1995 film)" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q723830" start="20153" end="20217" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor  Motion Picture" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25078" start="20219" end="20232" title="Terry Gilliam" label="Terry Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q524055" start="20270" end="20309" title="46th Berlin International Film Festival" label="46th Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414212" start="20413" end="20454" title="Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation" label="Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822376" start="20463" end="20515" title="Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Films" label="Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131772" start="20531" end="20573" title="Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film" label="Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226428" start="20581" end="20599" title="22nd Saturn Awards" label="22nd Saturn Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="20661" end="20673" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209098" start="20675" end="20690" title="Madeleine Stowe" label="Madeleine Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177114" start="20704" end="20709" title="David Peoples" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161925" start="20714" end="20727" title="Janet Peoples" label="Janet Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="20806" end="20826" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="20848" end="20852" title="Syfy" label="Syfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18421127" start="20870" end="20910" title="12 Monkeys (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;12 Monkeys&amp;quot; television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="20969" end="20974" title="television pilot" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q64853354" start="20990" end="21003" title="Terry Matalas" label="Terry Matalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q218591" start="21072" end="21082" title="Terra Nova (TV series)" label="Terra Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336758" start="21252" end="21263" title="green-light" label="green-light"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30577" wikidata="Q926770" url="?curid=30577" title="Sealed Knot">
<text>The Sealed Knot was a secret Royalist association which plotted for the Restoration of the monarchy during the English Interregnum. The group was commissioned by King Charles II between November 1653 and February 1654 from his exile in Paris for the purpose of coordinating underground Royalist activity in England and preparing for a general uprising against the Protectorate.

== Members ==
Its original founding members were:
* John Belasyse, 1st Baron Belasyse (16141689)
* Sir William Compton (16251663; third son of Spencer Compton, 2nd Earl of Northampton)
* Henry Hastings, 1st Baron Loughborough (16101666)
* Col. John Russell (16201687)
* Col. Sir Edward Villiers (16201689; father of Edward Villiers, 1st Earl of Jersey)
* Sir Richard Willis (sometimes spelt &#x27;Willys&#x27;) (1613/141690)

Additional members include:
*Susan Hyde ( 1607  1656)
*Elizabeth Maitland, Lady Tollemache (unclear)
*William Maynard, 2nd Baron Maynard

== Uprisings ==
The Sealed Knot made ten attempts between 1652 and 1659 to bring about the Restoration. The largest uprisings were staged in 1655 and 1659:
*Penruddock uprising (1655), named after one of the leaders of the revolt, John Penruddock. The revolt was easily put down by forces loyal to the Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell, and for his part in the rebellion Penruddock was beheaded in May 1655. The conspiracy was ultimately ineffective, partly because of an abundance of caution, but not least due to the treachery of Willis, who was feeding information to Cromwell&#x27;s spymaster John Thurloe from at least 1656, for reasons which remain unknown.
*Booth&#x27;s uprising (1659) occurred after the death of Oliver Cromwell. The conspiracy was known to Thurloe and the Royalists under the command of Sir George Booth, and was militarily defeated on 19 August at the Battle of Winnington Bridge by a New Model Army contingent under the command of General John Lambert.

==See also==

* Secret society

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q926770" start="4" end="15" title="Sealed Knot" label="Sealed Knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="29" end="37" title="Cavalier" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="72" end="83" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558636" start="111" end="130" title="English Interregnum" label="English Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="162" end="177" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="360" end="376" title="the Protectorate" label="the Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221390" start="431" end="464" title="John Belasyse, 1st Baron Belasyse" label="John Belasyse, 1st Baron Belasyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4230107" start="483" end="498" title="William Compton (army officer)" label="William Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q337036" start="524" end="564" title="Spencer Compton, 2nd Earl of Northampton" label="Spencer Compton, 2nd Earl of Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722713" start="568" end="606" title="Henry Hastings, 1st Baron Loughborough" label="Henry Hastings, 1st Baron Loughborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255970" start="626" end="638" title="John Russell (Royalist)" label="John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345727" start="662" end="677" title="Edward Villiers (16201689)" label="Edward Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277677" start="700" end="735" title="Edward Villiers, 1st Earl of Jersey" label="Edward Villiers, 1st Earl of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528682" start="743" end="757" title="Richard Willis (spy)" label="Richard Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q113288770" start="840" end="850" title="Susan Hyde (spy)" label="Susan Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623774" start="867" end="902" title="Elizabeth Maitland, Duchess of Lauderdale" label="Elizabeth Maitland, Lady Tollemache"/>
<link wikidata="Q24205941" start="914" end="948" title="William Maynard, 2nd Baron Maynard" label="William Maynard, 2nd Baron Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491711" start="1107" end="1126" title="Penruddock uprising" label="Penruddock uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033690" start="1181" end="1196" title="John Penruddock" label="John Penruddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q512196" start="1252" end="1266" title="Lord Protector" label="Lord Protector"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="1267" end="1282" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q544680" start="1544" end="1556" title="John Thurloe" label="John Thurloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841344" start="1612" end="1633" title="Booth&amp;#x27;s uprising" label="Booth&amp;#x27;s uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679598" start="1761" end="1777" title="Sir George Booth" label="Sir George Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q85745955" start="1827" end="1854" title="Battle of Winnington Bridge" label="Battle of Winnington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="1860" end="1874" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395992" start="1915" end="1927" title="John Lambert (general)" label="John Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="1946" end="1960" title="Secret society" label="Secret society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30581" wikidata="Q182727" url="?curid=30581" title="The Crying Game">
<text>The Crying Game is a 1992 crime thriller film, written and directed by Neil Jordan, produced by Stephen Woolley and Nik Powell, and starring Stephen Rea, Miranda Richardson, Jaye Davidson, Adrian Dunbar, Ralph Brown, and Forest Whitaker. The film explores themes of race, sex, gender, nationality, and sexuality against the backdrop of the Troubles in Northern Ireland.

The film follows Fergus (Rea), a member of the IRA, who has a brief but meaningful encounter with a British soldier, Jody (Whitaker), who is being held prisoner by the group. Fergus later develops an unexpected romantic relationship with Jody&#x27;s lover, Dil (Davidson), whom Fergus promised Jody he would take care of. Fergus is forced to decide between what he wants and what his nature dictates he must do.

A critical and commercial success, &quot;The Crying Game&quot; won the BAFTA Award for Best British Film as well as the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay, alongside Oscar nominations for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor for Rea, Best Supporting Actor for Davidson, and Best Film Editing. In 1999, the British Film Institute named it the 26th-greatest British film of all time.

== Plot ==
At a rural Northern Irish fairground, a Provisional IRA volunteer named Fergus and a unit of other IRA members, led by Peter Maguire, kidnap a Black British soldier named Jody after a female member of their unit, Jude, lures Jody to a secluded area by promising sex. The unit intends to hold Jody until an imprisoned IRA member is released, and if their demands are not met within three days, he will be executed.

As Fergus stands guard over Jody, the two begin to bond, and Jody shares the fable of the Scorpion and the Frog with him. Aware that he may not survive, Jody asks Fergus to promise to find his girlfriend Dil. When the captors&#x27; deadline passes without their demands being met, Fergus is ordered to take Jody into the woods to kill him. However, instead of shooting him, Fergus chases Jody when he attempts to escape. As Jody flees, he runs into the road and is struck and killed by a British armoured personnel carrier.

The British army attacks the IRA unit, and Fergus manages to escape, believing his companions have perished in the attack. He flees to London, assuming the alias &quot;Jimmy&quot; and finding work as a day labourer. A few months later, Fergus finds Dil at a hair salon, where Jody had told him that Dil works as a stylist. He follows her to a bar, and they flirt using the barman, Col, as an intermediary. They develop a relationship, and in time Fergus falls in love with her.

Later, when they are about to become intimate, Dil undresses, revealing that non-operative Dil is transsexual. Fergus, initially repulsed, reacts severely, hitting Dil in the face and leaving her apartment. After some reflection, he apologizes to Dil in a note, and they reconcile.

Around the same time, Jude reappears and coerces Fergus into helping with an assassination plot against a British judge, using the threat of harm to Dil to ensure his cooperation. Fergus continues to woo Dil, disguising her as a boy in Jody&#x27;s old cricket uniform to protect her. The night before the IRA mission, Dil gets drunk and Fergus stays with her. He confesses his role in Jody&#x27;s death, but Dil appears not to fully comprehend in her intoxicated state.

In the morning, Dil restrains Fergus with stockings, preventing him from completing the assassination. An angry Maguire manages to shoot the judge, but he is shot and killed by the judge&#x27;s bodyguards. Jude, seeking revenge, enters Dil&#x27;s flat with a gun, but Dil manages to overpower her and shoots her dead after learning of her involvement in Jody&#x27;s death. Dil then points the gun at Fergus but ultimately spares him, stating that Jody would not want her to kill him.

Fergus prevents Dil from killing herself and allows her to escape. He wipes her fingerprints from the gun and takes the blame for Jude&#x27;s murder. Months later, Dil visits Fergus in prison and asks why he took the fall for her. He responds, &quot;As a man once said, it&#x27;s in my nature,&quot; and begins to recount the story of the Scorpion and the Frog.

== Cast ==
== Production ==
Neil Jordan first drafted the screenplay in the mid-1980s under the title &quot;The Soldier&#x27;s Wife&quot;, but shelved the project after a similar film was released. 
A 1931 short story by Frank O&#x27;Connor called &quot;Guests of the Nation&quot;, in which IRA soldiers develop a bond with their English captives, whom they are ultimately forced to kill, partly inspired the story.

Jordan sought to begin production of the film in the early 1990s, but found it difficult to secure financing, as the script&#x27;s controversial themes and his recent string of box office flops discouraged potential investors. Several funding offers from the United States fell through because the funders wanted Jordan to cast a woman to play the role of Dil, believing that it would be impossible to find an androgynous male actor who could pass as female. Derek Jarman eventually referred Jordan to Jaye Davidson, who was completely new to acting, and was spotted by a casting agent while attending a premiere party for Jarman&#x27;s film &quot;Edward II&quot;. Rea later said, &quot;&#x27;If Jaye hadn&#x27;t been a completely convincing woman, my character would have looked stupid&#x27;&quot;. The film included full-frontal &quot;male&quot; nudity on Davidson&#x27;s part; he was filmed nude in the notable bedroom scene in which Dil&#x27;s sexual anatomy was revealed.

The film went into production with an inadequate patchwork of funding, leading to a stressful and unstable filming process. The producers constantly searched for small amounts of money to keep the production going, and the unreliable pay left crew members disgruntled. Costume designer Sandy Powell had an extremely small budget to work with and ended up having to lend Davidson some of her own clothes to wear in the film, as the two happened to be the same size.

The film was known as &quot;The Soldier&#x27;s Wife&quot; for much of its production, but Stanley Kubrick, a friend of Jordan, counselled against the title, which he said would lead audiences to expect a war film. The opening sequence was shot in Laytown, County Meath, Ireland, and the rest in London and Burnham Beeches, Buckinghamshire, England. The bulk of the film&#x27;s London scenes were shot in the East End, specifically Hoxton and Spitalfields. Dil&#x27;s flat is in a building facing onto Hoxton Square, with the exterior of the Metro on nearby Coronet Street. Fergus&#x27;s flat and Dil&#x27;s hair salon are both in Spitalfields. Chesham Street in Belgravia was the location for the assassination of the judge, with the now-defunct Lowndes Arms pub just around the corner.

== Release ==
The film was shown at festivals in Italy, the United States and Canada in September, and originally released in Ireland and the UK in October 1992, where it failed at the box office. Director Neil Jordan, in later interviews, attributed this failure to the film&#x27;s heavily political undertone, particularly its sympathetic portrayal of an IRA fighter. The bombing of a pub in London is specifically mentioned as turning the English press against the film.

The then-fledgling film studio Miramax Films decided to promote the film in the U.S. where it became a sleeper hit. A memorable advertising campaign generated intense public curiosity by asking audiences not to reveal the film&#x27;s &quot;secret&quot; regarding Dil&#x27;s gender identity. Those surveyed by CinemaScore on opening night gave the film a grade &quot;B&quot; on a scale of A+ to F. Jordan also believed the film&#x27;s success was a result of the film&#x27;s BritishIrish politics being either lesser-known or completely unknown to American audiences, who flocked to the film for what Jordan called &quot;the sexual politics&quot;.

The film earned critical acclaim and was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Film Editing, Best Actor (Rea), Best Supporting Actor (Davidson) and Best Director. Writer-director Jordan finally won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. The film went on to success around the world, including re-releases in Britain and Ireland.

=== Critical reception ===
&quot;The Crying Game&quot; received worldwide acclaim from critics. The film has a 95% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 73 reviews, with an average rating of 8.30/10. The consensus states, &quot;&quot;The Crying Game&quot; is famous for its shocking twist, but this thoughtful, haunting mystery grips the viewer from start to finish.&quot; On the review aggregator website Metacritic the film has a score of 90 out of 100 based on 22 reviews, indicating &quot;universal acclaim&quot;.

Roger Ebert awarded the film a rating of four out of four stars, describing it in his review as one that &quot;involves us deeply in the story, and then it reveals that the story is really about something else altogether&quot; and named it &quot;one of the best films of 1992&quot;.

Richard Corliss, in &quot;Time&quot; magazine, stated: &quot;And the secret? Only the meanest critic would give that away, at least initially.&quot; He alluded to the film&#x27;s secret by means of an acrostic, forming the sentence &quot;she is a he&quot; from the first letter of each paragraph.

Much has been written about &quot;The Crying Game&quot;&#x27;s discussion of race, nationality, and sexuality. Theorist and author Jack Halberstam argued that the viewer&#x27;s placement in Fergus&#x27;s point of view regarding Dil being a transsexual reinforces societal norms rather than challenging them.

David Cronenberg stated that he was disappointed by &quot;M. Butterfly&quot;&#x27;s reception and felt that it was overshadowed by &quot;The Crying Game&quot;. He said that the films paralleled each other as both were transsexual, transracial, and transcultural. He was critical of &quot;The Crying Game&quot; stating that the film &quot;copped out&quot; and that &quot;the Stephen Rea character should have killed the black soldier&quot; as it &quot;would have made the movie so much more powerful because his guilt would have been so much greater&quot;.

&quot;The Crying Game&quot; was placed on over 50 critics&#x27; ten-best lists in 1992, based on a poll of 106 film critics.

===Box office===
The film grossed 2 million ($3 million) in the United Kingdom. In the United States and Canada it was more successful, grossing $62.5 million, becoming Miramax&#x27;s highest grossing film in that market at the time and, based on &quot;Screen International&quot; definition of a British film, the second-highest grossing British film in the United States at the time. Based on its US gross, it was the most successful film of the year on a cost to US gross basis. It grossed a total of $71 million worldwide.

== Awards and nominations ==
== Soundtrack ==
The soundtrack to the film, &quot;The Crying Game: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack&quot;, released on 23 February 1993, was produced by Anne Dudley and Pet Shop Boys. Boy George scored his first hit since 1987 with his recording of the title song  a song that had been a hit in the 1960s for British singer Dave Berry. The closing rendition of Tammy Wynette&#x27;s &quot;Stand by Your Man&quot; was performed by American singer Lyle Lovett.
# &quot;The Crying Game&quot;  Boy George
# &quot;When a Man Loves a Woman&quot;  Percy Sledge
# &quot;Live for Today&quot; (Orchestral)  Cicero and Sylvia Mason-James
# &quot;Let the Music Play&quot;  Carroll Thompson (credited as Carol Thompson)
# &quot;White Cliffs of Dover&quot;  The Blue Jays
# &quot;Live for Today&quot; (Gospel)  David Cicero
# &quot;The Crying Game&quot;  Dave Berry
# &quot;Stand by Your Man&quot;  Lyle Lovett
# &quot;The Soldier&#x27;s Wife&quot;*
# &quot;It&#x27;s in my Nature&quot;*
# &quot;March to the Execution&quot;*
# &quot;I&#x27;m Thinking of You&quot;*
# &quot;Dies Irae&quot;*
# &quot;The Transformation&quot;*
# &quot;The Assassination&quot;*
# &quot;The Soldier&#x27;s Tale&quot;*

*Orchestral tracks composed by Anne Dudley and performed by the Pro Arte Orchestra of London.

== See also ==
* &quot;Breakfast on Pluto&quot; (2005)
* List of films featuring the Irish Republican Army
* List of transgender characters in film and television
* List of transgender-related topics
* BFI Top 100 British films

==Notes==
==References==
==Works cited==
* 

== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="26" end="45" title="crime thriller film" label="crime thriller film"/>
<link wikidata="Q55428" start="71" end="82" title="Neil Jordan" label="Neil Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610883" start="96" end="111" title="Stephen Woolley" label="Stephen Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034649" start="116" end="126" title="Nik Powell" label="Nik Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q313042" start="141" end="152" title="Stephen Rea" label="Stephen Rea"/>
<link wikidata="Q229241" start="154" end="172" title="Miranda Richardson" label="Miranda Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q360550" start="174" end="187" title="Jaye Davidson" label="Jaye Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825024" start="189" end="202" title="Adrian Dunbar" label="Adrian Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q124357" start="204" end="215" title="Ralph Brown" label="Ralph Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q182763" start="221" end="236" title="Forest Whitaker" label="Forest Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="336" end="348" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="418" end="421" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663714" start="855" end="888" title="BAFTA Award for Best British Film" label="BAFTA Award for Best British Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="904" end="946" title="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay" label="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="958" end="963" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="980" end="992" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="994" end="1007" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="1009" end="1019" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="1029" end="1050" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q281939" start="1069" end="1086" title="Academy Award for Best Film Editing" label="Best Film Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="1101" end="1123" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555746" start="1137" end="1175" title="BFI Top 100 British films" label="26th-greatest British film of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1200" end="1214" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="1229" end="1244" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893705" start="1441" end="1454" title="Honey trapping" label="promising sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202969" start="1690" end="1715" title="the Scorpion and the Frog" label="the Scorpion and the Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q684715" start="2100" end="2126" title="Alvis Saracen" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="2706" end="2717" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="3143" end="3150" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q55428" start="4238" end="4249" title="Neil Jordan" label="Neil Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351972" start="4431" end="4450" title="Frank O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Frank O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615139" start="4464" end="4484" title="Guests of the Nation" label="Guests of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q282787" start="5086" end="5098" title="Derek Jarman" label="Derek Jarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q618617" start="5275" end="5284" title="Edward II (film)" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q289952" start="5891" end="5903" title="Sandy Powell (costume designer)" label="Sandy Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="6161" end="6176" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q369747" start="6275" end="6283" title="war film" label="war film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902456" start="6318" end="6325" title="Laytown" label="Laytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q183544" start="6327" end="6339" title="County Meath" label="County Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999737" start="6377" end="6392" title="Burnham Beeches" label="Burnham Beeches"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="6479" end="6487" title="East End" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998354" start="6502" end="6508" title="Hoxton" label="Hoxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q123219" start="6513" end="6525" title="Spitalfields" label="Spitalfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922708" start="6572" end="6585" title="Hoxton Square" label="Hoxton Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q123024" start="6733" end="6742" title="Belgravia" label="Belgravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55099275" start="7233" end="7249" title="Sussex Arms pub bombing" label="bombing of a pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="7365" end="7378" title="Miramax Films" label="Miramax Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539815" start="7437" end="7448" title="sleeper hit" label="sleeper hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="7643" end="7654" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11073886" start="7808" end="7830" title="IrelandUnited Kingdom relations" label="BritishIrish politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="8042" end="8056" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="8068" end="8080" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q281939" start="8082" end="8099" title="Academy Award for Best Film Editing" label="Best Film Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="8101" end="8111" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="8119" end="8140" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="8156" end="8169" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="8210" end="8252" title="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay" label="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="8472" end="8487" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="8750" end="8760" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="8863" end="8874" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q38670" start="9147" end="9162" title="Richard Corliss" label="Richard Corliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="9173" end="9177" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q173287" start="9348" end="9356" title="acrostic" label="acrostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q433322" start="9576" end="9591" title="Jack Halberstam" label="Jack Halberstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="9685" end="9696" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q55422" start="9754" end="9770" title="David Cronenberg" label="David Cronenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513195" start="9812" end="9824" title="M. Butterfly (film)" label="M. Butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476447" start="10691" end="10711" title="Screen International" label="Screen International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176708" start="11015" end="11037" title="Soundtrack album" label="soundtrack to the film"/>
<link wikidata="Q273502" start="11150" end="11161" title="Anne Dudley" label="Anne Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="11166" end="11179" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q312883" start="11181" end="11191" title="Boy George" label="Boy George"/>
<link wikidata="Q327023" start="11322" end="11332" title="Dave Berry (musician)" label="Dave Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q234017" start="11359" end="11372" title="Tammy Wynette" label="Tammy Wynette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195069" start="11386" end="11403" title="Stand by Your Man" label="Stand by Your Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q543637" start="11443" end="11454" title="Lyle Lovett" label="Lyle Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11464" end="11479" title="The Crying Game (song)#Boy George version" label="The Crying Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456757" start="11507" end="11531" title="When a Man Loves a Woman (song)" label="When a Man Loves a Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q445862" start="11540" end="11552" title="Percy Sledge" label="Percy Sledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8876" start="11597" end="11603" title="David Cicero (singer)" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660959" start="11608" end="11626" title="Sylvia Mason-James" label="Sylvia Mason-James"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046623" start="11662" end="11678" title="Carroll Thompson" label="Carroll Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718782" start="11746" end="11759" title="The Blue Jays" label="The Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195069" start="11864" end="11881" title="Stand by Your Man" label="Stand by Your Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q83771" start="12065" end="12074" title="Dies Irae" label="Dies Irae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246707" start="12253" end="12271" title="Pro Arte Orchestra" label="Pro Arte Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q903819" start="12301" end="12331" title="Breakfast on Pluto (film)" label="&amp;quot;Breakfast on Pluto&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620017" start="12341" end="12390" title="List of films featuring the Irish Republican Army" label="List of films featuring the Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q112972528" start="12393" end="12446" title="List of transgender characters in film and television" label="List of transgender characters in film and television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444692" start="12449" end="12483" title="List of transgender-related topics" label="List of transgender-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555746" start="12486" end="12511" title="BFI Top 100 British films" label="BFI Top 100 British films"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30582" wikidata="Q183063" url="?curid=30582" title="The Sixth Sense">
<text>The Sixth Sense is a 1999 American psychological thriller film written and directed by M. Night Shyamalan. It stars Bruce Willis as a child psychologist whose patient (Haley Joel Osment) claims he can see and talk to the dead.

Released by Buena Vista Pictures through its Hollywood Pictures label on August 6, 1999, &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; received critical acclaim, with praise for the cast performances (particularly those of Willis, Osment, and Toni Collette), atmosphere, direction and surprise ending. It was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Original Screenplay for Shyamalan, Best Supporting Actor for Osment, and Best Supporting Actress for Collette. The film established Shyamalan as a preeminent filmmaker of thrillers and introduced the cinema public to his traits, most notably his affinity for twist endings.

The film was also a commercial success, grossing over $672 million worldwide, becoming the second-highest-grossing film of 1999 and Shyamalan&#x27;s highest-grossing film to date.

== Plot ==
In Philadelphia, child psychologist Malcolm Crowe is at home with his wife Anna when Vincent Grey, a former patient Malcolm had treated, breaks into their house. Vincent accuses Malcolm of failing him before shooting Malcolm and then himself.

Months later, Malcolm has begun working with Cole Sear, a nine-year-old boy who reminds him of Vincent. He feels he must help Cole in order to rectify his own failure to help Vincent and to reconcile with Anna, who has become distant and cold and is suffering from depression. Cole&#x27;s mother Lynn worries about him, especially after seeing mysterious signs of physical harm. At a birthday party, when bullies see that Cole is terribly scared of a cupboard, they lock him in it, causing him to scream in terror about someone seemingly inside with him. Once released, he faints and appears to have been physically assaulted, which his mother attributes to the bullies. Following this, Cole finally confides to Malcolm that he sees dead people who walk around like the living do, unaware that they are dead.

Malcolm thinks Cole is schizophrenic and considers dropping his case. However, after listening to an audiotape from a session with Vincent, he hears a man begging for help in Spanish when Vincent was supposed to be alone in the room, suggesting that Vincent had the same ability. He realizes that Cole is telling the truth and suggests that he try to communicate with the ghosts, and help them finish their business with the living.

One night, Cole finds Kyra Collins, a female child ghost, vomiting. He figures out who she is, and goes with Malcolm to the funeral reception at her home. In her room, Kyra gives Cole a videotape that he hands to her father. The tape reveals Kyra&#x27;s stepmother poisoning her food, alerting her father to the reality of her death and saving her younger sister from the same fate.

Now that Cole is doing better socially and personally, he tries out for and is given a lead part in the school play. He is coached by a ghost director and gives a good performance with Malcolm looking on. Before leaving, Cole suggests that Malcolm try speaking to Anna while she is asleep so he can hear her say her truthful thoughts and feelings. While stuck in traffic, Cole tells Lynn his secret. When she does not believe him, he tells her that his late grandmother visits him and describes details from his mother&#x27;s childhood that he could not have known. Shocked, Lynn finally believes him, and they embrace.

Malcolm returns home to find his wedding video playing and Anna talking in her sleep, asking Malcolm why he left her. Suddenly, she drops his wedding ring and he notices that it is not on his finger. Recalling what Cole told him about dead people only seeing what they want to see, Malcolm locates his gunshot injury, and he realizes that he did not survive being shot by Vincent. He has unknowingly been dead the entire time while working with Cole. Malcolm quickly comes to terms with the fact that he is a ghost, and apologizes to Anna for haunting her and not letting her move on. He tells her that she was never second to anything and that he loves her. Anna&#x27;s face relaxes, indicating she is now at peace. His business with Anna and Cole complete, Malcolm&#x27;s spirit departs in a flash of light.

== Cast ==

== Production ==
=== Development ===
David Vogel, then-president of production of Walt Disney Studios, read Shyamalan&#x27;s spec script and loved it. Without obtaining corporate approval, Vogel bought the rights, despite the price of $3 million and the stipulation that Shyamalan could direct the film. Disney dismissed Vogel from his position at the studio, and Vogel left the company shortly thereafter. Disney sold the production rights to Spyglass Entertainment, while retaining the distribution rights and 12.5% of the film&#x27;s box office takings.

During the casting process for the role of Cole Sear, Shyamalan had been apprehensive about Osment&#x27;s video audition, saying later he was &quot;this really sweet cherub, kind of beautiful, blond boy&quot;. Shyamalan saw the role as darker and more brooding but felt that Osment &quot;nailed it with the vulnerability and the need... He was able to convey a need as a human being in a way that was amazing to see.&quot;

Willis was cast in the role of Malcolm Crowe as part of a deal to compensate the studio for Willis&#x27;s role in the implosion of &quot;Broadway Brawler&quot; the year before.

Marisa Tomei was considered for the role of Lynn Sear.

Michael Cera auditioned for the role of Cole Sear, and Liam Aiken was offered the role but turned it down.

=== Filming ===

The color red is absent from most of the film, but it is used prominently in a few isolated shots for &quot;anything in the real world that has been tainted by the other world&quot; and &quot;to connote really explosively emotional moments and situations&quot;. Examples include the door of the church where Cole seeks sanctuary; the balloon, carpet, and Cole&#x27;s sweater at the birthday party; the tent in which he first encounters Kyra; the volume numbers on Crowe&#x27;s tape recorder; the doorknob on the locked basement door where Malcolm&#x27;s office is located; the shirt that Anna wears at the restaurant; Kyra&#x27;s mother&#x27;s dress at the wake; and the shawl wrapped around the sleeping Anna.

All the clothes Malcolm wears are items he wore or touched the evening before his death, including his overcoat, his blue rowing sweatshirt and the different layers of his suit. Though the filmmakers were careful about clues of Malcolm&#x27;s true state, the camera zooms slowly towards his face when Cole says, &quot;I see dead people.&quot; The filmmakers initially feared this would be too much of a giveaway, but left it in.

Location filming took place mostly in streets and buildings of Philadelphia, including St. Augustine&#x27;s Church on 4th and New Streets in Old City and on Saint Albans Street in Southwest Center City.

== Release ==
&quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; was released on August 6, 1999, by Buena Vista Pictures Distribution. Buena Vista handled North American distribution while Spyglass Entertainment handled international sales. Buena Vista International acquired distribution rights in the United Kingdom, Latin America, Australia, and Singapore.

=== Home media ===
After a six-month online promotion campaign, &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; was released on VHS and DVD by Hollywood Pictures Home Video on March 28, 2000. It went on to become the top-selling DVD of 2000, with more than 2.5 million units shipped, and the all-time second best-selling DVD title up until then, as well as the top video rental title of all-time. The film generated at least from the US home video market, including from VHS rentals in the US.

In the United Kingdom, it was the third-most-watched film of 2003 on television, with viewers that year.

== Reception ==
=== Box office ===
&quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; had a production budget of approximately $40 million (plus $25 million for prints and advertising). During its opening weekend, the film grossed $26.6 million, making it the largest August opening weekend, surpassing &quot;The Fugitive&quot; (1993). It would go on to hold this record for two years until it was overtaken by &quot;Rush Hour 2&quot; in 2001. The film spent five weeks as the number 1 film at the U.S. box office, becoming only the second film, after &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997), to have grossed more than $20 million each for five weekends. With a total gross of $29.2 million, &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; set the record for having the largest Labor Day weekend gross until 2007 when it was surpassed by &quot;Halloween&quot;. During Labor Day, it made $6.3 million, making it the biggest September Monday gross, holding that record until it was beaten by &quot;It&quot; in 2017. It grossed $293,506,292 in the United States and Canada, surpassing &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot; as the tenth highest grossing film of all time in that market at the time. Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 57.5 million tickets in the US and Canada.

In Europe, the film sold 37,124,510 tickets at the box office. In the United Kingdom, it was given at first a limited release on nine screens, and entered at number 8 at the UK box office before climbing up to number one the following week with 430 theatres playing the film. It had a record opening in the Netherlands. It had a worldwide gross of $672,806,292, ranking it ninth on the list of worldwide box-office money earners at the time.

=== Critical response ===

&quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; received widespread critical acclaim, with Osment&#x27;s performance receiving high praise in particular. On the review aggregator website, Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 86% based on reviews from 166 critics, with an average rating of 7.70/10. The site&#x27;s critical consensus reads: &quot;M. Night Shyamalan&#x27;s &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; is a twisty ghost story with all the style of a classical Hollywood picture, but all the chills of a modern horror flick.&quot; Metacritic rated it 64 out of 100 based on 35 reviews, meaning &quot;generally favorable reviews&quot;. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;A&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

In his review for the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, John Anderson wrote that the script was &quot;clever&quot; and called Osment&#x27;s performance the best of the year from a child actor. Stephen Hunter of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; said the film was a &quot;maximum creep-out.&quot;

By vote of the members of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; was awarded the Nebula Award for Best Script during 1999. The film was No. 71 on Bravo&#x27;s &quot;100 Scariest Movie Moments&quot;, for the scene where Cole encounters a female ghost in his tent. In 2024, Looper ranked it number 49 on its list of the &quot;50 Best PG-13 Movies of All Time,&quot; writing that with the film&#x27;s success, &quot;filmmakers and audiences alike began to expect the unexpected, leading to a resurgence of interest in psychological thrillers and supernatural mysteries.&quot;

== Accolades ==

&quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; has received numerous awards and nominations, with Academy Award nomination categories ranging from those honoring the film itself (Best Picture), to its writing, editing, and direction (Best Director, Best Editing, and Best Original Screenplay), to its cast&#x27;s performance (Best Supporting Actor and Best Supporting Actress). Especially lauded was the supporting role of actor Haley Joel Osment, whose nominations include an Academy Award, a Golden Globe Award and a Critics&#x27; Choice Movie Award. Overall, &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; was nominated for six Academy Awards and four British Academy Film Awards, but won none. The film received three nominations from the People&#x27;s Choice Awards and won all of them, with lead actor Bruce Willis being honored for his role. The Satellite Awards nominated the film in four categories, with awards being received for writing (M. Night Shyamalan) and editing (Andrew Mondshein). Supporting actress Toni Collette was nominated for both an Academy Award and a Satellite Award for her role in the film. James Newton Howard was honored by the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers for his composition of the music for the film.

In 2013, the Writers Guild of America ranked the screenplay #50 on its list of 101 Greatest Screenplays ever written.

=== American Film Institute lists ===
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills  No. 60
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:
** &quot;I see dead people.&quot;  No. 44
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  No. 89

== See also ==
* List of ghost films

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q590103" start="35" end="57" title="psychological thriller" label="psychological thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q51489" start="87" end="105" title="M. Night Shyamalan" label="M. Night Shyamalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="116" end="128" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="134" end="152" title="Developmental psychology" label="child psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q489856" start="168" end="185" title="Haley Joel Osment" label="Haley Joel Osment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323594" start="240" end="260" title="Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures" label="Buena Vista Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348264" start="273" end="291" title="Hollywood Pictures" label="Hollywood Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q229291" start="453" end="466" title="Toni Collette" label="Toni Collette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321123" start="495" end="510" title="Plot twist" label="surprise ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="537" end="551" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="563" end="575" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="577" end="590" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="595" end="619" title="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay" label="Best Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="635" end="656" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="673" end="696" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q182015" start="771" end="780" title="Thriller (genre)" label="thrillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q754017" start="966" end="1002" title="1999 in film" label="second-highest-grossing film of 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1070" end="1082" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="1576" end="1586" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="2144" end="2157" title="Schizophrenia" label="schizophrenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2296" end="2303" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414765" start="2820" end="2838" title="Factitious disorder imposed on another" label="poisoning her food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216535" start="4465" end="4484" title="Walt Disney Studios (division)" label="Walt Disney Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q512858" start="4827" end="4849" title="Spyglass Entertainment" label="Spyglass Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q108872492" start="5503" end="5519" title="Broadway Brawler" label="Broadway Brawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q191828" start="5544" end="5556" title="Marisa Tomei" label="Marisa Tomei"/>
<link wikidata="Q309555" start="5600" end="5612" title="Michael Cera" label="Michael Cera"/>
<link wikidata="Q212224" start="5655" end="5665" title="Liam Aiken" label="Liam Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133352" start="6867" end="6883" title="Location filming" label="Location filming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6930" end="6942" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317407" start="6954" end="6981" title="St. Augustine Church (Philadelphia)" label="St. Augustine&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083678" start="7008" end="7016" title="Old City, Philadelphia" label="Old City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571235" start="7047" end="7068" title="Southwest Center City, Philadelphia" label="Southwest Center City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323594" start="7148" end="7181" title="Buena Vista Pictures Distribution" label="Buena Vista Pictures Distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q512858" start="7237" end="7259" title="Spyglass Entertainment" label="Spyglass Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323594" start="7289" end="7314" title="Buena Vista International" label="Buena Vista International"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="7517" end="7520" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="7525" end="7528" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053254" start="7532" end="7561" title="Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment" label="Hollywood Pictures Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756711" start="7754" end="7766" title="video rental" label="video rental"/>
<link wikidata="Q156309" start="8276" end="8288" title="The Fugitive (1993 film)" label="The Fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q830208" start="8384" end="8395" title="Rush Hour 2" label="Rush Hour 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6559725" start="8444" end="8480" title="List of 1999 box office number-one films in the United States" label="number 1 film at the U.S. box office"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="8525" end="8532" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q909063" start="8778" end="8787" title="Halloween (2007 film)" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136484" start="8930" end="8932" title="It (2017 film)" label="It"/>
<link wikidata="Q181795" start="9022" end="9045" title="The Empire Strikes Back" label="The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q223142" start="9127" end="9142" title="Box Office Mojo" label="Box Office Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6559724" start="9431" end="9441" title="List of 1999 box office number-one films in the United Kingdom" label="number one"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="9832" end="9849" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="9859" end="9874" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="10195" end="10207" title="Horror film" label="horror flick"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="10215" end="10225" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="10339" end="10350" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="10450" end="10467" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q983243" start="10612" end="10626" title="Stephen Hunter" label="Stephen Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="10636" end="10655" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="10744" end="10790" title="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q644077" start="10836" end="10864" title="Nebula Award for Best Script" label="Nebula Award for Best Script"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="10901" end="10906" title="Bravo (US TV channel)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q489856" start="11756" end="11773" title="Haley Joel Osment" label="Haley Joel Osment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="11804" end="11817" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q723830" start="11821" end="11839" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor  Motion Picture" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q922229" start="11846" end="11878" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Young Performer" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="11963" end="11990" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q501058" start="12051" end="12078" title="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards" label="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="12116" end="12128" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40024" start="12161" end="12177" title="Satellite Awards" label="Satellite Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q506338" start="12290" end="12306" title="Andrew Mondshein" label="Andrew Mondshein"/>
<link wikidata="Q229291" start="12328" end="12341" title="Toni Collette" label="Toni Collette"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="12368" end="12381" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348108" start="12388" end="12403" title="Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actress  Motion Picture" label="Satellite Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q213869" start="12430" end="12449" title="James Newton Howard" label="James Newton Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="12469" end="12522" title="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers" label="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180240" start="12584" end="12608" title="Writers Guild of America" label="Writers Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q103076" start="12620" end="12630" title="screenplay" label="screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767231" start="12730" end="12764" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills"/>
<link wikidata="Q400051" start="12776" end="12815" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q620121" start="12862" end="12922" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109823" start="12950" end="12969" title="List of ghost films" label="List of ghost films"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30583" wikidata="Q2487" url="?curid=30583" title="Thirty Years' War">
<text>The Thirty Years&#x27; War, from 1618 to 1648, one of the most destructive conflicts in European history, was fought primarily in Central Europe. An estimated 4.5 to 8 million soldiers and civilians died from the effects of battle, famine, or disease, while parts of Germany reported population declines of over 50%. Related conflicts include the Eighty Years&#x27; War, the War of the Mantuan Succession, the Franco-Spanish War, the Torstenson War, the Dutch-Portuguese War, and the Portuguese Restoration War.

The war can be seen as a continuation of the religious conflict initiated by the 16th-century Reformation within the Holy Roman Empire. The 1555 Peace of Augsburg attempted to resolve this by dividing the Empire into Catholic and Lutheran states, but over the next 50 years the expansion of Protestantism beyond these boundaries destabilised the settlement. However, while differences over religion and Imperial authority were important factors in causing the war, some contemporary commentators suggest its scope and extent were driven by the contest for European dominance between Habsburg-ruled Spain and Austria, and the French House of Bourbon.

Its outbreak is generally traced to 1618, when Emperor Ferdinand II was deposed as king of Bohemia and replaced by the Protestant Frederick V of the Palatinate. Although Imperial forces quickly suppressed the Bohemian Revolt, Frederick&#x27;s participation expanded the fighting into the Palatinate, whose strategic importance drew in the Dutch Republic and Spain, then engaged in the Eighty Years&#x27; War. In addition, the acquisition of territories within the empire by rulers like Christian IV of Denmark and Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden gave them and other foreign powers an ongoing motive to intervene. Combined with fears the Protestant religion in general was threatened, what started as an internal dynastic dispute became a European conflict.

The period from 1618 to 1635 was primarily a civil war within the Holy Roman Empire, with support from external powers. After 1635, the empire became one theatre in a wider struggle between France, chiefly supported by Sweden, and Emperor Ferdinand III, whose principal ally was Spain. Fighting ended with the 1648 Peace of Westphalia, the terms of which included greater autonomy within the empire for states like Bavaria and Saxony, as well as acceptance of Dutch independence by Spain. The conflict shifted the balance of power in favour of France, and set the stage for the expansionist wars of Louis XIV which dominated Europe for the next sixty years.

==Structural origins==
The 1552 Peace of Passau ended the Schmalkaldic War, a religious conflict between Protestants and Catholics within the Holy Roman Empire. The 1555 Peace of Augsburg tried to prevent recurrence of conflict by fixing boundaries between the two faiths, using the principle of &quot;cuius regio, eius religio&quot;. This designated individual states as either Lutheran, then the most usual form of Protestantism, or Catholic, based on the religion of their ruler. Other provisions protected substantial religious minorities in cities like Donauwrth, and confirmed Lutheran ownership of property taken from the Catholic Church since Passau.

These agreements were undermined by the post-1555 expansion of Protestantism into areas previously designated as Catholic. Another factor was the growth of Protestant faiths not recognised by Augsburg, especially Calvinism, which was viewed with hostility by both Lutherans and Catholics. The Peace of Augsburg also gave individual rulers within the empire greater political autonomy and control over the religion practised in their domains, while weakening central authority. Conflict over economic and political objectives frequently superseded religion, with Lutheran Saxony, DenmarkNorway and Sweden competing with each other and Calvinist Brandenburg over the Baltic trade.

Managing these issues was hampered by the fragmented nature of the empire. Its representative institutions included 300 Imperial Estates distributed across Germany, the Low Countries, northern Italy, and present-day France. These ranged in size and importance from the seven prince-electors who voted for the Holy Roman Emperor, down to prince-bishoprics and Imperial cities like Hamburg. Each also belonged to a regional grouping or &quot;Imperial circle&quot;, which primarily focused on defence and operated as autonomous bodies. Above all of these was the Imperial Diet, which only assembled on an irregular basis, and then largely served as a forum for discussion, rather than legislation.

Although, in theory, emperors were elected, the position had been held by the House of Habsburg since 1440. The largest single landowner within the Holy Roman Empire, they controlled lands containing over eight million subjects, including Austria, Bohemia and Hungary. The Habsburgs also ruled the Spanish Empire until 1556, when Charles V divided the two empires between different branches of the family. This bond was reinforced by frequent inter-marriage, while Spain retained Imperial territories such as the Spanish Netherlands, Milan and Franche-Comt. Although these links meant the Austrian and Spanish Habsburgs often worked together, their objectives did not always align. Spain was a global maritime superpower, whose possessions stretched from Europe to the Philippines, and much of the Americas. In contrast, Austria was a land-based power, focused on ensuring their pre-eminence within Germany and securing their eastern border against the Ottoman Empire.

Before Augsburg, unity of religion compensated for lack of strong central authority; once removed, it presented opportunities for those who sought to further weaken it. These included ambitious Imperial states like Lutheran Saxony and Catholic Bavaria, as well as France, confronted by Habsburg lands on its borders to the north, south, and along the Pyrenees. Since many foreign rulers were also Imperial princes, divisions within the empire drew in external powers like Christian IV of Denmark, who joined the war in 1625 as Duke of Holstein-Gottorp.

==Background: 1556 to 1618==
Disputes occasionally resulted in full-scale conflict like the 1583 to 1588 Cologne War, caused when its ruler converted to Calvinism. More common were events such as the 1606 &quot;Battle of the Flags&quot; in Donauwrth, when riots broke out after the Lutheran majority blocked a Catholic religious procession. Emperor Rudolf approved intervention by the Catholic Maximilian of Bavaria. In return, he was allowed to annex the town, and as agreed at Augsburg, the official religion changed from Lutheran to Catholic.

When the Imperial Diet opened in February 1608, both Lutherans and Calvinists sought formal re-confirmation of the Augsburg settlement. In return, the Habsburg heir Archduke Ferdinand required the immediate restoration of all property taken from the Catholic Church since 1555, rather than the previous practice whereby the court ruled case by case. This demand threatened all Protestants, paralysed the diet, and removed the perception of Imperial neutrality.

Loss of faith in central authority meant towns and rulers began strengthening their fortifications and armies; outside travellers often commented on the growing militarisation of Germany in this period. In 1608, Frederick IV, Elector Palatine formed the Protestant Union, and Maximilian responded by setting up the Catholic League in July 1609. Both were created to support the dynastic ambitions of their leaders, but combined with the 1609 to 1614 War of the Jlich Succession, the result was to increase tensions throughout the empire. Some historians who see the war as primarily a European conflict argue Jlich marks its beginning, with Spain and Austria backing the Catholic candidate, France and the Dutch Republic the Protestant.

External powers became involved in what was an internal German dispute due to the imminent expiry of the 1609 Twelve Years&#x27; Truce, which suspended the Eighty Years&#x27; War between Spain and the Dutch Republic. Before restarting hostilities, Ambrosio Spinola, commander in the Spanish Netherlands, needed to secure the Spanish Road, an overland route connecting Habsburg possessions in Italy to Flanders. This allowed him to move troops and supplies by road, rather than sea where the Dutch navy was dominant; by 1618, the only part not controlled by Spain ran through the Electoral Palatinate.

Since Emperor Matthias had no surviving children, in July 1617 Philip III of Spain agreed to support Ferdinand&#x27;s election as king of Bohemia and Hungary. In return, Ferdinand made concessions to Spain in northern Italy and Alsace, and agreed to support their offensive against the Dutch. Doing so required his election as emperor, which was not guaranteed; Maximilian of Bavaria, who opposed the increase of Spanish influence in an area he considered his own, tried to create a coalition with Saxony and the Palatinate to support his candidacy.

Another option was Frederick V, Elector Palatine, a Calvinist who succeeded his father in 1610, and in 1613 married Elizabeth Stuart, daughter of James I of England. Four of the electors were Catholic, and three were Protestant; if this balance changed, it would potentially result in the election of a Protestant emperor. When Ferdinand became king of Bohemia in 1617, he also gained control of its electoral vote; however, his conservative Catholicism made him unpopular with the predominantly Protestant nobility, who were also concerned about the erosion of their rights. These factors combined to bring about the Bohemian Revolt in May 1618.

==Phase I: 1618 to 1635==

===Bohemian Revolt===

Ferdinand once claimed he would rather see his lands destroyed than tolerate heresy within them. Less than 18 months after taking control of Styria in 1595, he had eliminated Protestantism in what had been a stronghold of the Reformation. Absorbed by their war in the Netherlands, his Spanish relatives preferred to avoid antagonising Protestants elsewhere. They recognised the dangers associated with Ferdinand&#x27;s fervent Catholicism, but supported his claim due to the lack of alternatives.

On being elected king of Bohemia in May 1617, Ferdinand reconfirmed Protestant religious freedoms, but his record in Styria led to the suspicion he was only awaiting a chance to overturn them. These concerns were heightened after a series of legal disputes over property were all decided in favour of the Catholic Church. In May 1618, Protestant nobles led by Count Thurn met in Prague Castle with Ferdinand&#x27;s two Catholic representatives, Vilem Slavata and Jaroslav Borzita. In what became known as the Third Defenestration of Prague, both men were thrown out of the castle windows along with their secretary Filip Fabricius, although all three survived.

Thurn established a Protestant-dominated government in Bohemia, while unrest expanded into Silesia and the Habsburg heartlands of Lower and Upper Austria, where much of the nobility was also Protestant. Losing control of these threatened the entire Habsburg state, while Bohemia was one of the most prosperous areas of the Empire and its electoral vote crucial to ensuring Ferdinand succeeded Matthias as Emperor. The combination meant their recapture was vital for the Austrian Habsburgs but chronic financial weakness left them dependent on Maximilian and Spain for the resources needed to achieve this.

Spanish involvement inevitably drew in the Dutch, and potentially France, although the strongly Catholic Louis XIII of France faced his own Protestant rebels at home and refused to support them elsewhere. The revolt also provided opportunities for external opponents of the Habsburgs, including the Ottoman Empire and Savoy. Funded by Frederick and Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, a mercenary army under Ernst von Mansfeld was sent to support the Bohemian rebels. Attempts by Maximilian and John George of Saxony to broker a negotiated solution ended when Matthias died in March 1619, since many believed the loss of his authority and influence had fatally damaged the Habsburgs.

By mid-June 1619, the Bohemian army under Thurn was outside Vienna and although Mansfeld&#x27;s defeat by Imperial forces at Sablat forced him to return to Prague, Ferdinand&#x27;s position continued to worsen. Gabriel Bethlen, Calvinist Prince of Transylvania, invaded Hungary with Ottoman support, although the Habsburgs persuaded them to avoid direct involvement; this was helped when the Ottomans became involved in the 1620 Polish war, followed by the 1623 to 1639 conflict with Persia.

On 19 August, the Bohemian Estates rescinded Ferdinand&#x27;s 1617 election as king; on the 26th, they formally offered the crown to Frederick. Two days later, Ferdinand was elected emperor, making war inevitable if Frederick accepted the Bohemian Crown. Most of Frederick&#x27;s advisors urged him to reject it, as did the Duke of Savoy, and his father-in-law James I. The exceptions included Christian of Anhalt and Maurice of Orange, for whom conflict in Germany was a means to divert Spanish resources from the Netherlands. The Dutch offered subsidies to Frederick and the Protestant Union, helped raise loans for Bohemia, and provided weapons and munitions.

However, wider European support failed to materialise, largely due to lack of enthusiasm for removing a legally elected ruler, regardless of religion. Although Frederick accepted the crown and entered Prague in October 1619, his support eroded over the next few months. In July 1620, the Protestant Union proclaimed its neutrality, while John George of Saxony backed Ferdinand in return for the cession of Lusatia, and a guarantee of Lutheran rights in Bohemia. Maximilian of Bavaria funded a combined Imperial-Catholic League army led by Count Tilly and Charles of Bucquoy, which pacified Upper and Lower Austria and occupied western Bohemia before marching on Prague. Defeated by Tilly at the Battle of White Mountain in November 1620, the Bohemian army disintegrated, and Frederick was forced to flee the country.

===Palatinate Campaign===
By abandoning Frederick, the German princes hoped to restrict the dispute to Bohemia, but Maximilian&#x27;s dynastic ambitions made this impossible. In the October 1619 Treaty of Munich, Ferdinand transferred the Palatinate&#x27;s electoral vote to Bavaria, and allowed Maximilian to annex the Upper Palatinate. Many Protestant rulers had supported Ferdinand against Frederick because they objected to deposing the legally elected king of Bohemia. On the same grounds, they viewed Frederick&#x27;s removal as an infringement of &quot;German liberties&quot;, while for Catholics, it presented an opportunity to regain lands and properties lost since 1555. The combination destabilised large parts of the Empire.

At the same time, the strategic importance of the Spanish Road to their war in the Netherlands, and its proximity to the Palatinate, drew in the Spanish. When an army led by Crdoba occupied the Lower Palatinate in October 1619, James I responded to this attack on his son-in-law. English naval forces were sent to threaten Spanish possessions in the Americas and the Mediterranean, while James announced he would declare war if Spanish troops were not withdrawn by spring 1621. These actions were primarily designed to placate his opponents in Parliament, who considered his pro-Spanish policy a betrayal of the Protestant cause. However, Spanish chief minister Olivares correctly interpreted them as an invitation to open negotiations, and in return for an Anglo-Spanish alliance offered to restore Frederick to his Rhineland possessions.

Since Frederick&#x27;s demand for full restitution of his lands and titles was incompatible with the Treaty of Munich, hopes of a negotiated peace quickly evaporated. Despite defeat in Bohemia, Frederick&#x27;s allies included Georg Friedrich of Baden and Christian of Brunswick, while the Dutch provided him with military support after the Eighty Years&#x27; War restarted in April 1621 and his father-in-law James funded an army of mercenaries under Mansfeld. However, their failure to co-ordinate effectively led to a series of defeats by Spanish and Catholic League forces, including Wimpfen in May 1622 and Hchst in June. By November 1622, the Imperials controlled most of the Palatinate, apart from Frankenthal, which was held by a small English garrison under Sir Horace Vere. The remnants of Mansfeld&#x27;s army took refuge in the Dutch Republic, as did Frederick, who spent most of his time in The Hague until his death in November 1632.

At a meeting of the Imperial Diet in February 1623, Ferdinand forced through provisions transferring Frederick&#x27;s titles, lands, and electoral vote to Maximilian. He did so with support from the Catholic League, despite strong opposition from Protestant members, as well as the Spanish. The Palatinate was clearly lost; in March, James instructed Vere to surrender Frankenthal, while Tilly&#x27;s victory over Christian of Brunswick at Stadtlohn in August completed military operations. However, Spanish and Dutch involvement in the campaign was a significant step in internationalising the war, while Frederick&#x27;s removal meant other Protestant princes began discussing armed resistance to preserve their own rights and territories.

=== Danish intervention (16251629) ===
With Saxony dominating the Upper Saxon Circle and Brandenburg the Lower, both &quot;kreise&quot; had remained neutral during the campaigns in Bohemia and the Palatinate. However, Frederick&#x27;s deposition in 1623 meant John George of Saxony and the Calvinist George William, Elector of Brandenburg became concerned Ferdinand intended to reclaim formerly Catholic bishoprics currently held by Protestants. These fears seemed confirmed when Tilly restored the Roman Catholic Diocese of Halberstadt in early 1625.

As Duke of Holstein, Christian IV was also a member of the Lower Saxon circle, while the Danish economy relied on the Baltic trade and tolls from traffic through the resund. In 1621, Hamburg accepted Danish &quot;supervision&quot;, while his son Frederick became joint-administrator of Lbeck, Bremen, and Verden; possession ensured Danish control of the Elbe and Weser rivers.

Ferdinand had paid Albrecht von Wallenstein for his support against Frederick with estates confiscated from the Bohemian rebels, and now contracted with him to conquer the north on a similar basis. In May 1625, the Lower Saxony &quot;kreis&quot; elected Christian their military commander, although not without resistance; Saxony and Brandenburg viewed Denmark and Sweden as competitors, and wanted to avoid either becoming involved in the empire. Attempts to negotiate a peaceful solution failed as the conflict in Germany became part of the wider struggle between France and their Habsburg rivals in Spain and Austria.

In the June 1624 Treaty of Compigne, France had agreed to subsidise the Dutch war against Spain for a minimum of three years, while in the December 1625 Treaty of The Hague, the Dutch and English agreed to finance Danish intervention in the Empire. Hoping to create a wider coalition against Ferdinand, the Dutch invited France, Sweden, Savoy, and the Republic of Venice to join, but it was overtaken by events. In early 1626, Cardinal Richelieu, main architect of the alliance, faced a new Huguenot rebellion at home and in the March Treaty of Monzn, France withdrew from northern Italy, re-opening the Spanish Road.

Dutch and English subsidies enabled Christian to devise an ambitious three part campaign plan; while he led the main force down the Weser, Mansfeld would attack Wallenstein in Magdeburg, supported by forces led by Christian of Brunswick and Maurice of Hesse-Kassel. The advance quickly fell apart; Mansfeld was defeated at Dessau Bridge in April, and when Maurice refused to support him, Christian of Brunswick fell back on Wolfenbttel, where he died of disease shortly after. The Danes were comprehensively beaten at Lutter in August, and Mansfeld&#x27;s army dissolved following his death in November.

Many of Christian&#x27;s German allies, such as Hesse-Kassel and Saxony, had little interest in replacing Imperial domination with Danish, while few of the subsidies agreed to by the Treaty of The Hague were ever paid. Charles I of England allowed Christian to recruit up to 9,000 Scottish mercenaries, but they took time to arrive, and while able to slow Wallenstein&#x27;s advance were insufficient to stop him. By the end of 1627, Wallenstein occupied Mecklenburg, Pomerania, and Jutland, and began making plans to construct a fleet capable of challenging Danish control of the Baltic. He was supported by Spain, for whom it provided an opportunity to open another front against the Dutch.

On 13 May 1628, his deputy von Arnim besieged Stralsund, the only port with facilities large enough to build this fleet. However, this threat led Gustavus Adolphus to send several thousand Scots and Swedish troops to Stralsund, commanded by Alexander Leslie who was also appointed governor. Von Arnim was forced to lift the siege on 4 August, but three weeks later, Christian suffered another defeat at Wolgast. He began negotiations with Wallenstein, who despite his recent victories was concerned by the prospect of Swedish intervention, and thus anxious to make peace.

With Austrian resources stretched by the outbreak of the War of the Mantuan Succession, Wallenstein persuaded Ferdinand to agree with relatively lenient terms in the June 1629 Treaty of Lbeck. Christian retained his German possessions of Schleswig and Holstein, in return for relinquishing Bremen and Verden, and abandoning support for the German Protestants. While Denmark kept Schleswig and Holstein until 1864, this effectively ended its reign as the predominant Nordic state.

Once again, the methods used to obtain victory explain why the war failed to end. Ferdinand paid Wallenstein by letting him confiscate estates, extort ransoms from towns, and allowing his men to plunder the lands they passed through, regardless of whether they belonged to allies or opponents. In early 1628, Ferdinand deposed the hereditary Duke of Mecklenburg, and appointed Wallenstein in his place, an act which united all German princes in opposition, regardless of religion. This unity was undermined by Maximilian of Bavaria&#x27;s desire to retain the Palatinate; as a result, the Catholic League argued only for a return to the position prevailing pre-1627, while Protestants wanted that of 1618.

Made overconfident by success, in March 1629 Ferdinand passed an Edict of Restitution, which required all lands taken from the Catholic church after 1555 to be returned. While technically legal, politically it was extremely unwise, since doing so would alter nearly every single state boundary in north and central Germany, deny the existence of Calvinism and restore Catholicism in areas where it had not been a significant presence for nearly a century. Well aware none of the princes involved would agree, Ferdinand used the device of an Imperial edict, once again asserting his right to alter laws without consultation. This new assault on &quot;German liberties&quot; ensured continuing opposition and undermined his previous success.

At the same time, his Spanish allies were reluctant to antagonise German Protestants as their war in the Spanish Netherlands had now shifted in favour of the Dutch Republic. The financial predicament of the Spanish Crown steadily deteriorated in the 1620s, particularly after the Dutch West India Company captured their treasure fleet at Matanzas in 1628. The War of the Mantuan Succession further diverted Spanish resources from the Netherlands, while the loss of &#x27;s-Hertogenbosch to the Dutch Army under Frederick Henry in 1629 caused dismay in Madrid.

===Sweden invades Germany (16301635)===

From 1626 to 1629, Gustavus was engaged in a war with PolandLithuania, ruled by his Catholic cousin Sigismund, who also claimed the Swedish throne and had Imperial support. Once this conflict ended, and with only a few minor states like Hesse-Kassel still openly opposing the Emperor, Gustavus became an obvious ally for Richelieu. In September 1629, the latter helped negotiate the Truce of Altmark between Sweden and Poland, freeing Gustavus to enter the war. Partly a genuine desire to support his Protestant co-religionists, like Christian he also wanted to maximise his share of the Baltic trade that provided much of Sweden&#x27;s income.

Following failed negotiations with the Emperor, Gustavus landed in Pomerania in June 1630 with nearly 18,000 Swedish troops. Using Stralsund as a bridgehead, he marched south along the Oder towards Stettin and coerced Bogislaw XIV, Duke of Pomerania, into agreeing an alliance which secured his interests in Pomerania against his rival Sigismund. As a result, the Poles turned their attention to Russia, initiating the 1632 to 1634 Smolensk War.

However, Swedish expectations of widespread German support proved unrealistic. By the end of 1630, their only new ally was the Administrator of Magdeburg, Christian William whose capital was under siege by Tilly. Despite the devastation inflicted by Imperial soldiers, Saxony and Brandenburg had their own ambitions in Pomerania, which clashed with those of Gustavus; previous experience also showed inviting external powers into the Empire was easier than getting them to leave.

Gustavus put pressure on Brandenburg by sacking Kstrin and Frankfurt an der Oder, while the Sack of Magdeburg in May 1631 provided a powerful warning of the consequences of Imperial victory. Once again, Richelieu used French financial power to bridge differences between the Swedes and the German princes; the 1631 Treaty of Brwalde provided funds for the Swedes and their Protestant allies, including Saxony and Brandenburg. These amounted to 400,000 Reichstaler per year, or one million livres, plus an additional 120,000 for 1630. While less than 2% of total French income, these payments boosted that of Sweden by more than 25%, and allowed Gustavus to maintain 36,000 troops.

Gustavus used this army to win victories at Breitenfeld in September 1631, then Rain in April 1632, where Tilly was killed. Ferdinand turned once again to Wallenstein, who realised Gustavus was overextended and established himself at Frth, from where he could threaten his supply lines. This led to the Battle of the Alte Veste in late August, one of the largest battles of the war. An assault on the Imperial camp outside the town was bloodily repulsed, arguably the greatest blunder committed by Gustavus during his German campaign.

Two months later, the Swedes and Imperials met at Ltzen, where both sides suffered heavy casualties; Gustavus himself was killed, while some Swedish units incurred losses of over 60%. Fighting continued until dusk when Wallenstein retreated, abandoning his artillery and wounded. Despite their losses, this allowed the Swedes to claim victory, although the result continues to be disputed.

After his death, Gustavus&#x27; policies were continued by his Chancellor Axel Oxenstierna, and with French backing, Sweden and their German allies formed the Heilbronn League in April 1633. In July, their combined forces defeated an Imperial army under Bronckhorst-Gronsfeld at Oldendorf. Critics claimed this defeat was caused by Wallenstein&#x27;s failure to support the Bavarians, while rumours spread that he was preparing to switch sides. As a result, Emperor Ferdinand ordered his arrest in February 1634, and on 25th, he was assassinated by his own officers in Cheb.

The loss of Wallenstein and his organisation left Emperor Ferdinand reliant on Spain for military support. Since their main concern was to re-open the Spanish Road for their campaign against the Dutch, the focus of the war now shifted from the north to the Rhineland and Bavaria. Cardinal-Infante Ferdinand of Austria, new Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, raised an army of 18,000 in Italy, which met up with an Imperial force of 15,000 at Donauwrth on 2 September 1634. Four days later, they won a decisive victory at Nrdlingen which destroyed Swedish power in southern Germany and led to the defection of their German allies, who now sought to make peace with the Emperor.

==Phase II: French intervention, 1635 to 1648==

Swedish defeat at Nrdlingen triggered direct French intervention and thus expanded the conflict rather than ending it. Richelieu provided the Swedes with new subsidies, hired mercenaries led by Bernard of Saxe-Weimar for an offensive in the Rhineland, and in May 1635 declared war on Spain, starting the 1635 to 1659 Franco-Spanish War. A few days later, the German states and Ferdinand agreed to the Peace of Prague; in return for withdrawing the Edict of Restitution, the Heilbronn and Catholic Leagues were dissolved and replaced by a single Imperial army, although Saxony and Bavaria retained control of their own forces. This is generally seen as the point when the war ceased to be a primarily inter-German religious conflict.

In March 1635, French soldiers entered the Valtellina, cutting the link between Spanish controlled Milan and the Empire. In May, their main army of 35,000 invaded the Spanish Netherlands, but withdrew in July after suffering 17,000 casualties. In March 1636, France joined the Thirty Years War as an ally of Sweden, whose loss of most of the territories gained by Gustavus and their taxes made it increasingly reliant on French financing. The Spanish then invaded northern France, causing panic in Paris before lack of supplies forced them to retreat. A Swedish army under Johan Banr defeated the Imperials at Wittstock on 4 October, and re-established their predominance in northeast Germany, despite the defection of most of their German allies.

Ferdinand II died in February 1637, and was succeeded by his son Ferdinand III, who faced a deteriorating military position. Although Matthias Gallas and the main Imperial army had forced Banr back to the Baltic, in March 1638, Bernard destroyed an Imperial army at Rheinfelden. His capture of Breisach in December secured French control of Alsace and severed the Spanish Road, forcing Gallas to divert resources there. Although von Hatzfeldt defeated a combined Swedish-German force at Vlotho in October, lack of supplies forced Gallas to withdraw from the Baltic.

In April 1639, Banr defeated the Saxons at Chemnitz, then entered Bohemia in May. To retrieve the situation, Ferdinand diverted Piccolomini&#x27;s army from Thionville, ending direct military cooperation between Austria and Spain. Pressure grew on Olivares to make peace, especially after French and Swedish gains in Germany cut the Spanish Road, forcing Madrid to resupply their armies in Flanders by sea. However, their attempts to re-assert maritime control ended when the Dutch fleet under Maarten Tromp won a significant victory at the Downs in October 1639.

Spanish inability to adequately supply their troops allowed the French to over-run Artois in 1640. At the same time, continuing Dutch attacks on Portuguese colonies and opposition to heavy taxes led to revolts in both Portugal and Catalonia. Olivares now argued Spain should accept Dutch independence, and focus on preventing further French gains in the Spanish Netherlands. This appeared achievable since most of the Dutch &quot;regenten&quot; believed the war was won, the only question being the price of peace. They therefore reduced the army budget for 1640, despite objections from Frederick Henry.

After Bernard died in July 1639, his troops joined Banr&#x27;s Swedish army on an ineffectual campaign along the Weser, the highlight being a surprise attack in January 1641 on the Imperial Diet in Regensburg. Forced to retreat, Banr reached Halberstadt in May where he died, and despite beating off an Imperial force at Wolfenbttel in June, his largely German troops mutinied due to lack of pay. The situation was saved by the arrival of Lennart Torstensson in November with 7,000 Swedish recruits and enough cash to satisfy the mutineers.

French victory at Kempen in January 1642 was followed by Second Breitenfeld in October 1642, where Torstensson inflicted almost 10,000 casualties on an Imperial army led by Archduke Leopold Wilhelm of Austria. The capture of Leipzig in December gave the Swedes a significant new base in Germany, and despite their failure to take Freiberg, by 1643 the Saxon army had been reduced to a few isolated garrisons. While Ferdinand accepted a military solution was no longer possible, by fighting on he hoped to prevent the Imperial Estates joining his peace negotiations with France and Sweden, thus preserving his authority by allowing him to represent the Empire as a whole.

This seemed more likely when Richelieu died in December 1642, followed by Louis XIII in May 1643, leaving his five-year-old son Louis XIV as king. However, Richelieu&#x27;s policies were continued by his successor Cardinal Mazarin, while gains in Alsace allowed France to focus on the war against Spain. In 1643, the Army of Flanders invaded northern France hoping to relieve pressure elsewhere, but were decisively beaten by Cond at Rocroi on 19 May. Defeat ended any prospect of re-opening the Spanish Road, and Madrid finally accepted the war against the Dutch could not be won.

However, Cond was unable to fully exploit his victory due to factors affecting all combatants. The devastation inflicted by 25 years of warfare meant armies spent more time foraging than fighting, forcing them to become smaller and more mobile, with a much greater emphasis on cavalry. Difficulties in gathering provisions meant campaigns started later, and restricted them to areas that could be easily supplied, usually close to rivers. In addition, the French had to rebuild their army in Germany after it was shattered by an Imperial-Bavarian force led by Franz von Mercy at Tuttlingen in November.

Soon after Rocroi, Ferdinand invited Sweden and France to attend peace talks in the Westphalian towns of Mnster and Osnabrck, but negotiations were delayed when Christian of Denmark blockaded Hamburg and increased toll payments in the Baltic. This severely impacted the Dutch and Swedish economies, and in December 1643 the Torstensson War began when the Swedes invaded Jutland with Dutch naval support. Ferdinand pulled together an Imperial army under Gallas to attack the Swedes from the rear, which proved a disastrous decision. Leaving Wrangel to finish the war in Denmark, in May 1644 Torstensson marched into the Empire; Gallas was unable to stop him, while the Danes sued for peace after their defeat at Fehmarn in October 1644.

In August 1644, the French and Bavarian armies met in the three day Battle of Freiburg, in which both sides suffered heavy casualties. Convinced the war could no longer be won, Maximilian now put pressure on Ferdinand to end the conflict. Shortly after peace talks restarted in November, Gallas&#x27; Imperial army disintegrated and the remnants retreated into Bohemia, where they were scattered by Torstensson at Jankau in March 1645. In May, a Bavarian force under von Mercy destroyed a French detachment at Herbsthausen, before he was defeated and killed at Second Nrdlingen in August. Deprived of Imperial support, John George of Saxony signed a six-month truce with Sweden in September, and in the March 1646 Treaty of Eulenberg agreed to remain neutral until the end of the war.

Under Turenne, French commander in the Rhineland, and Wrangel, who had replaced Torstensson, the French and Swedes separately invaded Bavaria in the summer of 1646. Maximilian was soon desperate to end the war he was largely responsible for starting, at which point the Spanish publicised a secret offer by Mazarin to exchange French-occupied Catalonia for the Spanish Netherlands. Angered by this duplicity, the Dutch agreed a truce with Spain in January 1647 and began to negotiate their own peace terms. Having failed to acquire the Netherlands through diplomacy, Mazarin decided to do so by force. To free up resources for the attempt, on 14 March 1647 he signed the Truce of Ulm with Bavaria, Cologne and Sweden.

The planned offensive fell apart when Turenne&#x27;s mostly German troops mutinied, while Bavarian general Johann von Werth refused to comply with the truce. Although the mutinies were quickly suppressed, Maximilian felt obliged to follow Werth&#x27;s example and in September ordered Bronckhorst-Gronsfeld to combine the remnants of the Bavarian army with Imperial troops under von Holzappel. Outnumbered by a Franco-Swedish army led by Wrangel and Turenne, they were defeated at Zusmarshausen in May 1648 and von Holzappel was killed. Although the bulk of the Imperial army escaped thanks to an effective rearguard action by Raimondo Montecuccoli, Bavaria was left defenceless once again.

The Swedes sent a second force under von Knigsmarck to attack Prague, seizing the castle and Mal Strana district in July. The main objective was to gain as much loot as possible before the war ended; they failed to take the Old Town but captured the Imperial library, along with treasures including the &quot;Codex Gigas&quot;, now in Stockholm. When a Spanish offensive in Flanders ended with defeat at Lens in August 1648, Ferdinand finally agreed terms and on 24 October, he signed peace treaties with France and Sweden, ending the war.

==Conflict outside Germany==

===Northern Italy===

Northern Italy had been contested by France and the Habsburgs since the end of the 15th century. One reason was control of this area allowed opponents to threaten the southern borders of France and Austria. In addition, it contained large sections of the Spanish Road, which allowed Spain to safely move recruits and supplies from their Italian possessions to support their war against the Dutch. This reliance on long exterior lines of communication was a strategic weakness, which the French sought to exploit by disrupting the Road. This usually involved attacks on the Spanish-held Duchy of Milan, or blocking the Alpine passes.

Montferrat and its fortress of Casale Monferrato were subsidiary territories of the Duchy of Mantua and their possession allowed the holder to threaten Milan. This meant when the last duke in the direct line died in December 1627, France and Spain backed rival claimants, resulting in the 1628 to 1631 War of the Mantuan Succession. The French-born Duke of Nevers was backed by France and the Republic of Venice, his rival the Duke of Guastalla by Spain, Ferdinand II, Savoy and Tuscany. While a relatively minor conflict, the struggle had a disproportionate impact on the Thirty Years War, since Pope Urban VIII viewed Habsburg expansion in Italy as a threat to the Papal States. His opposition to Ferdinand II divided the Catholic powers, and made it acceptable for France to employ Protestant allies against Austria.

In March 1629, the French stormed Savoyard positions in the Pas de Suse, lifted the Spanish siege of Casale and captured Pinerolo. The Treaty of Suza then ceded the two fortresses to France and allowed their troops unrestricted passage through Savoyard territory, giving them control over Piedmont and the Alpine passes into southern France. However, as soon as the main French army withdrew in late 1629, the Spanish and Savoyards besieged Casale once again. At the same time, the Spanish employed mercenaries paid for by Ferdinand II in an offensive which routed the main Venetian field army and forced Nevers to abandon Mantua. By October 1630, the French position seemed so precarious their representatives agreed the Treaty of Ratisbon, but it was never ratified as Richelieu claimed he had never approved the terms.

Several factors restored the French position in northern Italy, notably a devastating outbreak of plague; between 1629 and 1631, over 60,000 died in Milan and 46,000 in Venice, with proportionate losses elsewhere. Richelieu took advantage of the diversion of Imperial resources to fund a Swedish invasion of Germany, whose success forced the Spanish-Savoyard alliance to withdraw from Casale and sign the Treaty of Cherasco in April 1631. Nevers was confirmed as Duke of Mantua and although Richelieu&#x27;s representative, Cardinal Mazarin, agreed to evacuate Pinerolo, it was later secretly returned under an agreement with Victor Amadeus I, Duke of Savoy. With the exception of the 1639 to 1642 Piedmontese Civil War, this secured the French position in northern Italy for the next twenty years.

After the outbreak of the Franco-Spanish War in 1635, Richelieu supported a renewed offensive by Victor Amadeus against Milan to tie down Spanish resources. These included an unsuccessful attack on Valenza in 1635, plus minor victories at Tornavento and Mombaldone. However, the anti-Habsburg alliance in northern Italy fell apart when first Charles of Mantua died in September 1637, then Victor Amadeus in October, whose death led to a struggle for control of the Savoyard state between his widow Christine of France and brothers, Thomas and Maurice.

In 1639, their quarrel erupted into open warfare, with France backing Christine and Spain the two brothers, and resulted in the Siege of Turin. One of the most famous military events of the 17th century, at one stage it featured no less than three different armies besieging each other. However, the revolts in Portugal and Catalonia forced the Spanish to cease operations in Italy and the war was settled on terms favourable to Christine and France.

In 1647, a French-backed rebellion succeeded in temporarily overthrowing Spanish rule in Naples. The Spanish quickly crushed the insurrection and restored their rule over all of southern Italy, defeating multiple French expeditionary forces sent to back the rebels. However, it exposed the weakness of Spanish rule in Italy and the alienation of the local elites from Madrid; in 1650, the governor of Milan wrote that as well as widespread dissatisfaction in the south, the only one of the Italian states that could be relied on was the Duchy of Parma.

===Catalonia===

Throughout the 1630s, tax increases levied to pay for the war led to protests throughout Spanish territories, which in 1640 resulted in revolts: first in Portugal, then in the Principality of Catalonia. Backed by France as part of Richelieu&#x27;s &#x27;war by diversion&#x27;, in January 1641 the rebels proclaimed a Catalan Republic. The Madrid government quickly assembled an army of 26,000 men to crush the revolt, which defeated the rebels at Martorell on 23 January 1641. The French now persuaded the Catalan Courts to recognise Louis XIII as Count of Barcelona, and ruler of Catalonia.

On 26 January, a combined French-Catalan force routed a larger Spanish army at Montjuc and secured Barcelona. However, the rebels soon found the new French administration differed little from the old, turning the war into a three-sided contest between the Franco-Catalan elite, the rural peasantry, and the Spanish. There was little serious fighting after France took control of Perpignan and Roussillon, establishing the current-day Franco-Spanish border in the Pyrenees. The revolt ended in 1651 with the Spanish capture of Barcelona.

=== Outside Europe ===
In 1580, Philip II of Spain also became ruler of the Portuguese Empire, creating the Iberian Union; long-standing commercial rivals, the 1602 to 1663 DutchPortuguese War was an offshoot of the Dutch fight for independence from Spain. The Portuguese dominated the trans-Atlantic economy known as the Triangular trade, in which slaves were transported from West Africa and Portuguese Angola to work on plantations in Portuguese Brazil, which exported sugar and tobacco to Europe. Known by Dutch historians as the &#x27;Great Design&quot;, control of this trade would not only be extremely profitable but also deprive the Spanish of funds needed to finance their war in the Netherlands.

In 1621, the Dutch West India Company was formed to achieve this, and a Dutch fleet captured the Brazilian port of Salvador, Bahia in 1624. After it was retaken by the Portuguese in 1625, a second fleet established Dutch Brazil in 1630, which was not returned until 1654. In 1641, the Dutch seized Portuguese slave trading hubs in Angola and So Tom, with support from the kingdoms of Kongo and Ndongo, whose position was threatened by Portuguese expansion. Although those gains proved short-lived, the Dutch retained territories elsewhere, like the Cape Colony, as well as Portuguese trading posts on the Gold Coast, in Malacca, on the Malabar Coast, the Moluccas and Ceylon.

== Peace of Westphalia (1648) ==

The Peace of Westphalia actually consisted of three separate agreements; the Peace of Mnster between Spain and the Dutch Republic, the Treaty of Osnabrck between the Empire and Sweden, plus the Treaty of Mnster between the Empire and France. Preliminary discussions began in 1642 but only became serious in 1646; a total of 109 delegations attended at one time or other, with talks split between Mnster and Osnabrck. After the Swedes rejected Christian of Denmark as mediator, the negotiators finally agreed on Papal Legate Fabio Chigi and the Venetian envoy Alvise Contarini.

The first to be signed on 30 January 1648, the Peace of Mnster forms part of the Westphalia settlement since the Dutch Republic was still considered Imperial territory. Although it officially confirmed Dutch independence, the Imperial Diet did not formally accept it was no longer part of the Empire until 1728. The Dutch were also given a monopoly over trade conducted through the Scheldt estuary, ensuring the commercial ascendancy of Amsterdam. Antwerp, capital of the Spanish Netherlands and previously the most important port in northern Europe, would not recover until the late 19th century.

The terms of the separate treaties with France and Sweden had first to be agreed by Ferdinand and the Imperial Estates. It has been argued they were a &quot;major turning point in German and European...legal history&quot;, because they went beyond normal peace settlements and effected major constitutional and religious changes to the Empire itself. Since they required changes to the structure and governance of the Empire, these negotiations were complex, with states like Saxony and Bavaria having very different views on desired outcomes. Ferdinand finally signed the Peace on 24 October, after a crushing French victory over Spain at Lens, and with Swedish troops on the verge of taking Prague. 

Key elements of the Peace were provisions confirming the autonomy of states within the Empire, including Ferdinand&#x27;s acceptance of the supremacy of the Imperial Diet, and those seeking to prevent future religious conflict. Article 5 reconfirmed the Augsburg settlement, established 1624 as the basis, or &quot;Normaljahr&quot;, for determining the dominant religion of a state and guaranteed freedom of worship for religious minorities. Article 7 recognised Calvinism as a Reformed faith and removed the &quot;ius reformandi&quot;, the requirement that if a ruler changed his religion, his subjects had to follow suit. These terms did not apply to the hereditary lands of the Habsburg monarchy, such as Lower and Upper Austria.

In terms of territorial concessions, Brandenburg-Prussia received Farther Pomerania, and the bishoprics of Magdeburg, Halberstadt, Kammin, and Minden. Frederick&#x27;s son Charles Louis regained the Lower Palatinate and became the eighth Imperial elector, although Bavaria kept the Upper Palatinate and its electoral vote. Externally, Spain acknowledged the independence of the Dutch Republic, while the Emperor confirmed that of the Old Swiss Confederacy, effectively an autonomous part of the Empire since 1499. In Lorraine, the Three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul and Verdun, occupied by France since 1552, were formally ceded, as were the cities of the Dcapole in Alsace, with the exception of Strasbourg and Mulhouse. Sweden received an indemnity of five million thalers, the Imperial territories of Swedish Pomerania, and the Prince-bishoprics of Bremen and Verden, which also gave them a seat in the Imperial Diet.

The Peace was later denounced by Pope Innocent X, who regarded the bishoprics ceded to France and Brandenburg as property of the Catholic church, and thus his to assign. It also disappointed many exiles by accepting Catholicism as the dominant religion in Bohemia, Upper and Lower Austria, all of which were Protestant strongholds prior to 1618. Fighting did not end immediately, since demobilising over 200,000 soldiers was a complex business, and the last Swedish garrison did not leave Germany until 1654. In addition, Mazarin insisted on excluding the Burgundian Circle from the treaty of Mnster, allowing France to continue its campaign against Spain in the Low Countries, a war that continued until the 1659 Treaty of the Pyrenees. The political disintegration of Poland-Lithuania led to the 1655 to 1660 Second Northern War with Sweden, which also involved Denmark, Russia and Brandenburg, while two Swedish attempts to impose its control on the port of Bremen failed in 1654 and 1666.

It has been argued the Peace established the principle known as Westphalian sovereignty, the idea of non-interference in domestic affairs by outside powers, although this has since been challenged. The process, or &#x27;Congress&#x27; model, was adopted for negotiations at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1668, Nijmegen in 1678, and Ryswick in 1697; unlike the 19th century &#x27;Congress&#x27; system, these were to end wars, rather than prevent them, so references to the &#x27;balance of power&#x27; can be misleading.

== Human and financial cost of the war ==

The Thirty Years&#x27; War forms part of what historians sometimes call &quot;The General Crisis&quot; of the mid-17th century. This term refers to a period of sustained conflict and unrest in areas ranging from Ming China to the British Isles, Tsarist Russia and the Holy Roman Empire. In each of these, fighting combined with famine and disease inflicted severe losses on local civilian populations. While the war certainly ranks as one of the worst of these events, 19th century German nationalists often exaggerated its impact to illustrate the dangers of a divided Germany. 

Suggestions of up to 12 million deaths from a population of 18 million are no longer considered realistic. In addition, upper estimates of material losses are not supported by contemporary evidence, or in some cases exceed prewar tax records. Regardless, modern commentators agree the war was a mortality disaster previously unknown in Europe. Estimates of total deaths range from 4.5 to 8 million, most incurred after 1630 when Sweden entered the war, the vast majority of which were civilian. 

Battles generally featured armies of around 13,000 to 20,000 each, one of the largest being Alte Veste in 1632 with a combined 70,000 to 85,000. Estimates of the total deployed by both sides within Germany range from an average of 80,000 to 100,000 from 1618 to 1626, peaking at 250,000 in 1632 and falling to under 160,000 by 1648. 

Casualty rates among those who actually did serve in the military could be extremely high. Of 230 men conscripted from the Swedish village of Bygde between 1621 and 1639, 215 are recorded as dead or missing, while another five returned home crippled. Aggregating figures from known battles and sieges, historian Peter Wilson estimates those either killed or wounded in combat totalled around 450,000. Since research shows disease either killed or incapacitated two to three times that number, that would suggest military casualties ranged from 1.3 to 1.8 million dead or otherwise rendered unfit for service. Although his methodology has been disputed, Pitirim Sorokin calculates an upper limit of 2,071,000 military casualties. 

Based on local records, military action accounted for less than 3% of civilian deaths, with the major causes being starvation (12%), bubonic plague (64%), typhus (4%), and dysentery (5%). Although regular outbreaks of disease were common for decades prior to 1618, the conflict greatly accelerated their spread, due to the influx of soldiers from foreign countries, the shifting locations of battle fronts and displacement of rural populations into already crowded cities. This was not restricted to Germany; disease carried by French and Imperial soldiers allegedly sparked the 16291631 Italian plague. Described as the &quot;worst mortality crisis to affect Italy during the early modern period&quot;, it resulted in some 280,000 deaths, some estimates suggesting up to a million. Poor harvests throughout the 1630s and repeated plundering of the same areas led to widespread famine; contemporaries record people eating grass, or too weak to accept alms, while instances of cannibalism were common.

Modern historians generally agree the Holy Roman Empire experienced an overall population decline of between 30 and 40%, although this was not evenly spread. It fell from between 18 and 20 million in 1600, to between 11 and 13 million in 1650, and did not regain pre-war levels until 1750. Nearly 50% of these losses appear to have been incurred during the first period of Swedish intervention from 1630 to 1635. The high mortality rate compared to the Wars of the Three Kingdoms in Britain may partly be due to the reliance of all sides on foreign mercenaries, often unpaid and required to live off the land. Lack of a sense of &#x27;shared community&#x27; resulted in atrocities such as the destruction of Magdeburg, in turn creating large numbers of refugees who were extremely susceptible to sickness and hunger. While flight saved lives in the short-term, in the long run it often proved catastrophic.

In 1940, agrarian historian Gnther Franz published a detailed analysis of regional data from across Germany covering the period from 1618 to 1648. Broadly confirmed by more recent work, he concluded &quot;about 40% of the rural population fell victim to the war and epidemics; in the cities...33%&quot;. These figures can be misleading, since Franz calculated the &quot;absolute decline&quot; in pre and post-war populations, or &#x27;total demographic loss&#x27;. They therefore include factors unrelated to death or disease, such as permanent migration to areas outside the Empire or lower birthrates, a common but less obvious impact of extended warfare. There were also wide regional variations; some areas in northwest Germany were relatively peaceful after 1630 and experienced almost no population loss, while those of Mecklenburg, Pomerania and Wrttemberg fell by nearly 50%.

Although some towns may have overstated their losses to avoid taxes, individual records confirm serious declines; from 1620 to 1650, the population of Munich fell from 22,000 to 17,000, that of Augsburg from 48,000 to 21,000. The financial impact is less clear; while the war caused short-term economic dislocation, especially in the period 1618 to 1623, overall it accelerated existing changes in trading patterns. It does not appear to have reversed ongoing macro-economic trends, such as the reduction of price differentials between regional markets, and a greater degree of market integration across Europe. The death toll may have improved living standards for the survivors; one study shows wages in Germany increased by 40% in real terms between 1603 and 1652.

==Military developments==

Innovations made by Gustavus in particular are considered part of the tactical evolution known as the &quot;Military Revolution&quot;, although whether tactics or technology were at the heart of these changes is still debated. Introduced by Maurice of Orange in the 1590s, these sought to increase infantry firepower by moving from massed columns to line formation. Gustavus further reduced the ten ranks used by Maurice to six, and increased the proportion of musketeers to pikemen. He also enhanced their firepower by providing each unit with quick-firing light artillery pieces on either flank. The best example of their tactical application was in the victory over Tilly&#x27;s traditionally organised army at Breitenfeld in September 1631.

Line formations were often harder to co-ordinate, as demonstrated by the victory of the supposedly obsolete Spanish tercios over the &quot;new model&quot; Swedish army at Nrdlingen in 1634. They lacked the offensive impact of columns, and Gustavus therefore compensated by requiring his cavalry to be far more aggressive, often employing his Finnish light cavalry or &quot;Hakkapeliitta&quot; as shock troops. He also used columns on occasion, including the failed assault at Alte Veste in September 1632. The line versus column debate continued into the early 19th century, and both were employed during the Napoleonic Wars.

Such tactics needed professional soldiers, who could retain formation, reload and fire disciplined salvos while under attack, as well as the use of standardised weapons. The first half of the 17th century saw the publication of numerous instruction manuals showing the movements required, thirty-two for pikemen and forty-two for musketeers. Training an infantryman to operate in this way was estimated as six months, although in reality many went into battle with far less experience. It also placed greater responsibility on junior officers who provided the vital links between senior commanders and the tactical unit. One of the first military schools designed to produce such men was set up at Siegen in 1616 and others soon followed.

On the other hand, strategic thinking failed to develop at the same pace. Historian Jeremy Black claims most campaigns were &quot;inconclusive&quot; and almost exclusively concerned with control of territory, rather than focused strategic objectives. The lack of connection between military and diplomatic goals helps explain why the war lasted so long and why peace proved so elusive. There were a number of reasons for this. When the war ended in 1648, the Franco-Swedish alliance still had over 84,000 men under arms on Imperial territory, their opponents around 77,000. While relatively small in contemporary terms, such numbers were unprecedented at the time. With the possible exception of Spain, the 17th century state could not support armies of this size, forcing them to depend on &quot;contributions&quot; levied or extorted from areas they passed through. 

Obtaining supplies thus became the limiting factor in campaign planning, an issue that grew more acute later in the war when much of the Empire had already been fought over. Even when adequate provisions could be gathered, the next problem was getting them to the troops; to ensure security of supply, commanders were forced to stay close to rivers, then the primary means of bulk transportation, and could not move too far from their main bases. Many historians argue feeding the troops became an objective in itself, unconnected to diplomatic goals and largely uncontrolled by their central governments. The result was &quot;armies increasingly devoid of intelligible political objectives...degenerating into travelling armed mobs, living in a symbiotic relationship with the countryside they passed through&quot;. This often conflicted with the political aims of their employers; the devastation inflicted in 1628 and 1629 by Imperial troops on Brandenburg and Saxony, both nominally their allies, was a major factor in their subsequent support for Swedish intervention.

== Social and cultural impact ==

It has been suggested the breakdown of social order caused by the war was often more significant and longer lasting than the immediate damage. The collapse of local government created landless peasants, who banded together to protect themselves from the soldiers of both sides, and led to widespread rebellions in Upper Austria, Bavaria and Brandenburg. Soldiers devastated one area before moving on, leaving large tracts of land empty of people and changing the ecosystem. Food shortages were worsened by an explosion in the rodent population, while Bavaria was overrun by wolves in the winter of 1638, and its crops destroyed by packs of wild pigs the following spring.

Contemporaries spoke of a &#x27;frenzy of despair&#x27; as people sought to make sense of the relentless and often random bloodshed unleashed by the war. Attributed by religious authorities to divine retribution for sin, attempts to identify a supernatural cause led to a series of witch-hunts, beginning in Franconia in 1626 and quickly spreading to other parts of Germany. They began in the Bishopric of Wrzburg, an area with a history of such events going back to 1616 and now re-ignited by Bishop von Ehrenberg, a devout Catholic eager to assert the church&#x27;s authority in his territories. By the time he died in 1631, over 900 people from all levels of society had been executed.

The Bamberg witch trials, held in the nearby Bishopric of Bamberg from 1626 to 1631, claimed over one thousand lives; in 1629, 274 died in the Eichsttt witch trials, plus another 50 in the adjacent Duchy of Palatinate-Neuburg. Elsewhere, persecution followed Imperial military success, expanding into Baden and the Palatinate following their reconquest by Tilly, then into the Rhineland. However, the extent to which they were symptomatic of the impact of the conflict on society is debatable, since many took place in areas relatively untouched by the war. Concerned their brutality would discredit the Counter-Reformation, Ferdinand ensured active persecution largely ended by 1630.

Although the war caused immense destruction, it has also been credited with sparking a revival in German literature, including the creation of societies dedicated to &quot;purging of foreign elements&quot; from the German language. One example is &quot;Simplicius Simplicissimus&quot;, often suggested as one of the earliest examples of the picaresque novel; written by Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen in 1668, it includes a realistic portrayal of a soldier&#x27;s life based on his own experiences, many of which are verified by other sources. Other less famous examples include the diaries of Peter Hagendorf, a participant in the Sack of Magdeburg whose descriptions of the everyday brutalities of the war remain compelling.

For German, and to a lesser extent Czech writers, the war was remembered as a defining moment of national trauma, the 18th century poet and playwright Friedrich Schiller being one of many to use it in their work. Variously known as the &#x27;Great German War,&#x27; &#x27;Great War&#x27; or &#x27;Great Schism&#x27;, for 19th and early 20th century German nationalists it showed the dangers of a divided Germany and was used to justify the creation of the German Empire in 1871, as well as the Greater Germanic Reich envisaged by the Nazis. Bertolt Brecht used it as the backdrop for his 1939 anti-war play &quot;Mother Courage and Her Children&quot;, while its enduring cultural resonance is illustrated by the novel &quot;Tyll&quot;; written by Austro-German author Daniel Kehlmann and also set during the war, it was nominated for the 2020 Booker Prize.

== Political consequences ==
The Peace reconfirmed &quot;German liberties&quot;, ending Habsburg attempts to convert the Holy Roman Empire into a more centralised state similar to Spain. Over the next 50 years, Bavaria, Brandenburg-Prussia, Saxony and others increasingly pursued their own policies, while Sweden gained a permanent foothold in the Empire. Despite these setbacks, the Habsburg lands suffered less from the war than many others and became a far more coherent bloc with the absorption of Bohemia, and restoration of Catholicism throughout their territories.

By laying the foundations of the modern nation state, Westphalia changed the relationship between subjects and their rulers. Previously, many had overlapping, sometimes conflicting, political and religious allegiances; they were now understood to be subject first and foremost to the laws and edicts of their respective state authority, not the claims of any other entity, religious or secular. This made it easier to levy national forces of significant size, loyal to their state and its leader; one lesson learned from Wallenstein and the Swedish invasion was the need for their own permanent armies, and Germany as a whole became a far more militarised society.

For Sweden, the benefits ultimately proved short-lived. Unlike French gains which were incorporated into France, Swedish territories remained part of the Empire, and they became members of the Lower and Upper Saxon &quot;kreis&quot;. While this provided both seats and influence in the Imperial Diet, it also brought Sweden into direct conflict with Brandenburg-Prussia and Saxony, their competitors in Pomerania. The income from their German possessions was relatively minor, and although parts of Pomerania remained Swedish until 1815, much of it was ceded to Prussia in 1679 and 1720.

France arguably gained more from the conflict than any other power, and by 1648, most of Richelieu&#x27;s objectives had been achieved. These included separation of the Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs, expansion of the French frontier into the Empire, and an end to Spanish military supremacy in northern Europe. Although the Franco-Spanish war continued until 1659, Westphalia allowed Louis XIV to begin replacing Spain as the predominant European power.

While religion remained a divisive political issue in many countries, the Thirty Years&#x27; War is arguably the last major European conflict where it was a primary driver. Future religious conflicts were either internal, such as the Camisards revolt in southern France, or relatively minor, like the 1712 Toggenburg War. The war created the outlines of a Europe that persisted until 1815 and beyond, most significantly the nation-state of France, along with the start of a split between Germany and a separate Austro-Hungarian bloc.

==Notes==
== References ==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (with several contributors)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* in 2 vols; translation by William Blaquiere. 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="4" end="26" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787" start="88" end="104" title="History of Europe" label="European history"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="130" end="144" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="267" end="274" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="347" end="369" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527665" start="375" end="404" title="War of the Mantuan Succession" label="War of the Mantuan Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q617333" start="410" end="428" title="Franco-Spanish War (16351659)" label="Franco-Spanish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419229" start="434" end="448" title="Torstenson War" label="Torstenson War"/>
<link wikidata="Q377269" start="454" end="474" title="Dutch-Portuguese War" label="Dutch-Portuguese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501724" start="484" end="510" title="Portuguese Restoration War" label="Portuguese Restoration War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483039" start="558" end="576" title="Second Schmalkaldic War" label="religious conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="607" end="618" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="630" end="647" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154577" start="658" end="675" title="Peace of Augsburg" label="Peace of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="730" end="738" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="743" end="751" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="804" end="817" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="916" end="924" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567004" start="1057" end="1064" title="FrenchHabsburg rivalry" label="contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="1096" end="1104" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="1111" end="1116" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1121" end="1128" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="1145" end="1161" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q374696" start="1200" end="1204" title="Defenestrations of Prague" label="1618"/>
<link wikidata="Q150599" start="1211" end="1231" title="Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Ferdinand II"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="1255" end="1262" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57195" start="1294" end="1323" title="Frederick V of the Palatinate" label="Frederick V of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785022" start="1373" end="1388" title="Bohemian Revolt" label="Bohemian Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126801" start="1434" end="1462" title="Palatinate campaign" label="fighting into the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="1503" end="1517" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q153586" start="1650" end="1673" title="Christian IV of Denmark" label="Christian IV of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="1678" end="1695" title="Gustavus Adolphus" label="Gustavus Adolphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="1699" end="1705" title="Swedish Empire" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="1963" end="1972" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455240" start="2044" end="2048" title="Peace of Prague (1635)" label="1635"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="2108" end="2114" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q150575" start="2149" end="2170" title="Ferdinand III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Ferdinand III"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="2233" end="2252" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q256961" start="2333" end="2340" title="Electorate of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="2345" end="2351" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125082" start="2432" end="2448" title="balance of power (international relations)" label="balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="2517" end="2526" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q703081" start="2609" end="2624" title="Peace of Passau" label="Peace of Passau"/>
<link wikidata="Q168556" start="2635" end="2651" title="Schmalkaldic War" label="Schmalkaldic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2682" end="2693" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2698" end="2707" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2719" end="2736" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154577" start="2747" end="2764" title="Peace of Augsburg" label="Peace of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q707722" start="2879" end="2904" title="cuius regio, eius religio" label="cuius regio, eius religio"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="2956" end="2964" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q53742" start="3135" end="3145" title="Donauwrth" label="Donauwrth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3207" end="3222" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="3451" end="3460" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="3809" end="3815" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="3817" end="3831" title="DenmarkNorway" label="DenmarkNorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="3836" end="3842" title="Swedish Empire" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q157367" start="3883" end="3894" title="Brandenburg-Prussia" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23581598" start="3904" end="3916" title="Baltic maritime trade (c. 14001800)" label="Baltic trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507115" start="4039" end="4054" title="Imperial Estate" label="Imperial Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="4088" end="4101" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="4103" end="4117" title="northern Italy" label="northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="4194" end="4208" title="prince-elector" label="prince-elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="4228" end="4246" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22881" start="4256" end="4269" title="prince-bishop" label="prince-bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="4278" end="4293" title="Free imperial city" label="Imperial cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="4299" end="4306" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q460338" start="4359" end="4374" title="Imperial circle" label="Imperial circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="4479" end="4492" title="Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="4693" end="4710" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q699964" start="4854" end="4861" title="Archduchy of Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="4863" end="4870" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="4875" end="4882" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="4913" end="4927" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="4945" end="4954" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="5080" end="5085" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="5128" end="5147" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="5149" end="5154" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16394" start="5159" end="5172" title="Franche-Comt" label="Franche-Comt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199818" start="5385" end="5396" title="History of the Philippines (15651898)" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="5402" end="5422" title="New Spain" label="much of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5569" end="5583" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="5830" end="5837" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987" start="5909" end="5914" title="Nord-Pas-de-Calais" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="5916" end="5921" title="Southern France" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="5937" end="5945" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q153586" start="6058" end="6081" title="Christian IV of Denmark" label="Christian IV of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q695919" start="6113" end="6137" title="Duke of Holstein-Gottorp" label="Duke of Holstein-Gottorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q524189" start="6245" end="6256" title="Cologne War" label="Cologne War"/>
<link wikidata="Q70963" start="6274" end="6279" title="Gebhard Truchsess von Waldburg" label="ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q150586" start="6482" end="6496" title="Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q57206" start="6535" end="6556" title="Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria" label="Maximilian of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150599" start="6853" end="6871" title="Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Archduke Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746" start="7362" end="7392" title="Frederick IV, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick IV, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q527814" start="7404" end="7420" title="Protestant Union" label="Protestant Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q731814" start="7465" end="7480" title="Catholic League (German)" label="Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q568727" start="7600" end="7628" title="War of the Jlich Succession" label="War of the Jlich Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="7858" end="7872" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q934238" start="8000" end="8024" title="Twelve Years&amp;#x27; Truce" label="Twelve Years&amp;#x27; Truce"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="8046" end="8068" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q359936" start="8138" end="8154" title="Ambrosio Spinola" label="Ambrosio Spinola"/>
<link wikidata="Q208963" start="8215" end="8227" title="Spanish Road" label="Spanish Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="8291" end="8299" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="8469" end="8489" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Electoral Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q152157" start="8498" end="8514" title="Matthias, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Matthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q247921" start="8545" end="8554" title="Oate treaty" label="July 1617"/>
<link wikidata="Q34464" start="8555" end="8574" title="Philip III of Spain" label="Philip III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q57195" start="9062" end="9091" title="Frederick V, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick V, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q158252" start="9159" end="9175" title="Elizabeth of Bohemia" label="Elizabeth Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="9189" end="9207" title="James VI and I" label="James I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785022" start="9661" end="9676" title="Bohemian Revolt" label="Bohemian Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="9818" end="9824" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q580447" start="9882" end="9888" title="Duchy of Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="9967" end="9978" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755727" start="10307" end="10336" title="Letter of Majesty" label="Protestant religious freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q708618" start="10599" end="10610" title="Jindich Maty Thurn" label="Count Thurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q193369" start="10618" end="10631" title="Prague Castle" label="Prague Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q716769" start="10684" end="10697" title="Vilem Slavata of Chlum" label="Vilem Slavata"/>
<link wikidata="Q320791" start="10702" end="10718" title="Jaroslav Borzita of Martinice" label="Jaroslav Borzita"/>
<link wikidata="Q374696" start="10748" end="10778" title="Third Defenestration of Prague" label="Third Defenestration of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836111" start="10854" end="10869" title="Filip Fabricius" label="Filip Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="10992" end="10999" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="11031" end="11036" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower"/>
<link wikidata="Q41967" start="11041" end="11054" title="Upper Austria" label="Upper Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="11574" end="11580" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="11613" end="11633" title="Louis XIII of France" label="Louis XIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454505" start="11648" end="11665" title="Huguenot rebellions" label="Protestant rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591895" start="11826" end="11831" title="Savoyard state" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q318091" start="11857" end="11890" title="Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy" label="Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q441405" start="11915" end="11933" title="Ernst von Mansfeld" label="Ernst von Mansfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="12252" end="12258" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q513007" start="12317" end="12323" title="Battle of Sablat" label="Sablat"/>
<link wikidata="Q313494" start="12403" end="12418" title="Gabriel Bethlen" label="Gabriel Bethlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244362" start="12430" end="12452" title="Prince of Transylvania" label="Prince of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q277392" start="12616" end="12631" title="PolishOttoman War (162021)" label="1620 Polish war"/>
<link wikidata="Q163476" start="12645" end="12682" title="OttomanSafavid War (16231639)" label="the 1623 to 1639 conflict with Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63024" start="13079" end="13098" title="Christian I, Prince of Anhalt-Bernburg" label="Christian of Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q164062" start="13103" end="13120" title="Maurice, Prince of Orange" label="Maurice of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="13755" end="13762" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155534" start="13888" end="13899" title="Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly" label="Count Tilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q695234" start="13904" end="13922" title="Charles Bonaventure de Longueval, 2nd Count of Bucquoy" label="Charles of Bucquoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373" start="14044" end="14068" title="Battle of White Mountain" label="Battle of White Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837158" start="14362" end="14378" title="Treaty of Munich (1619)" label="Treaty of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q10555" start="14487" end="14503" title="Upper Palatinate" label="Upper Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537353" start="15079" end="15086" title="Gonzalo Fernndez de Crdoba (15851635)" label="Crdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="15100" end="15116" title="Lower Palatinate" label="Lower Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="15273" end="15286" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="15450" end="15460" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q371833" start="15568" end="15576" title="Gaspar de Guzmn, Count-Duke of Olivares" label="Olivares"/>
<link wikidata="Q65236" start="15974" end="15998" title="George Frederick, Margrave of Baden-Durlach" label="Georg Friedrich of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q77229" start="16003" end="16025" title="Christian the Younger of Brunswick" label="Christian of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q661764" start="16335" end="16342" title="Battle of Wimpfen" label="Wimpfen"/>
<link wikidata="Q661686" start="16359" end="16365" title="Battle of Hchst" label="Hchst"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377865" start="16453" end="16464" title="Siege of Frankenthal" label="Frankenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753558" start="16519" end="16530" title="Horace Vere" label="Horace Vere"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="16652" end="16661" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q708574" start="17137" end="17146" title="Battle of Stadtlohn" label="Stadtlohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q429086" start="17507" end="17525" title="Upper Saxon Circle" label="Upper Saxon Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="17530" end="17541" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q616195" start="17546" end="17551" title="Lower Saxon Circle" label="Lower"/>
<link wikidata="Q166675" start="17741" end="17779" title="George William, Elector of Brandenburg" label="George William, Elector of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q645981" start="17940" end="17977" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Halberstadt" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Halberstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q104662" start="18160" end="18167" title="resund" label="resund"/>
<link wikidata="Q157812" start="18241" end="18250" title="Frederick III of Denmark" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q527527" start="18281" end="18287" title="Prince-bishopric of Lbeck" label="Lbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q837128" start="18289" end="18295" title="Prince-Archbishopric of Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15852601" start="18301" end="18307" title="Prince-Bishopric of Verden" label="Verden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="18350" end="18354" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650" start="18359" end="18364" title="Weser" label="Weser"/>
<link wikidata="Q153545" start="18393" end="18417" title="Albrecht von Wallenstein" label="Albrecht von Wallenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357802" start="19013" end="19032" title="Treaty of Compigne (1624)" label="Treaty of Compigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q763198" start="19150" end="19169" title="Treaty of The Hague (1625)" label="Treaty of The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="19349" end="19367" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="19424" end="19442" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Cardinal Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888452" start="19532" end="19548" title="Treaty of Monzn" label="Treaty of Monzn"/>
<link wikidata="Q636389" start="19793" end="19802" title="Archbishopric of Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q551420" start="19858" end="19881" title="Maurice, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel" label="Maurice of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q677121" start="19940" end="19953" title="Battle of Dessau Bridge" label="Dessau Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122" start="20041" end="20053" title="Wolfenbttel" label="Wolfenbttel"/>
<link wikidata="Q629302" start="20136" end="20142" title="Battle of Lutter" label="Lutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q168651" start="20271" end="20283" title="Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel" label="Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="20442" end="20462" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q109057" start="20678" end="20689" title="Mecklenburg" label="Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035990" start="20691" end="20700" title="Capitulation of Franzburg" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="20706" end="20713" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q648095" start="20944" end="20953" title="Hans Georg von Arnim-Boitzenburg" label="von Arnim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612839" start="20963" end="20972" title="Siege of Stralsund (1628)" label="Stralsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="21063" end="21080" title="Gustavus Adolphus" label="Gustavus Adolphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376604" start="21158" end="21174" title="Alexander Leslie" label="Alexander Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q653561" start="21320" end="21327" title="Battle of Wolgast" label="Wolgast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527665" start="21547" end="21576" title="War of the Mantuan Succession" label="War of the Mantuan Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q708862" start="21666" end="21682" title="Treaty of Lbeck" label="Treaty of Lbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="21729" end="21738" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q361663" start="22314" end="22333" title="Adolf Frederick I, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Duke of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q703097" start="22744" end="22764" title="Edict of Restitution" label="Edict of Restitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284645" start="23229" end="23234" title="edict" label="edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q113245930" start="23514" end="23544" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War, 16211648" label="war in the Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q617066" start="23700" end="23724" title="Dutch West India Company" label="Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q702252" start="23740" end="23754" title="Spanish treasure fleet" label="treasure fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610822" start="23758" end="23766" title="Battle in the Bay of Matanzas" label="Matanzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q387040" start="23885" end="23906" title="Siege of &amp;#x27;s-Hertogenbosch" label="&amp;#x27;s-Hertogenbosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240425" start="23914" end="23924" title="Dutch States Army" label="Dutch Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q167236" start="23931" end="23946" title="Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange" label="Frederick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985977" start="24068" end="24093" title="PolishSwedish War (16261629)" label="war with PolandLithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q52940" start="24124" end="24133" title="Sigismund III Vasa" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q168651" start="24261" end="24273" title="Hesse-Kassel" label="Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347605" start="24407" end="24423" title="Truce of Altmark" label="Truce of Altmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q696640" start="24737" end="24746" title="Duchy of Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="24855" end="24859" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="24868" end="24875" title="Szczecin" label="Stettin"/>
<link wikidata="Q571957" start="24888" end="24919" title="Bogislaw XIV, Duke of Pomerania" label="Bogislaw XIV, Duke of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997919" start="24938" end="24946" title="Treaty of Stettin (1630)" label="alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140492" start="25102" end="25114" title="Smolensk War" label="Smolensk War"/>
<link wikidata="Q92198" start="25272" end="25289" title="Christian William of Brandenburg" label="Christian William"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024" start="25658" end="25679" title="Frankfurt an der Oder" label="Frankfurt an der Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q698045" start="25691" end="25708" title="Sack of Magdeburg" label="Sack of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753007" start="25914" end="25932" title="Treaty of Brwalde" label="Treaty of Brwalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q15944605" start="26052" end="26063" title="Reichstaler" label="Reichstaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q607248" start="26089" end="26095" title="French livre" label="livres"/>
<link wikidata="Q205379" start="26326" end="26337" title="Battle of Breitenfeld (1631)" label="Breitenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q703436" start="26362" end="26366" title="Battle of Rain" label="Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075" start="26516" end="26521" title="Frth" label="Frth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002331" start="26586" end="26610" title="Battle of the Alte Veste" label="Battle of the Alte Veste"/>
<link wikidata="Q167259" start="26869" end="26875" title="Battle of Ltzen (1632)" label="Ltzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q155127" start="27285" end="27301" title="Axel Oxenstierna" label="Axel Oxenstierna"/>
<link wikidata="Q523454" start="27370" end="27386" title="Heilbronn League" label="Heilbronn League"/>
<link wikidata="Q481354" start="27490" end="27499" title="Battle of Oldendorf" label="Oldendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q559041" start="28067" end="28104" title="Cardinal-Infante Ferdinand of Austria" label="Cardinal-Infante Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q312212" start="28311" end="28321" title="Battle of Nrdlingen (1634)" label="Nrdlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856626" start="28673" end="28686" title="Treaty of Compigne (1635)" label="new subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q61118" start="28713" end="28735" title="Bernard of Saxe-Weimar" label="Bernard of Saxe-Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q617333" start="28836" end="28854" title="Franco-Spanish War (16351659)" label="Franco-Spanish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455240" start="28920" end="28935" title="Peace of Prague (1635)" label="Peace of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q685105" start="29296" end="29306" title="Valtellina" label="Valtellina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837301" start="29500" end="29510" title="Treaty of Wismar" label="March 1636"/>
<link wikidata="Q498046" start="29826" end="29837" title="Johan Banr" label="Johan Banr"/>
<link wikidata="Q428972" start="29864" end="29873" title="Battle of Wittstock" label="Wittstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q150575" start="30068" end="30081" title="Ferdinand III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand III"/>
<link wikidata="Q553849" start="30137" end="30152" title="Matthias Gallas" label="Matthias Gallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q331518" start="30270" end="30281" title="Battle of Rheinfelden" label="Rheinfelden"/>
<link wikidata="Q331565" start="30298" end="30306" title="Battle of Breisach" label="Breisach"/>
<link wikidata="Q78305" start="30433" end="30446" title="Melchior von Hatzfeldt" label="von Hatzfeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411470" start="30491" end="30497" title="Battle of Vlotho" label="Vlotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q245811" start="30615" end="30623" title="Battle of Chemnitz" label="Chemnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q697963" start="30700" end="30711" title="Ottavio Piccolomini" label="Piccolomini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890172" start="30729" end="30739" title="Relief of Thionville" label="Thionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="30927" end="30933" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14740421" start="31048" end="31059" title="Dutch States Navy" label="Dutch fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q470200" start="31066" end="31079" title="Maarten Tromp" label="Maarten Tromp"/>
<link wikidata="Q675999" start="31113" end="31118" title="Battle of the Downs" label="Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q159987" start="31220" end="31226" title="Artois" label="Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q377269" start="31265" end="31278" title="DutchPortuguese War" label="Dutch attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="31282" end="31301" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501724" start="31355" end="31363" title="Portuguese Restoration War" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348955" start="31368" end="31377" title="Reapers&amp;#x27; War" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699184" start="31567" end="31575" title="regenten" label="regenten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072" start="31987" end="31998" title="Halberstadt" label="Halberstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10671411" start="32066" end="32078" title="Battle of Wolfenbttel (1641)" label="Wolfenbttel"/>
<link wikidata="Q316816" start="32185" end="32204" title="Lennart Torstensson" label="Lennart Torstensson"/>
<link wikidata="Q994881" start="32306" end="32312" title="Battle of Kempen" label="Kempen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754785" start="32345" end="32363" title="Battle of Breitenfeld (1642)" label="Second Breitenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q437295" start="32461" end="32496" title="Archduke Leopold Wilhelm of Austria" label="Archduke Leopold Wilhelm of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="32513" end="32520" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q14819" start="32618" end="32626" title="Freiberg" label="Freiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="33034" end="33044" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="33088" end="33097" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q166056" start="33174" end="33190" title="Cardinal Mazarin" label="Cardinal Mazarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q310837" start="33386" end="33391" title="Louis II de Bourbon, Prince de Cond" label="Cond"/>
<link wikidata="Q728480" start="33395" end="33401" title="battle of Rocroi" label="Rocroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q644425" start="34105" end="34120" title="Franz von Mercy" label="Franz von Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436705" start="34124" end="34134" title="Battle of Tuttlingen" label="Tuttlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8614" start="34233" end="34243" title="Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742" start="34254" end="34261" title="Mnster" label="Mnster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916" start="34266" end="34275" title="Osnabrck" label="Osnabrck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419229" start="34475" end="34490" title="Torstensson War" label="Torstensson War"/>
<link wikidata="Q439909" start="34691" end="34698" title="Carl Gustaf Wrangel" label="Wrangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q392121" start="34862" end="34869" title="Battle of Fehmarn (1644)" label="Fehmarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q174574" start="34956" end="34974" title="Battle of Freiburg" label="Battle of Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415925" start="35302" end="35308" title="Battle of Jankau" label="Jankau"/>
<link wikidata="Q913821" start="35398" end="35410" title="Battle of Herbsthausen" label="Herbsthausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q630142" start="35449" end="35466" title="Battle of Nrdlingen (1645)" label="Second Nrdlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q303216" start="35681" end="35688" title="Henri de La Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne, Viscount of Turenne" label="Turenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q531523" start="36346" end="36358" title="Truce of Ulm" label="Truce of Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904317" start="36373" end="36380" title="Electorate of Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q63850" start="36501" end="36517" title="Johann von Werth" label="Johann von Werth"/>
<link wikidata="Q77613" start="36773" end="36786" title="Peter Melander, Graf von Holzappel" label="von Holzappel"/>
<link wikidata="Q519818" start="36875" end="36888" title="Battle of Zusmarshausen" label="Zusmarshausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q454789" start="37021" end="37042" title="Raimondo Montecuccoli" label="Raimondo Montecuccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q68163" start="37123" end="37138" title="Hans Christoff von Knigsmarck" label="von Knigsmarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494380" start="37142" end="37155" title="Battle of Prague (1648)" label="attack Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q753289" start="37180" end="37191" title="Mal Strana" label="Mal Strana"/>
<link wikidata="Q748211" start="37312" end="37320" title="Old Town (Prague)" label="Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q212180" start="37397" end="37408" title="Codex Gigas" label="Codex Gigas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164950" start="37492" end="37496" title="Battle of Lens" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="37733" end="37742" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="37753" end="37776" title="Italian Wars" label="end of the 15th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q208963" start="37936" end="37948" title="Spanish Road" label="Spanish Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="38055" end="38076" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="war against the Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15604942" start="38315" end="38325" title="Duchy of Montferrat" label="Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16333" start="38346" end="38363" title="Casale Monferrato" label="Casale Monferrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q766501" start="38399" end="38414" title="Duchy of Mantua" label="Duchy of Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142124" start="38494" end="38522" title="Vincenzo II Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua" label="last duke in the direct line"/>
<link wikidata="Q547017" start="38664" end="38678" title="Charles I Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua" label="Duke of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q321385" start="38742" end="38759" title="Ferrante II Gonzaga, Duke of Guastalla" label="Duke of Guastalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="38794" end="38801" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="38912" end="38927" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Pope Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="38982" end="38994" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9573" start="39257" end="39265" title="Pinerolo" label="Pinerolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019414" start="39271" end="39285" title="Treaty of Suza" label="Treaty of Suza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="39425" end="39433" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307987" start="40057" end="40063" title="16291631 Italian plague" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="40108" end="40113" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="40128" end="40134" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655000" start="40247" end="40274" title="Swedish intervention in the Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Swedish invasion of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q356145" start="40585" end="40616" title="Victor Amadeus I, Duke of Savoy" label="Victor Amadeus I, Duke of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778584" start="40657" end="40678" title="Piedmontese Civil War" label="Piedmontese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17689" start="40957" end="40964" title="Valenza" label="Valenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245345" start="40998" end="41008" title="Battle of Tornavento" label="Tornavento"/>
<link wikidata="Q17821" start="41013" end="41023" title="Mombaldone" label="Mombaldone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083398" start="41257" end="41276" title="Christine of France" label="Christine of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q426677" start="41291" end="41297" title="Thomas Francis, Prince of Carignano" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q610738" start="41302" end="41309" title="Prince Maurice of Savoy" label="Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q644342" start="41440" end="41454" title="Siege of Turin (1640)" label="Siege of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q573072" start="41853" end="41859" title="Neapolitan Republic (1647)" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q165040" start="42301" end="42315" title="Duchy of Parma" label="Duchy of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q15581" start="42511" end="42536" title="Principality of Catalonia" label="Principality of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345047" start="42653" end="42669" title="Catalan Republic (1641)" label="Catalan Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889282" start="42783" end="42792" title="Battle of Martorell (1641)" label="Martorell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902969" start="42842" end="42856" title="Catalan Courts" label="Catalan Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q640868" start="42884" end="42902" title="Count of Barcelona" label="Count of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q331170" start="43008" end="43016" title="Battle of Montjuc (1641)" label="Montjuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="43029" end="43038" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730" start="43309" end="43318" title="Perpignan" label="Perpignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522657" start="43323" end="43333" title="Roussillon" label="Roussillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q717431" start="43456" end="43465" title="Siege of Barcelona (1651)" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="43500" end="43518" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="43576" end="43589" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q377269" start="43641" end="43661" title="DutchPortuguese War" label="DutchPortuguese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="43761" end="43769" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q647110" start="43791" end="43807" title="Triangular trade" label="Triangular trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="43847" end="43858" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="43863" end="43880" title="Portuguese Angola" label="Portuguese Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088324" start="43907" end="43924" title="Portuguese Brazil" label="Portuguese Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q617066" start="44190" end="44214" title="Dutch West India Company" label="Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="44292" end="44307" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador, Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221357" start="44392" end="44404" title="Dutch Brazil" label="Dutch Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932" start="44519" end="44527" title="So Tom" label="So Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q796583" start="44563" end="44568" title="Kingdom of Kongo" label="Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796232" start="44573" end="44579" title="Kingdom of Ndongo" label="Ndongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807130" start="44728" end="44739" title="Dutch Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q770048" start="44784" end="44794" title="Portuguese Gold Coast" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988343" start="44799" end="44806" title="Portuguese Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="44815" end="44828" title="Malabar Coast" label="Malabar Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="44834" end="44842" title="Moluccas" label="Moluccas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709007" start="44847" end="44853" title="Portuguese Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q681800" start="44967" end="44983" title="Peace of Mnster" label="Peace of Mnster"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="45406" end="45418" title="Papal Legate" label="Papal Legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127254" start="45419" end="45430" title="Pope Alexander VII" label="Fabio Chigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q449416" start="45454" end="45470" title="Alvise Contarini (diplomat)" label="Alvise Contarini"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="45911" end="45920" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="45922" end="45929" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164950" start="46713" end="46717" title="Battle of Lens" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q262269" start="47576" end="47593" title="Farther Pomerania" label="Farther Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q247175" start="47641" end="47647" title="Bishopric of Kammin" label="Kammin"/>
<link wikidata="Q650645" start="47653" end="47659" title="Bishopric of Minden" label="Minden"/>
<link wikidata="Q57989" start="47682" end="47695" title="Charles I Louis, Elector Palatine" label="Charles Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="47944" end="47965" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182783" start="48041" end="48057" title="Three Bishoprics" label="Three Bishoprics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918043" start="48061" end="48065" title="Prince-Bishopric of Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q328001" start="48067" end="48071" title="Prince-Bishopric of Toul" label="Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015016" start="48076" end="48082" title="Prince-Bishopric of Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q184646" start="48162" end="48170" title="Dcapole" label="Dcapole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="48204" end="48214" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q79815" start="48219" end="48227" title="Mulhouse" label="Mulhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q162528" start="48274" end="48281" title="thalers" label="thalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q682318" start="48311" end="48328" title="Swedish Pomerania" label="Swedish Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q101266" start="48462" end="48477" title="Pope Innocent X" label="Pope Innocent X"/>
<link wikidata="Q155187" start="48985" end="49002" title="Burgundian Circle" label="Burgundian Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221670" start="49144" end="49166" title="Treaty of the Pyrenees" label="Treaty of the Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q631163" start="49172" end="49196" title="Deluge (history)" label="political disintegration"/>
<link wikidata="Q654006" start="49241" end="49260" title="Second Northern War" label="Second Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="49391" end="49397" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q908060" start="49408" end="49421" title="Swedish Wars on Bremen" label="1654 and 1666"/>
<link wikidata="Q442402" start="49488" end="49511" title="Westphalian sovereignty" label="Westphalian sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q327270" start="49698" end="49721" title="Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1668)" label="Aix-la-Chapelle in 1668"/>
<link wikidata="Q316900" start="49723" end="49739" title="Treaties of Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen in 1678"/>
<link wikidata="Q164393" start="49745" end="49752" title="Peace of Ryswick" label="Ryswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697300" start="50056" end="50074" title="The General Crisis" label="The General Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="50190" end="50200" title="Ming China" label="Ming China"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="50208" end="50221" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="50223" end="50237" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Tsarist Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="50306" end="50312" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q370744" start="50460" end="50479" title="German nationalism" label="German nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284045" start="51533" end="51539" title="Bygde" label="Bygde"/>
<link wikidata="Q319816" start="52045" end="52060" title="Pitirim Sorokin" label="Pitirim Sorokin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="52256" end="52270" title="bubonic plague" label="bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="52278" end="52284" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="52295" end="52304" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307987" start="52702" end="52726" title="16291631 Italian plague" label="16291631 Italian plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="52801" end="52820" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q284137" start="53205" end="53223" title="population decline" label="population decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="53579" end="53605" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q101676" start="54062" end="54075" title="Gnther Franz" label="Gnther Franz"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="54874" end="54883" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227570" start="54888" end="54899" title="Duchy of Wrttemberg" label="Wrttemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="55072" end="55078" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="55115" end="55123" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229587" start="55262" end="55274" title="Kipper und Wipper" label="1618 to 1623"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051564" start="55825" end="55844" title="Military Revolution" label="Military Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q164062" start="55958" end="55975" title="Maurice, Prince of Orange" label="Maurice of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424777" start="56056" end="56063" title="Column (formation)" label="columns"/>
<link wikidata="Q179583" start="56067" end="56081" title="Line (formation)" label="line formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q721960" start="56178" end="56187" title="musketeer" label="musketeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q220016" start="56192" end="56199" title="Pike (weapon)" label="pikemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q749150" start="56579" end="56586" title="tercios" label="tercios"/>
<link wikidata="Q312212" start="56631" end="56652" title="Battle of Nrdlingen (1634)" label="at Nrdlingen in 1634"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340672" start="56837" end="56850" title="Hakkapeliitta" label="Hakkapeliitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="57073" end="57088" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572895" start="57190" end="57195" title="salvo" label="salvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3167" start="57789" end="57795" title="Siegen" label="Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975504" start="57915" end="57927" title="Jeremy Black (historian)" label="Jeremy Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011601" start="60124" end="60137" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; War in Upper Austria" label="Upper Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="60765" end="60775" title="witch-hunt" label="witch-hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427044" start="60876" end="60897" title="Bishopric of Wrzburg" label="Bishopric of Wrzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086566" start="60978" end="60998" title="Philipp Adolf von Ehrenberg" label="Bishop von Ehrenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q322741" start="61111" end="61126" title="Wrzburg witch trial" label="over 900 people"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="61163" end="61171" title="burned at the stake" label="executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853364" start="61178" end="61198" title="Bamberg witch trials" label="Bamberg witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q561334" start="61219" end="61239" title="Bishopric of Bamberg" label="Bishopric of Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14538006" start="61317" end="61339" title="Eichsttt witch trials" label="Eichsttt witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q675127" start="61382" end="61400" title="Palatinate-Neuburg" label="Palatinate-Neuburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q650489" start="61476" end="61481" title="Margraviate of Baden" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="61552" end="61561" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q705839" start="62114" end="62139" title="Simplicius Simplicissimus" label="Simplicius Simplicissimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44563" start="62202" end="62218" title="picaresque novel" label="picaresque novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q31220" start="62231" end="62272" title="Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen" label="Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q321852" start="62466" end="62481" title="Peter Hagendorf" label="Peter Hagendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q698045" start="62504" end="62521" title="Sack of Magdeburg" label="Sack of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="62751" end="62769" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="63056" end="63069" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914778" start="63094" end="63116" title="Greater Germanic Reich" label="Greater Germanic Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="63134" end="63139" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="63141" end="63155" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q62407" start="63213" end="63244" title="Mother Courage and Her Children" label="Mother Courage and Her Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q47494332" start="63324" end="63328" title="Tyll (novel)" label="Tyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q57477" start="63368" end="63383" title="Daniel Kehlmann" label="Daniel Kehlmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="63443" end="63455" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="64071" end="64083" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="65866" end="65874" title="Continental Europe" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q374281" start="65976" end="65985" title="Camisards" label="Camisards"/>
<link wikidata="Q690096" start="66048" end="66062" title="Toggenburg War" label="Toggenburg War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30587" wikidata="Q354535" url="?curid=30587" title="Talking Head">
<text>A talking head is a television pundit. 

Talking head or talking heads may also refer to:
==Music==
* Talking Heads, an American rock band
** &quot;Talking Heads&quot; (album), a 2005 box set by Talking Heads
* &quot;Talking Head&quot;, a song by Motrhead from the 1979 album &quot;Bomber&quot;
*&quot;Talking Heads&quot;, a 2019 single by Black Midi
* &quot;Talking Heads&quot;, a song by Northlane from the 2019 album &quot;Alien&quot;

==Television, theatre and film==
* &quot;Talking Head&quot; (film), a 1992 film by Mamoru Oshii
* &quot;Talking Heads&quot; (British TV series), a BBC television series by Alan Bennett
** &quot;Talking Heads&quot; (play), a 2003 stage adaptation of the BBC series
* &quot;Talking Heads&quot; (Australian TV series), a television series hosted by Peter Thompson
* &quot;Talking Heads&quot;, a 1980 short film by Krzysztof Kielowski

===Episodes===
* &quot;Talking Heads&quot; (&quot;Body of Proof&quot;), an episode of the TV series &quot;Body of Proof&quot;
* &quot;Talking Head&quot;, an episode of the TV series &quot;KYTV&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q354535" start="2" end="14" title="Talking Head" label="talking head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="31" end="37" title="pundit" label="pundit"/>
<link wikidata="Q354535" start="41" end="53" title="Talking Head" label="Talking head"/>
<link wikidata="Q354535" start="57" end="70" title="Talking Head" label="talking heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="102" end="115" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679816" start="142" end="175" title="Talking Heads (album)" label="&amp;quot;Talking Heads&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q834388" start="277" end="295" title="Bomber_(album)" label="&amp;quot;Bomber&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q65070663" start="341" end="351" title="Black Midi" label="Black Midi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069671" start="427" end="432" title="Alien (Northlane album)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679818" start="475" end="506" title="Talking Head (film)" label="&amp;quot;Talking Head&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679819" start="538" end="583" title="Talking Heads (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Talking Heads&amp;quot; (British TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679817" start="628" end="660" title="Talking Heads (play)" label="&amp;quot;Talking Heads&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019910" start="706" end="754" title="Talking Heads (Australian TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Talking Heads&amp;quot; (Australian TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55165" start="851" end="871" title="Krzysztof Kielowski" label="Krzysztof Kielowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745537" start="890" end="943" title="Talking Heads (Body of Proof)" label="&amp;quot;Talking Heads&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Body of Proof&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719229" start="1061" end="1065" title="KYTV (TV series)" label="KYTV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30589" wikidata="Q3930" url="?curid=30589" title="Table tennis">
<text>Table tennis (also known as ping-pong) is a racket sport derived from tennis but distinguished by its playing surface being atop a stationary table, rather than the court on which players stand. Either individually or in teams of two, players take alternating turns returning a light, hollow ball over the table&#x27;s net onto the opposing half of the court using small rackets until they fail to do so, which results in a point for the opponent. Play is fast, requiring quick reaction and constant attention, and is characterized by an emphasis on spin, which can affect the ball&#x27;s trajectory more than in other ball sports.

Owed to its small minimum playing area, its ability to be played indoors in all climates, and relative accessibility of equipment, table tennis is enjoyed worldwide not just as a competitive sport, but as a common recreational pastime among players of all levels and ages.

Table tennis has been an Olympic sport since 1988, with event categories in both men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s singles, and men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s teams since replacing doubles in 2008.

Table tennis is governed by the International Table Tennis Federation (ITTF), founded in 1926, and specifies the official rules in the ITTF handbook. ITTF currently includes 226 member associations worldwide.

== History ==

The sport originated in Victorian England, where it was played among the upper-class as an after-dinner parlour game. It has been suggested that makeshift versions of the game were developed by British military officers in India around the 1860s or 1870s, who brought it back with them. A row of books stood up along the center of the table as a net, two more books served as rackets and were used to continuously hit a golf-ball. In 1883, British sporting goods company Slazenger filed a patent for a net for table tennis.

The name &quot;ping-pong&quot; was in wide use before British manufacturer J. Jaques &amp; Son Ltd trademarked it in 1901. The name &quot;ping-pong&quot; then came to describe the game played using the rather expensive Jaques&#x27;s equipment, with other manufacturers calling it table tennis. A similar situation arose in the United States, where Jaques sold the rights to the &quot;ping-pong&quot; name to Parker Brothers. Parker Brothers then enforced its trademark for the term in the 1920s, making the various associations change their names to &quot;table tennis&quot; instead of the more common, but trademarked, term. The U.S. trademark for &quot;Ping-Pong&quot; is currently owned by Indian Industries, Inc. d/b/a Escalade Sports.

The next major innovation was by James W. Gibb, a British table tennis enthusiast, who discovered novelty celluloid balls on a trip to the US in 1901 and found them ideal for the game. This was followed by E.C. Goode who, in 1901, invented the modern version of the racket by fixing a sheet of pimpled, or stippled, rubber to the wooden blade. Table tennis was growing in popularity by 1901 to the extent that tournaments were being organized, books were being written on the subject, and an unofficial world championship was held in 1902. In those early days, the scoring system was the same as in lawn tennis.

Although both a &quot;Table Tennis Association&quot; and a &quot;Ping Pong Association&quot; existed by 1910, a new Table Tennis Association was founded in 1921, and renamed the English Table Tennis Association in 1926. The International Table Tennis Federation (ITTF) followed in 1926. London hosted the first official World Championships in 1926. In 1933, the United States Table Tennis Association, now called USA Table Tennis, was formed.

In the 1930s, Edgar Snow commented in &quot;Red Star Over China&quot; that the Communist forces in the Chinese Civil War had a &quot;passion for the English game of table tennis&quot; which he found &quot;bizarre&quot;. On the other hand, the popularity of the sport waned in the 1930s Soviet Union, partly because of the promotion of team and military sports, and partly because of a theory that the game had adverse health effects.

In the 1950s, paddles that used a rubber sheet combined with an underlying sponge layer changed the game dramatically, introducing greater spin and speed. These were introduced to Britain by sports goods manufacturer S.W. Hancock Ltd. The use of speed glue beginning in the mid-1980s increased the spin and speed even further, resulting in changes to the equipment to &quot;slow the game down&quot;. Table tennis was introduced as an Olympic sport at the Olympics in 1988.

==Rules and regulations==
The official rules and regulations are specified in the ITTF handbook, which was first published in 1927. The current (fiftieth) version was published in 2022.

===Rule changes===

After the 2000 Olympics in Sydney, the ITTF instituted several rule changes that were aimed at making table tennis more viable as a televised spectator sport. First, the older balls were officially replaced by balls in October 2000. This increased the ball&#x27;s air resistance and effectively slowed down the game. By that time, players had begun increasing the thickness of the fast sponge layer on their paddles, which made the game excessively fast and difficult to watch on television. A few months later, the ITTF changed from a 21-point to an 11-point scoring system (and the serve rotation was reduced from five points to two), effective in September 2001. This was intended to make games more fast-paced and exciting. The ITTF also changed the rules on service to prevent a player from hiding the ball during service, in order to increase the average length of rallies and to reduce the server&#x27;s advantage, effective in 2002. For the opponent to have time to realize a serve is taking place, the ball must be tossed a minimum of in the air. The ITTF states that all events after July 2014 are played with a new poly material ball.

== Equipment ==
=== Ball ===

The international rules specify that the game is played with a sphere having a mass of and a diameter of . The rules say that the ball shall bounce up when dropped from a height of onto a standard steel block thereby having a coefficient of restitution of 0.89 to 0.92. As of 2015, balls are now made of a polymer instead of celluloid, colored white or orange, with a finish. The choice of ball color is made according to the table color and its surroundings. For example, a white ball is easier to see on a green or blue table than it is on a grey table. Manufacturers often indicate the quality of the ball with a star rating system, usually from one to three, three being the highest grade. As this system is not standard across manufacturers, the only way a ball may be used in official competition is upon ITTF approval (the ITTF approval can be seen printed on the ball).

The 40mm ball was introduced after the end of the 2000 Summer Olympics; previously a 38mm ball was standard. This created some controversies. Vladimir Samsonov, the World No. 1 table tennis professional at the time, threatened to pull out of the World Cup, which was scheduled to debut the new regulation ball on 12 October 2000.

=== Table ===
The table is long, wide, and high with any continuous material so long as the table yields a uniform bounce of about when a standard ball is dropped onto it from a height of , or about . The table or playing surface is uniformly dark colored and matte, divided into two halves by a net at in height. The ITTF approves only wooden tables or their derivates. Concrete tables with a steel net or a solid concrete partition are sometimes available in outside public spaces, such as parks.

=== Playing area ===
ITTF regulations require a playing space of at least long by wide, and a height clearance of at least . For wheelchair events, the minimums are long and wide.

=== Racket ===

Players are equipped with a laminated wooden racket covered with rubber on one or two sides depending on the grip of the player. The ITTF uses the term &quot;racket&quot;, though &quot;bat&quot; is common in Britain, and &quot;paddle&quot; in the U.S. and Canada.

The wooden portion of the racket, often referred to as the &quot;blade&quot;, commonly features anywhere between one and seven plies of wood, though cork, glass fiber, carbon fiber, aluminum fiber, and Kevlar are sometimes used. According to the ITTF regulations, at least 85% of the blade by thickness shall be of natural wood. Common wood types include balsa, limba, cypress, and hinoki, which is popular in Japan. The average size of the blade is about long and wide. Although the official restrictions only focus on the flatness and rigidity of the blade itself, these dimensions are optimal for most play styles.

Table tennis regulations allow different rubber surfaces on each side of the racket. Various types of surfaces provide various levels of spin or speed, and in some cases they nullify spin. For example, a player may have a rubber that provides much spin on one side of their racket, and one that provides no spin on the other. By flipping the racket in play, different types of returns are possible. To help a player distinguish between the rubber used by his opposing player, international rules specify that one side must be black while the other side must be a bright color clearly distinguishable from black and from the color of the ball. The player has the right to inspect their opponent&#x27;s racket before a match to see the type of rubber used and what color it is. Despite high-speed play and rapid exchanges, a player can see clearly what side of the racket was used to hit the ball. Current rules state that, unless damaged in play, the racket cannot be exchanged for another racket at any time during a match.

== Gameplay ==
=== Starting a game ===
According to ITTF rule 2.13.1, the first service is decided by lot, normally a coin toss. It is also common for one player (or the umpire/scorer) to hide the ball in one or the other hand, usually hidden under the table, allowing the other player to guess which hand the ball is in. The correct or incorrect guess gives the &quot;winner&quot; the option to choose to serve, receive, or to choose which side of the table to use. (A common but non-sanctioned method is for the players to play the ball back and forth three times and then play out the point. This is commonly referred to as &quot;serve to play&quot;, &quot;rally to serve&quot;, &quot;play for serve&quot;, or &quot;volley for serve&quot;. Another common method is referred to as &quot;Ping for serve&quot; or &quot;Pinging for serve&quot; where players will begin playing by hitting or bouncing the ball and playing a rally spelling out the word ping P-I-N-G with each hit then playing out the point for service).

=== Service and return ===

In game play, the player serving the ball commences a play. The server first stands with the ball held on the open palm of the hand not carrying the paddle, called the freehand, and tosses the ball directly upward without spin, at least high. The server strikes the ball with the racket on the ball&#x27;s descent so that it first touches the server&#x27;s court, and then touches directly the receiver&#x27;s court without touching the net assembly. In casual games, many players do not toss the ball upward; however, this is technically illegal and can give the serving player an unfair advantage.

The ball must remain behind the endline and above the playing surface of the table at all times during the service. The server&#x27;s body or clothing cannot be used to obstruct sight of the ball; the opponent and the umpire must have a clear view of the ball at all times. If the umpire is doubtful of the legality of a service they may first interrupt play and give a warning to the server. If the serve is a clear failure or is doubted again by the umpire after the warning, the receiver scores a point.

If the service is &quot;good&quot;, then the receiver must make a &quot;good&quot; return by hitting the ball back before it bounces a second time on receiver&#x27;s side of the table so that the ball passes the net and touches the opponent&#x27;s court, either directly or after touching the net assembly. Thereafter, the server and receiver must alternately make a return until the rally is over. Returning the serve is one of the most difficult parts of the game, as the server&#x27;s first move is often the least predictable and thus most advantageous shot due to the numerous spin and speed choices at the server&#x27;s disposal.

=== Let ===
A let is a rally of which the result is not scored, and is called in the following circumstances:

* The ball touches the net in service (service), provided the service is otherwise correct or the ball is obstructed by the player on the receiving side. Obstruction means a player touches the ball when it is above or traveling towards the playing surface, not having touched the player&#x27;s court since last being struck by the player.
* When the player on the receiving side is not ready and the service is delivered.
* Player&#x27;s failure to make a service or a return or to comply with the Laws is due to a disturbance outside the control of the player.
* Play is interrupted by the umpire or assistant umpire.

A let is also called foul service, if the ball hits the server&#x27;s side of the table, if the ball does not pass further than the edge, and if the ball hits the table edge and hits the net.

=== Scoring ===

A point is scored by the player for any of several results of the rally:

* The opponent fails to make a correct service or return.
* After making a service or a return, the ball touches anything other than the net assembly before being struck by the opponent.
* The ball passes over the player&#x27;s court or beyond their end line without touching their court, after being struck by the opponent.
* The opponent obstructs the ball.
* The opponent strikes the ball twice successively. The hand that is holding the racket counts as part of the racket and that making a good return off one&#x27;s hand or fingers is allowed. It is not a fault if the ball accidentally hits one&#x27;s hand or fingers and then subsequently hits the racket.
* The opponent strikes the ball with a side of the racket blade whose surface is not covered with rubber.
* The opponent moves the playing surface or touches the net assembly.
* The opponent&#x27;s free hand touches the playing surface.
* As a receiver under the expedite system, completing 13 returns in a rally.
* The opponent that has been warned by the umpire commits a second offense in the same individual match or team match. If the third offence happens, 2 points will be given to the player. If the individual match or the team match has not ended, any unused penalty points can be transferred to the next game of that match.

A game shall be won by the player first scoring 11 points unless both players score 10 points, when the game shall be won by the first player subsequently gaining a lead of 2 points. A match shall consist of the best of any odd number of games. In competition play, matches are typically best of five or seven games.

=== Alternation of services and ends ===
Service alternates between opponents every two points (regardless of winner of the rally) until the end of the game, unless both players score ten points or the expedite system is operated, when the sequences of serving and receiving stay the same but each player serves for only one point in turn (Deuce). The player serving first in a game receives first in the next game of the match.

After each game, players switch sides of the table. In the last possible game of a match, for example the seventh game in a best of seven match, players change ends when the first player scores five points, regardless of whose turn it is to serve. If the sequence of serving and receiving is out of turn or the ends are not changed, points scored in the wrong situation are still calculated and the game shall be resumed with the order at the score that has been reached.

=== Doubles game ===

In addition to games between individual players, pairs may also play table tennis. Singles and doubles are both played in international competition, including the Olympic Games since 1988 and the Commonwealth Games since 2002.

In doubles, all the rules of single play are applied except for the following.

Service
: A line painted along the long axis of the table to create doubles courts bisects the table. This line&#x27;s only purpose is to facilitate the doubles service rule, which is that service must originate from the right hand &quot;box&quot; in such a way that the first bounce of the serve bounces once in said right hand box and then must bounce at least once in the opponent side&#x27;s right hand box (far left box for server), or the receiving pair score a point.

Order of play, serving and receiving
# Players must hit the ball in turn. For example, if A is paired with B and X is paired with Y, then A is the server and X is the receiver. and the order of play shall be AXBY. The rally proceeds this way until one side fails to make a legal return and the other side scores.
# At each change of service, the previous receiver shall become the server and the partner of the previous server shall become the receiver. For example, if the previous order of play is AXBY, the order becomes XBYA after the change of service.
# In the second or the latter games of a match, the game begins in reverse order of play. For example, if the order of play is AXBY at beginning of the first game, the order begins with XAYB or YBXA in the second game depending on either X or Y being chosen as the first server of the game. That means the first receiver of the game is the player who served to the first server of the game in the preceding game. In each game of a doubles match, the pair having the right to serve first shall choose which of them will do so. The receiving pair, however, can only choose in the first game of the match.
# When a pair reaches 5 points in the final game, the pairs must switch ends of the table and change the receiver to reverse the order of play. For example, when the last order of play before a pair score 5 points in the final game is AXBY, the order after change shall be AYBX if A still has the second serve. Otherwise, X is the next server and the order becomes XAYB.

=== Expedite system ===
If a game is unfinished after 10 minutes of play and fewer than 18 points have been scored, the expedite system is initiated. The umpire interrupts the game, and the game resumes with players serving for one point in turn. If the expedite system is introduced while the ball is not in play, the previous receiver shall serve first. Under the expedite system, the server must win the point before the opponent makes 13 consecutive returns or the point goes to the opponent. The system can also be initiated at any time at the request of both players or pairs. Once introduced, the expedite system remains in force until the end of the match. As it is intended as a rule to shorten the duration of a match, it is mainly deployed in defensive players&#x27; matches, which tend to have longer points.

== Grips ==
Though table tennis players grip their rackets in various ways, their grips can be classified into two major families of styles, &quot;penhold&quot; and &quot;shakehand&quot;. The rules of table tennis do not prescribe the manner in which one must grip the racket, and numerous grips are employed.

=== Penhold ===

The penhold grip is so-named because one grips the racket similarly to the way one holds a writing instrument. The style of play among penhold players can vary greatly from player to player. The most popular style, usually referred to as the Chinese penhold style, involves curling the middle, ring, and fourth finger on the back of the blade with the three fingers always touching one another. Chinese penholders favour a round racket head, for a more over-the-table style of play. In contrast, another style, sometimes referred to as the Japanese/Korean penhold grip, involves splaying those three fingers out across the back of the racket, usually with all three fingers touching the back of the racket, rather than stacked upon one another. Sometimes a combination of the two styles occurs, wherein the middle, ring and fourth fingers are straight, but still stacked, or where all fingers may be touching the back of the racket, but are also in contact with one another. Japanese and Korean penholders will often use a square-headed racket for an away-from-the-table style of play. Traditionally these square-headed rackets feature a block of cork on top of the handle, as well as a thin layer of cork on the back of the racket, for increased grip and comfort. Penhold styles are popular among players originating from East Asian countries such as China, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan.

Traditionally, penhold players use only one side of the racket to hit the ball during normal play, and the side which is in contact with the last three fingers is generally not used. This configuration is sometimes referred to as &quot;traditional penhold&quot; and is more commonly found in square-headed racket styles. However, the Chinese developed a technique in the 1990s in which a penholder uses both sides of the racket to hit the ball, where the player produces a backhand stroke (most often topspin) known as a reverse penhold backhand by turning the traditional side of the racket to face one&#x27;s self, and striking the ball with the opposite side of the racket. This stroke has greatly improved and strengthened the penhold style both physically and psychologically, as it eliminates the strategic weakness of the traditional penhold backhand.

=== Shakehand ===
The shakehand grip is so-named because the racket is grasped as if one is performing a handshake. Though it is sometimes referred to as the &quot;tennis&quot; or &quot;Western&quot; grip, it bears no relation to the Western tennis grip, which was popularized on the West Coast of the United States in which the racket is rotated 90, and played with the wrist turned so that on impact the knuckles face the target. In table tennis, &quot;Western&quot; refers to Western nations, for this is the grip that players native to Europe and the Americas have almost exclusively employed.

The shakehand grip&#x27;s simplicity and versatility, coupled with the acceptance among top-level Chinese trainers that the European style of play should be emulated and trained against, has established it as a common grip even in China. Many world-class European and East Asian players currently use the shakehand grip, and it is generally accepted that shakehands is easier to learn than penholder, allowing a broader range of playing styles both offensive and defensive.

=== Seemiller ===
The Seemiller grip is named after the American table tennis champion Danny Seemiller, who used it. It is achieved by placing the thumb and index finger on either side of the bottom of the racquet head and holding the handle with the rest of the fingers. Since only one side of the racquet is used to hit the ball, two contrasting rubber types can be applied to the blade, offering the advantage of &quot;twiddling&quot; the racket to fool the opponent. Seemiller paired inverted rubber with anti-spin rubber. Many players today combine inverted and long-pipped rubber. The grip is considered exceptional for blocking, especially on the backhand side, and for forehand loops of backspin balls.
The Seemiller grip&#x27;s popularity reached its apex in 1985 when four (Danny Seemiller, Ricky Seemiller, Eric Boggan and Brian Masters) of the United States&#x27; five participants in the World Championships used it.

== Stance ==
The stance in table tennis is also known as the &#x27;ready position&#x27;. It is the position every player initially adopts when receiving and returns to after playing a shot in order to be prepared to make the next shot. It involves the feet being spaced wider than shoulder width and a partial crouch being adopted; the crouch is an efficient posture for moving quickly from and also preloads the muscles enabling a more dynamic movement. The upper torso is positioned slightly forward and the player is looking forwards. The racket is held at the ready with a bent arm. The position should feel balanced and provide a solid base for striking and quick lateral movement. Players may tailor their stance based upon their personal preferences, and alter it during the game based upon the specific circumstances.

== Types of strokes ==
Table tennis strokes generally break down into offensive and defensive categories.

=== Offensive strokes ===

==== Hit ====
Also known as speed drive, a direct hit on the ball propelling it forward back to the opponent. This stroke differs from speed drives in other racket sports like tennis because the racket is primarily &quot;perpendicular&quot; to the direction of the stroke and most of the energy applied to the ball results in &quot;speed&quot; rather than &quot;spin&quot;, creating a shot that does not arc much, but is fast enough that it can be difficult to return. A speed drive is used mostly for keeping the ball in play, applying pressure on the opponent, and potentially opening up an opportunity for a more powerful attack.

==== Loop ====
Perfected during the 1960s, the loop is essentially the reverse of the chop. The racket is &quot;parallel&quot; to the direction of the stroke (&quot;closed&quot;) and the racket thus &quot;grazes&quot; the ball, resulting in a large amount of topspin. A good loop drive will arc quite a bit, and once striking the opponent&#x27;s side of the table will jump forward, much like a kick serve in tennis. Most professional players nowadays, such as Ding Ning, Timo Boll and Zhang Jike, primarily use loop for offense.

==== Counter-hit ====
The counter-hit is usually a counterattack against drives, normally high loop drives. The racket is held closed and near to the ball, which is hit with a short movement &quot;off the bounce&quot; (immediately after hitting the table) so that the ball travels faster to the other side. Kenta Matsudaira is known for primarily using counter-hit for offense.

==== Flip ====
When a player tries to attack a ball that has not bounced beyond the edge of the table, the player does not have the room to wind up in a &quot;backswing&quot;. The ball &quot;may still be attacked&quot;, however, and the resulting shot is called a flip because the backswing is compressed into a quick wrist action. A flip is not a single stroke and can resemble either a loop drive or a loop in its characteristics. What identifies the stroke is that the backswing is compressed into a short wrist flick.

==== Smash ====
A player will typically execute a smash when the opponent has returned a ball that bounces too high or too close to the net. It is nearly always done with a forehand stroke. &quot;Smashing&quot; uses rapid acceleration to impart as much speed on the ball as possible so that the opponent cannot react in time. The racket is generally perpendicular to the direction of the stroke. Because the speed is the main aim of this shot, the spin on the ball is often minimal, although it can be applied as well. An offensive table tennis player will think of a rally as a build-up to a winning smash. Smash is used more often with penhold grip.

=== Defensive strokes ===

==== Push ====
The push (or &quot;slice&quot; in Asia) is usually used for keeping the point alive and creating offensive opportunities. A push resembles a tennis slice: the racket cuts underneath the ball, imparting backspin and causing the ball to float slowly to the other side of the table. A push can be difficult to attack because the backspin on the ball causes it to drop toward the table upon striking the opponent&#x27;s racket. In order to attack a push, a player must usually loop (if the push is long) or flip (if the push is short) the ball back over the net. Often, the best option for beginners is to simply push the ball back again, resulting in pushing rallies. Against good players, it may be the worst option because the opponent will counter with a loop, putting the first player in a defensive position. Pushing can have advantages in some circumstances, such as when the opponent makes easy mistakes.

==== Chop ====
A chop is the defensive, backspin counterpart to the offensive loop drive. A chop is essentially a bigger, heavier push, taken well back from the table. The racket face points primarily horizontally, perhaps a little bit upward, and the direction of the stroke is straight down. The object of a defensive chop is to match the topspin of the opponent&#x27;s shot with backspin. A good chop will float nearly horizontally back to the table, in some cases having so much backspin that the ball actually &quot;rises&quot;. Such a chop can be &quot;extremely&quot; difficult to return due to its enormous amount of backspin. Some defensive players can also impart no-spin or sidespin variations of the chop. Some famous choppers include Joo Sae-hyuk and Wu Yang.

==== Block ====
A block is executed by simply placing the racket in front of the ball right after the ball bounces; thus, the ball rebounds back toward the opponent with nearly as much energy as it came in with. This requires precision, since the ball&#x27;s spin, speed, and location all influence the correct angle of a block. It is very possible for an opponent to execute a perfect loop, drive, or smash, only to have the blocked shot come back just as fast. Due to the power involved in offensive strokes, often an opponent simply cannot recover quickly enough to return the blocked shot, especially if the block is aimed at an unexpected side of the table. Blocks almost always produce the same spin as was received, many times topspin.

==== Lob ====
The defensive lob propels the ball about five metres in height, only to land on the opponent&#x27;s side of the table with great amounts of spin. The stroke itself consists of lifting the ball to an enormous height before it falls back to the opponent&#x27;s side of the table. A lob can have nearly any kind of spin. Though the opponent may &quot;smash&quot; the ball hard and fast, a good defensive lob could be more difficult to return due to the unpredictability and heavy amounts of the spin on the ball. Thus, though backed off the table by tens of feet and running to reach the ball, a good defensive player can still win the point using good lobs. The lob is used less frequently by professional players. A notable exception is Michael Maze.

== Effects of spin ==
Adding spin onto the ball causes major changes in table tennis gameplay. Although nearly every stroke or serve creates some kind of spin, understanding the individual types of spin allows players to defend against and use different spins effectively.

=== Backspin ===
Backspin is where the bottom half of the ball is rotating away from the player, and is imparted by striking the base of the ball with a downward movement. At the professional level, backspin is usually used defensively in order to keep the ball low. Backspin is commonly employed in service because it is harder to produce an offensive return, though at the professional level most people serve sidespin with either backspin or topspin. Due to the initial lift of the ball, there is a limit on how much speed with which one can hit the ball without missing the opponent&#x27;s side of the table. However, backspin also makes it harder for the opponent to return the ball with great speed because of the required angular precision of the return. Alterations are frequently made to regulations regarding equipment in an effort to maintain a balance between defensive and offensive spin choices. It is actually possible to smash with backspin offensively, but only on high balls that are close to the net.

=== Topspin ===
The topspin stroke has a smaller influence on the first part of the ball curve. Like the backspin stroke, however, the axis of spin remains roughly perpendicular to the trajectory of the ball thus allowing for the Magnus effect to dictate the subsequent curvature. After the apex of the curve, the ball dips downwards as it approaches the opposing side, before bouncing. On the bounce, the topspin will accelerate the ball, much in the same way that a wheel which is already spinning would accelerate upon making contact with the ground. When the opponent attempts to return the ball, the topspin causes the ball to jump upwards and the opponent is forced to compensate for the topspin by adjusting the angle of his or her racket. This is known as &quot;closing the racket&quot;.

The speed limitation of the topspin stroke is minor compared to the backspin stroke. This stroke is the predominant technique used in professional competition because it gives the opponent less time to respond. In table tennis topspin is regarded as an offensive technique due to increased ball speed, lower bio-mechanical efficiency and the pressure that it puts on the opponent by reducing reaction time. (It is possible to play defensive topspin-lobs from far behind the table, but only highly skilled players use this stroke with any tactical efficiency.) Topspin is the least common type of spin to be found in service at the professional level, simply because it is much easier to attack a top-spin ball that is not moving at high speed.

=== Sidespin ===
This type of spin is predominantly employed during service, wherein the contact angle of the racket can be more easily varied. Unlike the two aforementioned techniques, sidespin causes the ball to spin on an axis which is vertical, rather than horizontal. The axis of rotation is still roughly perpendicular to the trajectory of the ball. In this circumstance, the Magnus effect will still dictate the curvature of the ball to some degree. Another difference is that, unlike backspin and topspin, sidespin will have relatively very little effect on the bounce of the ball, much in the same way that a spinning top would not travel left or right if its axis of rotation were exactly vertical. This makes sidespin a useful weapon in service, because it is less easily recognized when bouncing, and the ball &quot;loses&quot; less spin on the bounce. Sidespin can also be employed in offensive rally strokes, often from a greater distance, as an adjunct to topspin or backspin. This stroke is sometimes referred to as a &quot;hook&quot;. The hook can even be used in some extreme cases to circumvent the net when away from the table.

=== Corkspin ===
Players employ this type of spin almost exclusively when serving, but at the professional level, it is also used from time to time in the lob. Unlike any of the techniques mentioned above, corkspin (or &quot;drill-spin&quot;) has the axis of spin relatively parallel to the ball&#x27;s trajectory, so that the Magnus effect has little or no effect on the trajectory of a cork-spun ball: upon bouncing, the ball will dart right or left (according to the direction of the spin), severely complicating the return. In theory, this type of spin produces the most obnoxious effects, but it is less strategically practical than sidespin or backspin, because of the limitations that it imposes upon the opponent during their return. Aside from the initial direction change when bouncing, unless it goes out of reach, the opponent can counter with &quot;either&quot; topspin or backspin. A backspin stroke is similar in the fact that the corkspin stroke has a lower maximum velocity, simply due to the contact angle of the racket when producing the stroke. To impart a spin on the ball which is parallel to its trajectory, the racket must be swung more or less perpendicular to the trajectory of the ball, greatly limiting the forward momentum that the racket transfers to the ball. Corkspin is almost always mixed with another variety of spin since alone, it is not only less effective but also harder to produce.

==Competitions==

Competitive table tennis is popular in East Asia and Europe, and has been gaining attention in the United States. The most important international competitions are the World Table Tennis Championships, the Table Tennis World Cup, the Olympics and the ITTF World Tour. Continental competitions include the following: 
* European Championships
* Europe Top-16
* the Asian Championships 
* the Asian Games

Chinese players have won 60% of the men&#x27;s World Championships since 1959; in the women&#x27;s competition for the Corbillon Cup, Chinese players have won all but three of the World Championships since 1971. Other strong teams come from East Asia and Europe, including Austria, Belarus, Germany, Hong Kong, Portugal, Japan, South Korea, Singapore, Sweden, and Taiwan.

There are professional competitions at the clubs level; the respective leagues of Austria, Belgium, China (China Table Tennis Super League), Japan (T.League), France, Germany (Bundesliga), and Russia are examples of the highest level. There are also some important international club teams competitions such as the European Champions League and its former competitor, the European Club Cup, where the top club teams from European countries compete.

Virtual reality table tennis competition took place in Olympic Esports Week on June 24, 2023 in Singapore. Eleven Table Tennis was the game played during the event. The final match was played between two players both representing France. ITTF Group CEO, Steve Dainton also participated in the event. European table tennis federation and French table tennis association are also arranging virtual reality table tennis tournaments.

== Naturalized players in international competition ==
According to the &quot;New York Times&quot;, 31% of the table tennis players at the 2016 Summer Olympics were naturalized. The rate was twice as high as the next sport, basketball, which featured 15% of naturalized players.

Feng Tianwei, a Chinese-born player representing Singapore, has medaled in three Olympic table tennis events, more medals than native Singaporeans have won in all other sports combined (two). These successes have been somewhat controversial in Singapore. In 2014, Singapore Table Tennis Association&#x27;s president Lee Bee Wah quit over this issue; her successor, Ellen Lee, later favored the application for citizenship of Zeng Jian, a China-born paddler.

The rate of naturalization accelerated after the ITTF&#x27;s 2009 decision (one year after China won every possible Olympic medal in the sport) to reduce the number of entries per association in both the Olympics and the World Table Tennis Championships.

In 2019, the ITTF adopted new regulations which state that players who acquired a new nationality may not represent their new association before:

*1 year after the date of registration, if the player is under the age of 15 when registered and has never represented another association
*3 years after the date of registration, if the player is under the age of 15 when registered and has already represented another association
*5 years after the date of registration, if the player is under the age of 18 but at least 15 years of age when registered
*7 years after the date of registration, if the player is under the age of 21 but at least 18 years of age when registered
*9 years after the date of registration, if the player is at least 21 years old when registered

== Notable players ==

An official hall of fame exists at the ITTF Museum. A &quot;Grand Slam&quot; is earned by a player who wins singles crowns at the Olympic Games, World Championships, and World Cup. Jan-Ove Waldner of Sweden first completed the grand slam at 1992 Olympic Games. Deng Yaping of China is the first female recorded at the inaugural Women&#x27;s World Cup in 1996. The following table presents an exhaustive list of all players to have completed a grand slam.

Jean-Philippe Gatien, Wang Hao and Sun Yingsha won both the World Championships and the World Cup, but lost in the gold medal matches at the Olympics. Ma Lin and Chen Meng won both the Olympic gold and the World Cup, but lost in the finals of the World Championships. Jrgen Persson and Liu Shiwen also won the titles except the Olympic Games. Persson is one of the five table tennis players to have competed at seven Olympic Games. Zhang Yining and Ma Long are the only players to have completed the grand slam twice.

== Governance ==

Founded in 1926, the International Table Tennis Federation (ITTF) is the worldwide governing body for table tennis, which maintains an international ranking system in addition to organizing events like the World Table Tennis Championships. In 2007, the governance for table tennis for persons with a disability was transferred from the International Paralympic Committee to the ITTF.

On many continents, there is a governing body responsible for table tennis on that continent. For example, the European Table Tennis Union (ETTU) is the governing body responsible for table tennis in Europe. There are also national bodies and other local authorities responsible for the sport, such as USA Table Tennis (USATT), which is the national governing body for table tennis in the United States.

==Variants==
Hardbat table tennis uses rackets with short outward &quot;pips&quot; and no sponge, resulting in decreased speeds and reduced spin. World Championship of Ping Pong uses old-fashioned wooden paddles covered with sandpaper.

Round the World (also called Round Robin or Round the Table) table tennis is an informal party-type variation in which players line up on either side of the table. When a player hits the ball he sets the paddle down, and the player behind him picks it up to receive the return. When a player sets down his paddle, he moves to the line at the opposing side of the table. Players are eliminated as they lose a point. When only 2 players remain, a player hits the ball, sets his paddle down, spins and then retrieves his paddle to make the return.

== See also ==

* Disability classification in table tennis
* Glossary of table tennis
* International Table Tennis Federation
* List of ITTF World Tour winners
* List of table tennis players
* Beer pong
* Headis
* Ping-pong diplomacy
* Pingpongo
* Pong
* Table squash

== References ==

== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Official ITTF website
* Official ETTU website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="0" end="12" title="Table tennis" label="Table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="28" end="37" title="Table tennis" label="ping-pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q118145884" start="44" end="56" title="racket sport" label="racket sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="70" end="76" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q741118" start="165" end="170" title="Tennis court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q337695" start="371" end="378" title="table tennis racket" label="rackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q282770" start="932" end="945" title="Table tennis at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympic sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q562089" start="952" end="956" title="Table tennis at the 1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q387526" start="1090" end="1094" title="Table tennis at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q661379" start="1129" end="1166" title="International Table Tennis Federation" label="International Table Tennis Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="1346" end="1363" title="Victorian England" label="Victorian England"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947863" start="1426" end="1438" title="parlour game" label="parlour game"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1545" end="1550" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855977" start="1793" end="1802" title="Slazenger" label="Slazenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q954607" start="1922" end="1945" title="Jaques of London" label="J. Jaques &amp;amp; Son Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="1946" end="1955" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501379" start="2255" end="2270" title="Parker Brothers" label="Parker Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="2564" end="2569" title="d/b/a" label="d/b/a"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377389" start="2570" end="2585" title="Escalade Sports" label="Escalade Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q146612" start="2694" end="2703" title="celluloid" label="celluloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="2904" end="2910" title="Natural rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="3187" end="3198" title="tennis" label="lawn tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342760" start="3317" end="3341" title="Table Tennis Association" label="Table Tennis Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342760" start="3379" end="3411" title="English Table Tennis Association" label="English Table Tennis Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q661379" start="3425" end="3462" title="International Table Tennis Federation" label="International Table Tennis Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q867238" start="3521" end="3540" title="World Table Tennis Championships" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q958120" start="3563" end="3601" title="USATT" label="United States Table Tennis Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q557081" start="3659" end="3669" title="Edgar Snow" label="Edgar Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059846" start="3689" end="3708" title="Red Star Over China" label="Red Star Over China"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="3748" end="3765" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465026" start="4326" end="4336" title="speed glue" label="speed glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="4535" end="4551" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="Olympics in 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q570002" start="4771" end="4784" title="Table tennis at the 2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="4788" end="4794" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210980" start="5147" end="5153" title="Sponge (material)" label="sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143011" start="6164" end="6190" title="coefficient of restitution" label="coefficient of restitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q146612" start="6263" end="6272" title="celluloid" label="celluloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q570002" start="6868" end="6888" title="Table tennis at the 2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q360555" start="6961" end="6978" title="Vladimir Samsonov" label="Vladimir Samsonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q661379" start="7468" end="7472" title="International Table Tennis Federation" label="ITTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q97073475" start="7912" end="7918" title="Table tennis rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="8467" end="8472" title="balsa" label="balsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419734" start="8474" end="8479" title="Terminalia superba" label="limba"/>
<link wikidata="Q14169641" start="8481" end="8488" title="cypress" label="cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q917187" start="8494" end="8500" title="hinoki" label="hinoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q97073475" start="8772" end="8787" title="Table tennis rubber" label="rubber surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q825367" start="9874" end="9883" title="coin toss" label="coin toss"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="16303" end="16321" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q121916" start="19692" end="19710" title="writing instrument" label="writing instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="20924" end="20933" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="20953" end="20958" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="20960" end="20965" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="20967" end="20978" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="20984" end="20990" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="21327" end="21334" title="Han Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496845" start="22095" end="22106" title="tennis grip" label="tennis grip"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="22137" end="22168" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="22333" end="22340" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220809" start="23015" end="23030" title="Danny Seemiller" label="Danny Seemiller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24259" end="24279" title="Isometric exercise#Isometric presses as preparation for explosive power movements" label="preloads the muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="25041" end="25054" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q53875" start="25566" end="25574" title="Parallel (geometry)" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q242496" start="25915" end="25924" title="Ding Ning" label="Ding Ning"/>
<link wikidata="Q57747" start="25926" end="25935" title="Timo Boll" label="Timo Boll"/>
<link wikidata="Q197218" start="25940" end="25950" title="Zhang Jike" label="Zhang Jike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363614" start="26292" end="26308" title="Kenta Matsudaira" label="Kenta Matsudaira"/>
<link wikidata="Q482630" start="29239" end="29251" title="Joo Sae-hyuk" label="Joo Sae-hyuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225038" start="29256" end="29263" title="Wu Yang" label="Wu Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q559105" start="30760" end="30772" title="Michael Maze" label="Michael Maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q490309" start="31066" end="31074" title="Backspin" label="Backspin"/>
<link wikidata="Q936809" start="32090" end="32097" title="topspin" label="topspin"/>
<link wikidata="Q622975" start="32300" end="32313" title="Magnus effect" label="Magnus effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q622975" start="33994" end="34007" title="Magnus effect" label="Magnus effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q112169174" start="34967" end="34975" title="corkspin" label="corkspin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34986" end="34996" title="drill-spin" label="drill-spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q622975" start="35088" end="35101" title="Magnus effect" label="Magnus effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="36242" end="36251" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="36256" end="36262" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="36302" end="36315" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q867238" start="36371" end="36403" title="World Table Tennis Championships" label="World Table Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q428526" start="36409" end="36431" title="Table Tennis World Cup" label="Table Tennis World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q282770" start="36437" end="36445" title="Table tennis at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155795" start="36454" end="36469" title="ITTF World Tour" label="ITTF World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499149" start="36522" end="36544" title="Table Tennis European Championships" label="European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376281" start="36547" end="36560" title="Europe Top-16" label="Europe Top-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436541" start="36567" end="36586" title="Asian Table Tennis Championships" label="Asian Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q483463" start="36594" end="36605" title="Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="36880" end="36887" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="36889" end="36896" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="36898" end="36905" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="36907" end="36916" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="36918" end="36926" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="36928" end="36933" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="36935" end="36946" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="36948" end="36957" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="36959" end="36965" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="36971" end="36977" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="37062" end="37069" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="37071" end="37078" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="37080" end="37085" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074065" start="37087" end="37118" title="China Table Tennis Super League" label="China Table Tennis Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q48750772" start="37128" end="37136" title="T.League" label="T.League"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="37139" end="37145" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="37147" end="37154" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q564417" start="37156" end="37166" title="Bundesliga (table tennis)" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="37173" end="37179" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061281" start="37295" end="37320" title="European Champions League (table tennis)" label="European Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q833658" start="37352" end="37369" title="European Club Cup of Champions" label="European Club Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q29877679" start="37537" end="37556" title="Eleven Table Tennis" label="Eleven Table Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="37939" end="37953" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="38000" end="38020" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="38026" end="38037" title="Naturalization" label="naturalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="38085" end="38095" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q242490" start="38141" end="38153" title="Feng Tianwei" label="Feng Tianwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950534" start="38457" end="38468" title="Lee Bee Wah" label="Lee Bee Wah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189029" start="38506" end="38515" title="Ellen Lee" label="Ellen Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q79056438" start="38566" end="38575" title="Zeng Jian" label="Zeng Jian"/>
<link wikidata="Q661379" start="38649" end="38653" title="International Table Tennis Federation" label="ITTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q387526" start="38697" end="38742" title="Table tennis at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="won every possible Olympic medal in the sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q867238" start="38821" end="38853" title="World Table Tennis Championships" label="World Table Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322526" start="39662" end="39674" title="ITTF Hall of Fame" label="hall of fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q282770" start="39780" end="39793" title="Table tennis at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q867238" start="39795" end="39814" title="World Table Tennis Championships" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q428526" start="39820" end="39829" title="Table Tennis World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q345360" start="39831" end="39846" title="Jan-Ove Waldner" label="Jan-Ove Waldner"/>
<link wikidata="Q270661" start="39911" end="39922" title="Deng Yaping" label="Deng Yaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q212608" start="40106" end="40126" title="Jean-Philippe Gatien" label="Jean-Philippe Gatien"/>
<link wikidata="Q313116" start="40128" end="40136" title="Wang Hao (table tennis, born 1983)" label="Wang Hao"/>
<link wikidata="Q32772779" start="40141" end="40152" title="Sun Yingsha" label="Sun Yingsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q317851" start="40257" end="40263" title="Ma Lin (table tennis)" label="Ma Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360632" start="40268" end="40277" title="Chen Meng" label="Chen Meng"/>
<link wikidata="Q447207" start="40374" end="40388" title="Jrgen Persson" label="Jrgen Persson"/>
<link wikidata="Q443175" start="40393" end="40403" title="Liu Shiwen" label="Liu Shiwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q782214" start="40506" end="40537" title="List of athletes with the most appearances at Olympic Games" label="competed at seven Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q197335" start="40539" end="40551" title="Zhang Yining" label="Zhang Yining"/>
<link wikidata="Q459114" start="40556" end="40563" title="Ma Long" label="Ma Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q661379" start="40665" end="40702" title="International Table Tennis Federation" label="International Table Tennis Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485448" start="40727" end="40736" title="Sport governing body" label="governing"/>
<link wikidata="Q867238" start="40850" end="40882" title="World Table Tennis Championships" label="World Table Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085248" start="40912" end="40954" title="para table tennis" label="table tennis for persons with a disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q175386" start="40980" end="41014" title="International Paralympic Committee" label="International Paralympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377017" start="41140" end="41167" title="European Table Tennis Union" label="European Table Tennis Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q958120" start="41331" end="41347" title="USA Table Tennis" label="USA Table Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127347" start="41447" end="41454" title="Hardbat" label="Hardbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035492" start="41580" end="41611" title="World Championship of Ping Pong" label="World Championship of Ping Pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281193" start="42235" end="42276" title="Disability classification in table tennis" label="Disability classification in table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673427" start="42279" end="42303" title="Glossary of table tennis" label="Glossary of table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q661379" start="42306" end="42343" title="International Table Tennis Federation" label="International Table Tennis Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573807" start="42346" end="42377" title="List of ITTF World Tour winners" label="List of ITTF World Tour winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q339793" start="42380" end="42408" title="List of table tennis players" label="List of table tennis players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064959" start="42411" end="42420" title="Beer pong" label="Beer pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592284" start="42423" end="42429" title="Headis" label="Headis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048465" start="42432" end="42451" title="Ping-pong diplomacy" label="Ping-pong diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17625135" start="42454" end="42463" title="Pingpongo" label="Pingpongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216293" start="42466" end="42470" title="Pong" label="Pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673169" start="42473" end="42485" title="Table squash" label="Table squash"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30592" wikidata="Q278960" url="?curid=30592" title="Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty">
<text>The Partial Test Ban Treaty (PTBT), formally known as the 1963 Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water, prohibited all test detonations of nuclear weapons except for those conducted underground. It is also abbreviated as the Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT) and Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (NTBT), though the latter may also refer to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), which succeeded the PTBT for ratifying parties.

Negotiations initially focused on a comprehensive ban, but that was abandoned because of technical questions surrounding the detection of underground tests and Soviet concerns over the intrusiveness of proposed verification methods. The impetus for the test ban was provided by rising public anxiety over the magnitude of nuclear tests, particularly tests of new thermonuclear weapons (hydrogen bombs), and the resulting nuclear fallout. A test ban was also seen as a means of slowing nuclear proliferation and the nuclear arms race. Though the PTBT did not halt proliferation or the arms race, its enactment did coincide with a substantial decline in the concentration of radioactive particles in the atmosphere.

The PTBT was signed by the governments of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States in Moscow on 5 August 1963 before it was opened for signature by other countries. The treaty formally went into effect on 10 October 1963. Since then, 123 other states have become party to the treaty. Ten states have signed but not ratified the treaty.

The treaty contributed to a lasting taboo on non-underground tests. Signatories Israel and South Africa may have violated it with the 1979 Vela incident. Non-signatories France and China continued atmospheric testing until 1974 and 1980. Since 1980, all declared nuclear weapons states have made underground tests, and there have been no suspected non-underground tests.

==Background==

The primary motivation for the treaty stemmed from growing public concern over radioactive fallout from above-ground and underwater nuclear testing, especially as the power of nuclear devices continued to increase. Additionally, there was widespread apprehension about the broader environmental damage caused by such testing. In 195253, both the United States and the Soviet Union detonated their first thermonuclear weapons (hydrogen bombs), which were significantly more powerful than the atomic bombs that had been tested and deployed since the Trinity test in 1945. In 1954, the U.S. conducted the Castle Bravo test at Bikini Atoll as part of Operation Castle, which resulted in a yield of 15 megatons of TNT, more than double the expected yield. This unexpectedly high yield caused widespread radioactive fallout, leading to severe environmental and human consequences. The Castle Bravo test resulted in the worst radiological event in US history as radioactive particles spread over more than , affected inhabited areas (including Rongelap Atoll and Utirik Atoll), and sickened Japanese fishermen aboard the &quot;Lucky Dragon&quot; upon whom &quot;ashes of death&quot; had rained. In the same year, a Soviet test sent radioactive particles over Japan. Around the same time, victims of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima visited the US for medical care, which attracted significant public attention. In 1961, the Soviet Union tested the Tsar Bomba, which had a yield of 50 megatons and remains the most powerful human-made explosion in history, though due to use of a lead tamper, fallout was relatively limited. Between 1951 and 1958, the US conducted 166 atmospheric tests, the Soviet Union conducted 82, and Britain conducted 21; only 22 underground tests were conducted in this period (all by the US).

==Negotiations==

===Early efforts===
In 1945, Britain and Canada made an early call for international discussions on the control of atomic power, anticipating the global implications of nuclear technology. At the time, the U.S. had not yet developed a cohesive policy or strategy regarding nuclear weapons. Vannevar Bush, who had been instrumental in initiating and overseeing the Manhattan Project, sought to leverage this moment to advance his long-term goal of banning nuclear weapons production, despite the project&#x27;s role in developing them. As a first step in this direction, Bush proposed an international agency dedicated to nuclear control. Bush unsuccessfully argued in 1952 that the US pursue a test ban agreement with the Soviet Union before testing its first thermonuclear weapon, but his interest in international controls was echoed in the 1946 AchesonLilienthal Report, which had been commissioned by President Harry S. Truman to help construct US nuclear weapons policy. J. Robert Oppenheimer, who had led Los Alamos National Laboratory during the Manhattan Project, exerted significant influence over the report, particularly in its recommendation of an international body that would control production of and research on the world&#x27;s supply of uranium and thorium. A version of the Acheson-Lilienthal plan was presented to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission (UNAEC) as the Baruch Plan in June 1946. The Baruch Plan proposed that an International Atomic Development Authority would control all research on and material and equipment involved in the production of atomic energy. Though Dwight D. Eisenhower, then the Chief of Staff of the United States Army, was not a significant figure in the Truman administration on nuclear questions, he did support Truman&#x27;s nuclear control policy, including the Baruch Plan&#x27;s provision for an international control agency, provided that the control system was accompanied by &quot;a system of free and complete inspection.&quot;

 The Soviet Union dismissed the Baruch Plan as a US attempt to secure its nuclear dominance, and called for the US to halt weapons production and release technical information on its program. The AchesonLilienthal paper and Baruch Plan would serve as the basis for US policy into the 1950s. Between 1947 and 1954, the US and Soviet Union discussed their demands within the United Nations Commission for Conventional Disarmament. A series of events in 1954, including the Castle Bravo test and spread of fallout from a Soviet test over Japan, redirected the international discussion on nuclear policy. Additionally, by 1954, both US and Soviet Union had assembled large nuclear stockpiles, reducing hopes of complete disarmament. In the early years of the Cold War, the US approach to nuclear control reflected a strain between an interest in controlling nuclear weapons and a belief that dominance in the nuclear arena, particularly given the size of Soviet conventional forces, was critical to US security. Interest in nuclear control and efforts to stall proliferation of weapons to other states grew as the Soviet Union&#x27;s nuclear capabilities increased.

====After Castle Bravo: 19541958====
In 1954, just weeks after the Castle Bravo test, Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru made the first public call for a &quot;standstill agreement&quot; on nuclear testing. Nehru viewed a testing moratorium as a crucial first step toward broader and more comprehensive arms control agreements, reflecting his commitment to nuclear disarmament and global peace. In the same year, the British Labour Party, then led by Clement Attlee, called on the UN to ban testing of thermonuclear weapons. 1955 marks the beginning of test-ban negotiations, as Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev first proposed talks on the subject in February 1955. On 10 May 1955, the Soviet Union proposed a test ban before the UN Disarmament Commission&#x27;s &quot;Committee of Five&quot; (Britain, Canada, France, the Soviet Union, and the US). This proposal, which closely reflected a prior Anglo-French proposal, was initially part of a comprehensive disarmament proposal meant to reduce conventional arms levels and eliminate nuclear weapons. Despite the closeness of the Soviet proposal to earlier Western proposals, the US reversed its position on the provisions and rejected the Soviet offer &quot;in the absence of more general control agreements,&quot; including limits on the production of fissionable material and protections against a surprise nuclear strike. The May 1955 proposal is now seen as evidence of Khrushchev&#x27;s &quot;new approach&quot; to foreign policy, as Khrushchev sought to mend relations with the West. The proposal would serve as the basis of the Soviet negotiating position through 1957.

Eisenhower had supported nuclear testing after World War II. In 1947, he rejected arguments by Stafford L. Warren, the Manhattan Project&#x27;s chief physician, concerning the detrimental health effects of atmospheric testing, agreeing instead with James Bryant Conant, a chemist and participant in the Manhattan Project, who was skeptical of Warren&#x27;s then-theoretical claims. Warren&#x27;s arguments were lent credence in the scientific community and public by the Castle Bravo test of 1954. Eisenhower, as president, first explicitly expressed interest in a comprehensive test ban that year, arguing before the National Security Council, &quot;We could put [the Russians] on the spot if we accepted a moratorium... Everybody seems to think that we&#x27;re skunks, saber-rattlers and warmongers. We ought not miss any chance to make clear our peaceful objectives.&quot; Then-Secretary of State John Foster Dulles had responded skeptically to the limited arms-control suggestion of Nehru, whose proposal for a test ban was discarded by the National Security Council for being &quot;not practical.&quot; Harold Stassen, Eisenhower&#x27;s special assistant for disarmament, argued that the US should prioritize a test ban as a first step towards comprehensive arms control, conditional on the Soviet Union accepting on-site inspections, over full disarmament. Stassen&#x27;s suggestion was dismissed by others in the administration over fears that the Soviet Union would be able to conduct secret tests. On the advice of Dulles, Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) chairman Lewis Strauss, and Secretary of Defense Charles Erwin Wilson, Eisenhower rejected the idea of considering a test ban outside general disarmament efforts. During the 1952 and 1956 presidential elections, Eisenhower fended off challenger Adlai Stevenson, who ran in large part on support for a test ban.
The British governments of 195458 (under Conservatives Winston Churchill, Anthony Eden, and Harold Macmillan) also quietly resisted a test ban, despite the British public favoring a deal, until the US Congress approved expanded nuclear collaboration in 1958 and until after Britain had tested its first hydrogen bombs. In their view, testing was necessary if the UK nuclear program were to continue to develop. This opposition was tempered by concern that resistance to a test ban might lead the US and Soviet Union to pursue an agreement without Britain having any say in the matter.

Members of the Soviet militaryindustrial complex also opposed a test ban, though some scientists, including Igor Kurchatov, were supportive of antinuclear efforts. France, which was in the midst of developing its own nuclear weapon, also firmly opposed a test ban in the late 1950s.

The proliferation of thermonuclear weapons coincided with a rise in public concern about nuclear fallout debris contaminating food sources, particularly the threat of high levels of strontium-90 in milk (see the Baby Tooth Survey). This survey was a scientist and citizen led campaign which used &quot;modern media advocacy techniques to communicate complex issues&quot; to inform public discourse. Its research findings confirmed a significant build-up of strontium-90 in bones of babies and helped galvanise public support for a ban on atmospheric nuclear testing in the US. Lewis Strauss and Edward Teller, dubbed the &quot;father of the hydrogen bomb,&quot; both sought to tamp down on these fears, arguing that fallout [at the dose levels of US exposure] were fairly harmless and that a test ban would enable the Soviet Union to surpass the US in nuclear capabilities. Teller also suggested that testing was necessary to develop nuclear weapons that produced less fallout. Support in the US public for a test ban to continue to grow from 20% in 1954 to 63% by 1957. Moreover, widespread antinuclear protests were organized and led by theologian and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Albert Schweitzer, whose appeals were endorsed by Pope Pius XII, and Linus Pauling, the latter of whom organized an anti-test petition signed by more than 9,000 scientists across 43 countries (including the infirm and elderly Albert Einstein).

The AEC would eventually concede, as well, that even low levels of radiation were harmful. It was a combination of rising public support for a test ban and the shock of the 1957 Soviet &quot;Sputnik&quot; launch that encouraged Eisenhower to take steps towards a test ban in 1958.

There was also increased environmental concern in the Soviet Union. In the mid-1950s, Soviet scientists began taking regular radiation readings near Leningrad, Moscow, and Odessa and collected data on the prevalence of strontium-90, which indicated that strontium-90 levels in western Russia approximately matched those in the eastern US. Rising Soviet concern was punctuated in September 1957 by the Kyshtym disaster, which forced the evacuation of 10,000 people after an explosion at a nuclear plant. Around the same time, 219 Soviet scientists signed Pauling&#x27;s antinuclear petition. Soviet political elites did not share the concerns of others in the Soviet Union. However; Kurchatov unsuccessfully called on Khrushchev to halt testing in 1958.

On 14 June 1957, following Eisenhower&#x27;s suggestion that existing detection measures were inadequate to ensure compliance, the Soviet Union put forth a plan for a two-to-three-year testing moratorium. The moratorium would be overseen by an international commission reliant on national monitoring stations, but, importantly, would involve no on-the-ground inspections. Eisenhower initially saw the deal as favorable, but eventually came to see otherwise. In particular, Strauss and Teller, as well as Ernest Lawrence and Mark Muir Mills, protested the offer. At a meeting with Eisenhower in the White House, the group argued that testing was necessary for the US to eventually develop bombs that produced no fallout (&quot;clean bombs&quot;). The group repeated the oft-cited fact, which was supported by Freeman Dyson, that the Soviet Union could conduct secret nuclear tests. In 1958, at the request of Igor Kurchatov, Soviet nuclear physicist and weapons designer Andrei Sakharov published a pair of widely circulated academic papers challenging the claim of Teller and others that a clean, fallout-free nuclear bomb could be developed, due to the formation of carbon-14 when nuclear devices are detonated in the air. A one-megaton clean bomb, Sakharov estimated, would cause 6,600 deaths over 8,000 years, figures derived largely from estimates on the quantity of carbon-14 generated from atmospheric nitrogen and the contemporary risk models at the time, along with the assumption that the world population is &quot;thirty billion persons&quot; in a few thousand years. In 1961, Sakharov was part of the design team for a 50 megaton &quot;clean bomb&quot;, which has become known as the Tsar Bomba, detonated over the island of Novaya Zemlya.
In the spring of 1957, the US National Security Council had explored including a one-year test moratorium and a &quot;cut-off&quot; of fissionable-material production in a &quot;partial&quot; disarmament plan. The British government, then led by Macmillan, had yet to fully endorse a test ban. Accordingly, it pushed the US to demand that the production cut-off be closely timed with the testing moratorium, betting that the Soviet Union would reject this. London also encouraged the US to delay its disarmament plan, in part by moving the start of the moratorium back to November 1958. At the same time, Macmillan linked British support for a test ban to a revision of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 (McMahon Act), which prohibited sharing of nuclear information with foreign governments. Eisenhower, eager to mend ties with Britain following the Suez Crisis of 1956, was receptive to Macmillan&#x27;s conditions, but the AEC and the congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy were firmly opposed. It was not until after &quot;Sputnik&quot; in late 1957 that Eisenhower quickly moved to expand nuclear collaboration with the UK via presidential directives and the establishment of bilateral committees on nuclear matters. In early 1958, Eisenhower publicly stated that amendments to the McMahon Act were a necessary condition of a test ban, framing the policy shift in the context of US commitment to its NATO allies.

In August 1957, the US assented to a two-year testing moratorium proposed by the Soviet Union, but required that it be linked to restrictions on the production of fissionable material with military uses, a condition that the Soviet Union rejected. While Eisenhower insisted on linking a test ban to a broader disarmament effort (e.g., the production cut-off), Moscow insisted on independent consideration of a test ban.

On 19 September 1957, the US conducted the first contained underground test at the Nevada Test Site, codenamed &quot;Rainier&quot;. The &quot;Rainier&quot; shot complicated the push for a comprehensive test ban, as underground tests could not be as easily identified as atmospheric tests.

Despite Eisenhower&#x27;s interest in a deal, his administration was hamstrung by discord among US scientists, technicians, and politicians. At one point, Eisenhower complained that &quot;statecraft was becoming a prisoner of scientists.&quot; Until 1957, Strauss&#x27;s AEC (including its Los Alamos and Livermore laboratories) was the dominant voice in the administration on nuclear affairs, with Teller&#x27;s concerns over detection mechanisms also influencing Eisenhower. Unlike some others within the US scientific community, Strauss fervently advocated against a test ban, arguing that the US must maintain a clear nuclear advantage via regular testing and that the negative environmental impacts of such tests were overstated. Furthermore, Strauss repeatedly emphasized the risk of the Soviet Union violating a ban, a fear Eisenhower shared.

On 7 November 1957, after &quot;Sputnik&quot; and under pressure to bring on a dedicated science advisor, Eisenhower created the President&#x27;s Science Advisory Committee (PSAC), which had the effect of eroding the AEC&#x27;s monopoly over scientific advice. In stark contrast to the AEC, PSAC promoted a test ban and argued against Strauss&#x27;s claims concerning its strategic implications and technical feasibility. In late 1957, the Soviet Union made a second offer of a three-year moratorium without inspections, but lacking any consensus within his administration, Eisenhower rejected it. In early 1958, the discord within American circles, particularly among scientists, was made clear in hearings before the Senate Subcommittee on Nuclear Disarmament, chaired by Senator Hubert Humphrey. The hearings featured conflicting testimony from the likes of Teller and Linus Pauling, as well as from Harold Stassen, who argued that a test ban could safely be separated from broader disarmament, and AEC members, who argued that a cutoff in nuclear production should precede a test ban.

====Khrushchev and a moratorium: 19581961====
In the summer of 1957, Khrushchev was at acute risk of losing power, as the Anti-Party Group composed of former Stalin allies Lazar Kaganovich, Georgy Malenkov, and Vyacheslav Molotov launched an attempt to replace Khrushchev as General Secretary of the Communist Party (effectively the leader of the Soviet Union) with Nikolai Bulganin, then the Premier of the Soviet Union. The attempted ouster, which was foiled in June, was followed by a series of actions by Khrushchev to consolidate power. In October 1957, still feeling vulnerable from Anti-Party Group&#x27;s ploy, Khrushchev forced out defense minister Georgy Zhukov, cited as &quot;the nation&#x27;s most powerful military man.&quot; On 27 March 1958, Khrushchev forced Bulganin to resign and succeeded him as Premier. Between 1957 and 1960, Khrushchev had his firmest grip on power, with little real opposition.

Khrushchev was personally troubled by the power of nuclear weapons and would later recount that he believed the weapons could never be used. In the mid-1950s, Khrushchev took a keen interest in defense policy and sought to inaugurate an era of dtente with the West. Initial efforts to reach accords, such as on disarmament at the 1955 Geneva Summit, proved fruitless, and Khrushchev saw test-ban negotiations as an opportunity to present the Soviet Union as &quot;both powerful and responsible.&quot; At the 20th Communist Party Congress in 1956, Khrushchev declared that nuclear war should no longer be seen as &quot;fatalistically inevitable.&quot; Simultaneously, however, Khrushchev expanded and advanced the Soviet nuclear arsenal at a cost to conventional Soviet forces (e.g., in early 1960, Khrushchev announced demobilization of 1.2million troops).

On 31 March 1958, the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union approved a decision to halt nuclear testing, conditional on other nuclear powers doing the same. Khrushchev then called on Eisenhower and Macmillan to join the moratorium. Despite the action being met with widespread praise and an argument from Dulles that the US should reciprocate, Eisenhower dismissed the plan as a &quot;gimmick&quot;; the Soviet Union had just completed a testing series and the US was about to begin Operation Hardtack I, a series of atmospheric, surface-level, and underwater nuclear tests. Eisenhower instead insisted that any moratorium be linked to reduced production of nuclear weapons. In April 1958, the US began Operation Hardtack I as planned. The Soviet declaration concerned the British government, which feared that the moratorium might lead to a test ban before its own testing program was completed. Following the Soviet declaration, Eisenhower called for an international meeting of experts to determine proper control and verification measuresan idea first proposed by British Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd.

The advocacy of PSAC, including that of its chairmen James Rhyne Killian and George Kistiakowsky, was a key factor in Eisenhower&#x27;s eventual decision to initiate test-ban negotiations in 1958. In the spring of 1958, chairman Killian and the PSAC staff (namely Hans Bethe and Isidor Isaac Rabi) undertook a review of US test-ban policy, determining that a successful system for detecting underground tests could be created. At the recommendation of Dulles (who had recently come to support a test ban), the review prompted Eisenhower to propose technical negotiations with the Soviet Union, effectively detaching test-ban negotiations from negotiations over a halt to nuclear weapons production (the one-time US demand). In explaining the policy shift, Eisenhower privately said that continued resistance to a test ban would leave the US in a state of &quot;moral isolation.&quot;

On 8 April 1958, still resisting Khrushchev&#x27;s call for a moratorium, Eisenhower invited the Soviet Union to join these technical negotiations in the form of a conference on the technical aspects of a test-ban, specifically the technical details of ensuring compliance with a ban. The proposal was, to a degree, a concession to the Soviet Union, as a test ban would be explored independent of the previously demanded cutoff in fissionable-material production. Khrushchev initially declined the invitation, but eventually agreed &quot;in spite of the serious doubts&quot; he had after Eisenhower suggested a technical agreement on verification would be a precursor to a test ban.

On 1 July 1958, responding to Eisenhower&#x27;s call, the nuclear powers convened the Conference of Experts in Geneva, aimed at studying means of detecting nuclear tests. The conference included scientists from the US, Britain, the Soviet Union, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Poland, and Romania. The US delegation was led by James Fisk, a member of PSAC, the Soviets by Evgenii Fedorov, and the British delegation by William Penney, who had led the British delegation to the Manhattan Project. Whereas the US approached the conference solely from a technical perspective, Penney was specifically instructed by Macmillan to attempt to achieve a political agreement. This difference in approach was reflected in the broader composition of the US and UK teams. US experts were primarily drawn from academia and industry. Fisk was a vice president at Bell Telephone Laboratories and was joined by Robert Bacher and Ernest Lawrence, both physicists who had worked on the Manhattan Project. Conversely, British delegates largely held government positions. The Soviet delegation was composed primarily of academics, though virtually all of them had some link to the Soviet government. The Soviets shared the British goal of achieving an agreement at the conference.

At particular issue was the ability of sensors to differentiate an underground test from an earthquake. There were four techniques examined: measurement of acoustic waves, seismic signals, radio waves, and inspection of radioactive debris. The Soviet delegation expressed confidence in each method, while Western experts argued that a more comprehensive compliance system would be necessary.

The Conference of Experts was characterized as &quot;highly professional&quot; and productive. By the end of August 1958, the experts devised an extensive control program, known as the &quot;Geneva System,&quot; involving 160170 land-based monitoring posts, plus 10 additional sea-based monitors and occasional flights over land following a suspicious event (with the inspection plane being provided and controlled by the state under inspection). The experts determined that such a scheme would be able to detect 90% of underground detonations, accurate to 5 kilotons, and atmospheric tests with a minimum yield of 1 kiloton. The US had initially advocated for 650 posts, versus a Soviet proposal of 100110. The final recommendation was a compromise forged by the British delegation. In a widely publicized and well-received communiqu dated 21 August 1958, the conference declared that it &quot;reached the conclusion that it is technically feasible to set up... a workable and effective control system for the detection of violations of a possible agreement on the worldwide cessation of nuclear weapons tests.&quot;
The technical findings, released on 30 August 1958 in a report drafted by the Soviet delegation, were endorsed by the US and UK, which proposed that they serve as the basis for test-ban and international-control negotiations. However, the experts&#x27; report failed to address precisely who would do the monitoring and when on-site inspectionsa US demand and Soviet concernwould be permitted. The experts also deemed detection of outer-space tests (tests more than above the earth&#x27;s surface) to be impractical. Additionally, the size of the Geneva System may have rendered it too expensive to be put into effect. The 30 August report, which contained details on these limitations, received significantly less public attention than the 21 August communiqu.

Nevertheless, pleased by the findings, the Eisenhower administration proposed negotiations on a permanent test ban and announced it would self-impose a year-long testing moratorium if Britain and the Soviet Union did the same. This decision amounted to a victory for John Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles (then the Director of Central Intelligence), and PSAC, who had argued within the Eisenhower administration for separating a test ban from larger disarmament efforts, and a defeat for the Department of Defense and AEC, which had argued to the contrary.

In May 1958, Britain had informed the US that it would be willing to join a testing moratorium on 31 October 1958, by which point it would have finished its hydrogen-bomb testing, conditional on the US providing Britain with nuclear information following amendment of the McMahon Act. The US Congress approved amendments permitting greater collaboration in late June. Following Soviet assent on 30 August 1958 to the one-year moratorium, the three countries conducted a series of tests in September and October. At least 54 tests were conducted by the US and 14 by the Soviet Union in this period. On 31 October 1958 the three countries initiated test-ban negotiations (the Conference on the Discontinuance of Nuclear Tests) and agreed to a temporary moratorium (the Soviet Union joined the moratorium shortly after this date). The moratorium would last for close to three years.

The Conference on the Discontinuance of Nuclear Tests convened in Geneva at Moscow&#x27;s request (the Western participants had proposed New York City). The US delegation was led by James Jeremiah Wadsworth, an envoy to the UN, the British by David Ormsby-Gore, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, and the Soviets by Semyon K. Tsarapkin, a disarmament expert with experience dating back to the 1946 Baruch Plan. The Geneva Conference began with a Soviet draft treaty grounded in the Geneva System. The three nuclear weapons states (the &quot;original parties&quot;) would abide by a test ban, verified by the Geneva System, and work to prevent testing by potential nuclear states (such as France). This was rejected by Anglo-American negotiators due to fears that the verification provisions were too vague and the Geneva System too weak.

Shortly after the Geneva Conference began in the fall of 1958, Eisenhower faced renewed domestic opposition to a comprehensive test ban as Senator Albert Gore Sr. argued in a widely circulated letter that a partial ban would be preferable due to Soviet opposition to strong verification measures.

The Gore letter did spur some progress in negotiations, as the Soviet Union allowed in late November 1958 for explicit control measures to be included in the text of the drafted treaty. By March 1959, the negotiators had agreed upon seven treaty articles, but they primarily concerned uncontroversial issues and a number of disputes over verification persisted. First, the Soviet verification proposal was deemed by the West to be too reliant on self-inspection, with control posts primarily staffed by citizens of the country housing the posts and a minimal role for officials from the international supervisory body. The West insisted that half of a control post staff be drawn from another nuclear state and half from neutral parties. Second, the Soviet Union required that the international supervisory body, the Control Commission, require unanimity before acting; the West rejected the idea of giving Moscow a veto over the commission&#x27;s proceedings. Finally, the Soviet Union preferred temporary inspection teams drawn from citizens of the country under inspection, while the West insisted on permanent teams composed of inspectors from the Control Commission.

Additionally, despite the initial positive response to the Geneva experts&#x27; report, data gathered from Hardtack operations of 1958 (namely the underground &quot;Rainier&quot; shot) would further complication verification provisions as US scientists, including Hans Bethe (who backed a ban), became convinced that the Geneva findings were too optimistic regarding detection of underground tests, though Macmillan warned that using the data to block progress on a test ban might be perceived in the public as a political ploy. In early 1959, Wadsworth told Tsarapkin of new US skepticism towards the Geneva System. While the Geneva experts believed the system could detect underground tests down to five kilotons, the US now believed that it could only detect tests down to 20 kilotons (in comparison, the Little Boy bomb dropped on Hiroshima had an official yield of 13 kilotons). As a result, the Geneva detection regime and the number of control posts would have to be significantly expanded, including new posts within the Soviet Union. The Soviets dismissed the US argument as a ruse, suggesting that the Hardtack data had been falsified.

In early 1959, a roadblock to an agreement was removed as Macmillan and Eisenhower, over opposition from the Department of Defense, agreed to consider a test ban separately from broader disarmament endeavors.

On 13 April 1959, facing Soviet opposition to on-site detection systems for underground tests, Eisenhower proposed moving from a single, comprehensive test ban to a graduated agreement where atmospheric teststhose up to 50km (31mi) high, a limit Eisenhower would revise upward in May 1959would be banned first, with negotiations on underground and outer-space tests continuing. This proposal was turned down on 23 April 1959 by Khrushchev, calling it a &quot;dishonest deal.&quot; On 26 August 1959, the US announced it would extend its year-long testing moratorium to the end of 1959, and would not conduct tests after that point without prior warning. The Soviet Union reaffirmed that it would not conduct tests if the US and UK continued to observe a moratorium.

To break the deadlock over verification, Macmillan proposed a compromise in February 1959 whereby each of the original parties would be subject to a set number of on-site inspections each year. In May 1959, Khrushchev and Eisenhower agreed to explore Macmillan&#x27;s quota proposal, though Eisenhower made further test-ban negotiations conditional on the Soviet Union dropping its Control Commission veto demand and participating in technical discussions on identification of high-altitude nuclear explosions. Khrushchev agreed to the latter and was noncommittal on the former. A working group in Geneva would eventually devise a costly system of 56 satellites orbiting at least above the earth, though it could not say with certainty that such a system would be able to determine the origin of a high-altitude test. US negotiators also questioned whether high-altitude tests could evade detection via radiation shielding. Concerning Macmillan&#x27;s compromise, the Soviet Union privately suggested it would accept a quota of three inspections per year. The US argued that the quota should be set according to scientific necessity (i.e., be set according to the frequency of seismic events).

In June 1959, a report of a panel headed by Lloyd Berkner, a physicist, was introduced into discussions by Wadsworth. The report specifically concerned whether the Geneva System could be improved without increasing the number of control posts. Berkner&#x27;s proposed measures were seen as highly costly and the technical findings themselves were accompanied by a caveat about the panel&#x27;s high degree of uncertainty given limited data. Around the same time, analysis conducted by the Livermore National Laboratory and RAND Corporation at Teller&#x27;s instruction found that the seismic effect of an underground test could be artificially dampened (referred to as &quot;decoupling&quot;) to the point that a 300-kiloton detonation would appear in seismic readings as a one-kiloton detonation. These findings were largely affirmed by pro-ban scientists, including Bethe. The third blow to the verification negotiations was provided by a panel chaired by Robert Bacher, which found that even on-site inspections would have serious difficulty determining whether an underground test had been conducted.

In September 1959, Khrushchev visited the US While the test ban was not a focus on conversations, a positive meeting with Eisenhower at Camp David eventually led Tsarapkin to propose a technical working group in November 1959 that would consider the issues of on-site inspections and seismic decoupling in the &quot;spirit of Camp David.&quot; Within the working group, Soviet delegates allowed for the timing of on-site inspections to be grounded in seismic data, but insisted on conditions that were seen as excessively strict. The Soviets also recognized the theory behind decoupling, but dismissed its practical applications. The working group closed in December with no progress and significant hostility. Eisenhower issued a statement blaming &quot;the recent unwillingness of the politically guided Soviet experts to give serious scientific consideration to the effectiveness of seismic techniques for the detection of underground nuclear explosions.&quot; Eisenhower simultaneously declared that the US would not be held to its testing moratorium when it expired on 31 December 1959, though pledged to not test if Geneva talks progressed. The Soviet Union followed by reiterating its decision to not test as long as Western states did not test.

In early 1960, Eisenhower indicated his support for a comprehensive test ban conditional on proper monitoring of underground tests. On 11 February 1960, Wadsworth announced a new US proposal by which only tests deemed verifiable by the Geneva System would be banned, including all atmospheric, underwater, and outer-space tests within detection range. Underground tests measuring more than 4.75 on the Richter scale would also be barred, subject to revision as research on detection continued. Adopting Macmillan&#x27;s quota compromise, the US proposed each nuclear state be subject to roughly 20 on-site inspections per year (the precise figure based on the frequency of seismic events).

Tsarapkin responded positively to the US proposal, though was wary of the prospect of allowing underground tests registering below magnitude 4.75. In its own proposal offered 19 March 1960 the Soviet Union accepted most US provisions, with certain amendments. First, the Soviet Union asked that underground tests under magnitude 4.75 be banned for a period of four-to-five years, subject to extension. Second, it sought to prohibit all outer-space tests, whether within detection range or not. Finally, the Soviet Union insisted that the inspection quota be determined on a political basis, not a scientific one. The Soviet offer faced a mixed reception. In the US, Senator Hubert Humphrey and the Federation of American Scientists (which was typically seen as supportive of a test ban) saw it as a clear step towards an agreement. Conversely, AEC chairman John A. McCone and Senator Clinton Presba Anderson, chair of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, argued that the Soviet system would be unable to prevent secret tests. That year, the AEC published a report arguing that the continuing testing moratorium risked &quot;free world supremacy in nuclear weapons,&quot; and that renewed testing was critical for further weapons development. The joint committee also held hearings in April which cast doubt on the technical feasibility and cost of the proposed verification measures. Additionally, Teller continued to warn of the dangerous consequences of a test ban and the Department of Defense (including Neil H. McElroy and Donald A. Quarles, until recently its top two officials) pushed to continue testing and expand missile stockpiles.

Shortly after the Soviet proposal, Macmillan met with Eisenhower at Camp David to devise a response. The Anglo-American counterproposal agreed to ban small underground tests (those under magnitude 4.75) on a temporary basis (a duration of roughly 1 year, versus the Soviet proposal of 45 years), but this could only happen after verifiable tests had been banned and a seismic research group (the Seismic Research Program Advisory Group) convened. The Soviet Union responded positively to the counterproposal and the research group convened on 11 May 1960. The Soviet Union also offered to keep an underground ban out of the treaty under negotiation. In May 1960, there were high hopes that an agreement would be reached at an upcoming summit of Eisenhower, Khrushchev, Macmillan, and Charles de Gaulle of France in Paris.

A test ban seemed particularly close in 1960, with Britain and France in accord with the US (though France conducted its first nuclear test in February) and the Soviet Union having largely accepted the MacmillanEisenhower proposal. But US-Soviet relations soured after an American U-2 spy plane was shot down in Soviet airspace in May 1960. The Paris summit was abruptly cancelled and the Soviet Union withdrew from the seismic research group, which subsequently dissolved. Meetings of the Geneva Conference continued until December, but little progress was made as Western-Soviet relations continued to grow more antagonistic through the summer, punctuated by the Congo Crisis in July and angry exchanges at the UN in September. Macmillan would later claim to President John F. Kennedy that the failure to achieve a test ban in 1960 &quot;was all the fault of the American &#x27;big hole&#x27; obsession and the consequent insistence on a wantonly large number of on-site inspections.&quot;

Eisenhower would leave office with an agreement out of reach, as Eisenhower&#x27;s technical advisors, upon whom he relied heavily, became mired in the complex technical questions of a test ban, driven in part by a strong interest among American experts to lower the error rate of seismic test detection technology. Some, including Kistiakowsky, would eventually raise concerns about the ability of inspections and monitors to successfully detect tests. The primary product of negotiations under Eisenhower was the testing moratorium without any enforcement mechanism. Ultimately, the goal of a comprehensive test ban would be abandoned in favor of a partial ban due to questions over seismic detection of underground tests.

Political scientist Robert Gilpin later argued that Eisenhower faced three camps in the push for a test ban. The first was the &quot;control&quot; camp, led by figures like Linus Pauling and astronomer Harlow Shapley, which believed that both testing and possession of nuclear weapons was dangerous. Second, there was the &quot;finite containment&quot; camp, populated by scientists like Hans Bethe, which was concerned by perceived Soviet aggression but still believed that a test ban would be workable with adequate verification measures. Third, the &quot;infinite containment&quot; camp, of which Strauss, Teller, and members of the defense establishment were members, believed that any test ban would grant the Soviet Union the ability to conduct secret tests and move ahead in the arms race.

The degree of Eisenhower&#x27;s interest in a test ban is a matter of some historical dispute. Stephen E. Ambrose writes that by early 1960, a test ban had become &quot;the major goal of his Presidency, indeed of his entire career,&quot; and would be &quot;his final and most lasting gift to his country.&quot; Conversely, John Lewis Gaddis characterizes negotiations of the 1950s as &quot;an embarrassing series of American reversals,&quot; suggesting a lack of real US commitment to arms control efforts. The historian Robert Divine also attributed the failure to achieve a deal to Eisenhower&#x27;s &quot;lack of leadership,&quot; evidenced by his inability to overcome paralyzing differences among US diplomats, military leaders, national security experts, and scientists on the subject. Paul Nitze would similarly suggest that Eisenhower never formulated a cohesive test ban policy, noting his ability to &quot;believe in two mutually contradictory and inconsistent propositions at the same time.&quot;

===Renewed efforts===

Upon assuming the presidency in January 1961, John F. Kennedy was committed to advancing a comprehensive test ban on nuclear weapons. He quickly ordered a review of the U.S. negotiating position to revitalize stalled talks, as he believed Eisenhower&#x27;s previous approach had been &quot;insufficient&quot; in achieving meaningful progress toward nuclear disarmament. Kennedy saw the test ban as a critical step toward reducing nuclear proliferation and easing Cold War tensions. In making his case for a test ban, Kennedy drew a direct link between continued testing and nuclear proliferation, calling it the &quot;&#x27;Nth-country&#x27; problem.&quot; While a candidate, Kennedy had argued, &quot;For once China, or France, or Sweden, or half a dozen other nations successfully test an atomic bomb, the security of both Russians and Americans is dangerously weakened.&quot; He had also claimed that renewed testing would be &quot;damaging to the American image&quot; and might threaten the &quot;existence of human life.&quot; On the campaign trail, Kennedy&#x27;s test-ban proposal consisted of a continued US testing moratorium, expanded efforts to reach a comprehensive agreement, limit any future tests to those minimizing fallout, and expand research on fallout. Notably, early in his presidency, Kennedy also oversaw a significant increase in U.S. defense spending, a move that was soon mirrored by the Soviet Union. This escalation intensified the arms race and placed the test-ban negotiations within a broader context of heightened military competition. Despite these growing tensions, Kennedy(JFK) remained committed to pursuing a comprehensive test ban, recognizing it as a crucial step toward curbing the nuclear arms race.

On 21 March 1961, test-ban negotiations resumed in Geneva and Arthur Dean, a lead US envoy, offered a new proposal in an attempt to bridge the gap between the two sides. The early Kennedy proposal largely grew out of later Eisenhower efforts, with a ban on all tests but low-yield underground ones (below magnitude 4.75), which would be subject to a three-year moratorium. The US and UK proposed 20 on-site inspections per annum, while the Soviet Union proposed three. The verification procedures included in the Anglo-American plan were unacceptable to Tsarapkin, who responded with separate proposals rejected by the Western powers. Specifically, the Soviet Union proposed a &quot;troika&quot; mechanism: a monitoring board composed of representatives of the West, the Soviet Union, and nonaligned states that would require unanimity before acting (effectively giving the Soviet Union veto authority). In May 1961, Kennedy attempted via secret contact between Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy and a Soviet intelligence officer to settle on 15 inspections per year. This was rejected by Khrushchev.

Ahead of the June 1961 Vienna summit between Kennedy and Khrushchev, Robert F. Kennedy spoke with the Soviet ambassador to the US, who suggested that progress on a test ban was possible in a direct meeting between the leaders. President Kennedy subsequently announced to the press that he had &quot;strong hopes&quot; for progress on a test ban. In Vienna, Khrushchev suggested that three inspections per year would have to be the limit, as anything more frequent would constitute espionage. Khrushchev privately believed allowing three inspections to be a significant concession to the West, as other Soviet officials preferred an even less intrusive system, and was angered by US resistance. Khrushchev later told his son, &quot;hold out a finger to themthey chop off your whole hand.&quot;

Additionally, the Soviet Union had once been ready to support a control commission under the aegis of the UN, Khrushchev explained, but it could no longer do so given perceived bias in recent UN action in the Congo. Instead, Khrushchev reiterated the troika proposal. Furthermore, Khrushchev insisted that the test ban be considered in the context of &quot;general and complete disarmament,&quot; arguing that a test ban on its own was unimportant; Kennedy said the US could only agree with a guarantee that a disarmament agreement would be reached quickly (the Vienna demands thus amounted to a reversal of both sides&#x27; earlier positions). Kennedy also disagreed that a test ban was itself insignificant; the world could expect many more countries in the coming years to cross the nuclear threshold without a test ban. Ultimately, the two leaders left Vienna without clear progress on the subject. The Soviet Union would drop the general-disarmament demand in November 1961.

====Lifting the moratorium: 19611962====
Following setbacks at the Vienna Summit and the escalation of the Berlin Crisis of 1961, as well as the Soviet Union&#x27;s decision to resume nuclear testing in August attributed by Moscow to a shifting international situation and France&#x27;s nuclear tests, Kennedy faced increasing pressure from the Department of Defense and nuclear laboratories to abandon hopes of a test ban. In June 1961, after talks in Geneva had stalled, Kennedy voiced concerns that Soviet negotiating behavior posed &quot;a serious question about how long we can safely continue on a voluntary basis a refusal to undertake tests in this country without any assurance that the Russians are not testing.&quot; Whether the Soviets had actually conducted secret tests remained a point of debate within the Kennedy administration.

A team led by physicist Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky investigated the possibility that the Soviet Union had secretly tested nuclear weapons, concluding that while such tests were possible, no evidence suggested they had occurred. Despite these findings, the Joint Chiefs of Staff dismissed Panofsky&#x27;s report as &quot;assertive, ambiguous, semiliterate, and generally unimpressive,&quot; reflecting the deep skepticism and tension within the U.S. government over Soviet activities and the broader test-ban negotiations.

Two weeks after the lifting of the Soviet moratorium in August 1961, and after another failed Anglo-American attempt to have the Soviet Union agree to an atmospheric-test ban, the US restarted testing on 15 September 1961. Kennedy specifically limited such testing to underground and laboratory tests, but under mounting pressure as Soviet tests continuedduring the time period of the Soviet &quot;Tsar Bomba&quot; 50 Mt+ test detonation on 30 October over Novaya ZemlyaKennedy announced and dedicated funds to a renewed atmospheric testing program in November 1961.

A report on the 1961 Soviet test, published by a group of American scientists led by Hans Bethe, concluded that Soviet laboratories had likely been operating at full capacity throughout the moratorium, anticipating a resumption of testing. The report suggested that preparations for testing probably began even before the talks resumed in Geneva in March 1961. By January 1962, Bethe, who had previously supported a test ban, publicly declared that a ban was &quot;no longer a desirable goal&quot; and advocated for the United States to conduct tests on weapons developed by its laboratories. In contrast, U.S. laboratories had been relatively inactive regarding nuclear weapons during the moratorium, highlighting a significant disparity in activity between the two nations.
In December 1961, Macmillan met with Kennedy in Bermuda, appealing for a final and permanent halt to tests. Kennedy, conversely, used the meeting to request permission to test on Christmas Island, with US testing grounds in the Pacific having largely been exhausted. Macmillan agreed to seek to give US permission &quot;if the situation did not change.&quot; Christmas Island was ultimately opened to US use by February 1962.

On this matter of resumed atmospheric tests, Kennedy lacked the full backing of his administration and allies. In particularly, Macmillan, Adlai Stevenson (then the UN ambassador), the State Department, the United States Information Agency, and Jerome Wiesner, the PSAC chairman, opposed resuming atmospheric tests. On the side advocating resumption were the AEC, Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, Joint Chiefs of Staff (which had called for renewed atmospheric tests in October 1961), and Department of Defense, though then-Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara privately acknowledged that such tests were &quot;not really necessary.&quot; Teller continued to advocate for atmospheric tests, as well, arguing in early 1962 that nuclear fallout was nothing be concerned about. Teller also argued that testing was necessary to continued advancement of US nuclear capabilities, particularly in terms of the mobility of its weapons and, accordingly, its second-strike capability.

Despite Teller&#x27;s reassurances, Kennedy himself &quot;hated the idea of reopening the race&quot; and was uneasy with continued production of fallout, a negative consequence of resumed testing that its opponents within the administration stressed. Opponents of the tests also argued that renewed atmospheric tests would come at a significant moral cost to the US, given broad public opposition to the plan, and claimed that further tests were largely unnecessary, with the US already having an adequate nuclear arsenal. Arthur Dean believed that public opposition to atmospheric testing was so great that the US would have to halt such tests within four years even without an agreement. John Kenneth Galbraith, then the ambassador to India, had advised Kennedy in June 1961 that resumed testing &quot;would cause us the gravest difficulties in Asia, Africa and elsewhere.&quot; Similarly, Hubert Humphrey described the moratorium as &quot;a ray of hope to millions of worried people.&quot; Its termination, Humphrey warned, &quot;might very well turn the political tides in the world in behalf of the Soviets.&quot;

Ultimately, Kennedy sided with those arguing for resumed testing. In particular, an argument by William C. Foster, the head of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, swayed Kennedy. Foster argued that if the US failed to respond to the Soviet test series, Moscow could order a second test series, which could give the Soviet Union a significant advantage. Furthermore, a second test series, without US reciprocation, could damage the push for a test ban and make Senate ratification of any agreement less likely. On 2 March 1962, building on the November 1961 announcement, Kennedy promised to resume atmospheric testing by the end of April 1962 if Moscow continued to resist the Anglo-American test-ban proposal. To an extent, the announcement was a compromise, as Kennedy restricted atmospheric tests to those tests which were &quot;absolutely necessary,&quot; not feasible underground, and minimized fallout. The condition that testing would resume only if the Soviet Union continued to oppose the Anglo-American proposal also served as a concession to dissenting voices within his administration and to Macmillan.

Kennedy portrayed resumed testing as a necessary for the image of US resolve. If the US failed to respond to the Soviet test series, Kennedy explained, Moscow would &quot;chalk it up, not to goodwill, but to a failure of willnot to our confidence in Western superiority, but to our fear of world opinion.&quot; Keeping the US in a position of strength, Kennedy argued, would be necessary for a test ban to ever come about.

The US suspension of atmospheric tests was lifted on 25 April 1962.

By March 1962, the trilateral talks in Geneva had shifted to 18-party talks at the UN Disarmament Conference. On 27 August 1962, within that conference, the US and UK offered two draft treaties to the Soviet Union. The primary proposal included a comprehensive ban verified by control posts under national command, but international supervision, and required on-site inspections. This was rejected by the Soviet Union due to the inspection requirement. The alternative proposal included a partial test banunderground tests would be excludedto be verified by national detection mechanisms, without supervision by a supranational body.

====Cuban Missile Crisis and beyond: 19621963====
In October 1962, the U.S. and Soviet Union experienced the Cuban Missile Crisis, which brought the two superpowers to the brink of nuclear war. This intense standoff prompted both Kennedy and Khrushchev to seek accelerated rapprochement, recognizing the urgent need to reduce tensions and prevent future confrontations. After years of dormant or lethargic negotiations, American and British negotiators subsequently forged a strong working relationship and with Soviet negotiators found common ground on test restrictions later in 1962. After years of pursuing a comprehensive ban, Khrushchev was convinced to accept a partial ban, partly due to the efforts of Soviet nuclear scientists, including Kurchatov, Sakharov, and Yulii Khariton, who argued that atmospheric testing had severe consequences for human health. Khrushchev had been concerned by a partial ban due to the greater US experience in underground tests; by 1962, the US had conducted 89 such tests and the Soviet Union just two (the Soviet focus had been on cheaper, larger-yield atmospheric tests). For this reason, many in the Soviet weapons industry argued that a partial ban would give the US the advantage in nuclear capabilities. Khrushchev would later recount that he saw test-ban negotiations as a prime venue for ameliorating tensions after the crisis in Cuba.

Shocked by how close the world had come to thermonuclear war, Khrushchev proposed easing tensions with the U.S. In a letter to President Kennedy dated 30 October 1962, Khrushchev outlined a series of bold initiatives to prevent the possibility of nuclear war. His proposals included a non-aggression treaty between NATO and the Warsaw Pact, or even the disbanding of these military blocs; a treaty to cease all nuclear weapons testing; and the complete elimination of all nuclear weapons. He also suggested resolving the contentious issue of Germany by having both East and West formally recognize the existence of West Germany and East Germany, as well as calling for U.S. recognition of the government of mainland China.

The letter invited counter-proposals and encouraged further exploration of these and other issues through peaceful negotiations. Additionally, Khrushchev invitedNorman Cousins, the editor of a major U.S. periodical and an anti-nuclear weapons activist, to serve as a liaison with President Kennedy. Cousins met with Khrushchev for four hours in December 1962.. Cousins&#x27; secret mission was aided by Pope John XXIII, who served as an intermediary; officially, Cousins was traveling to Rome on a personal basis, but from the Vatican he continued to the Soviet Union. Through Cousins&#x27; shuttle diplomacy in 1962 and 1963, the pontiff remained at the center of negotiations and helped ease misunderstandings between the two world leaders.

Kennedy&#x27;s response to Khrushchev&#x27;s proposals was lukewarm but Kennedy expressed to Cousins that he felt constrained in exploring these issues due to pressure from hardliners in the US national security apparatus. However Kennedy pursued negotiations for a partial nuclear test ban.

On 13 November 1962, Tsarapkin indicated that the Soviet Union would accept a proposal drafted by US and Soviet experts involving automated test detection stations (&quot;black boxes&quot;) and a limited number of on-site inspections. The two sides disagreed over the number of black boxes, however, as the US sought 1220 such stations and the Soviet Union rejected any more than three. On 28 December 1962, Kennedy lowered the US demand to 810 stations. On 19 February 1963, the number was lowered further to seven, as Khrushchev continued to insist on no more than three. Kennedy was willing to reduce the number to six, though this was not clearly communicated to the Soviet Union. On 20 April 1963, Khrushchev withdrew support for three inspections entirely.

Progress was further complicated in early 1963, as a group in the US Congress called for the Soviet proposal to be discarded in favor of the Geneva System. On 27 May 1963, 34 US Senators, led by Humphrey and Thomas J. Dodd, introduced a resolution calling for Kennedy to propose another partial ban to the Soviet Union involving national monitoring and no on-site inspections. Absent Soviet agreement, the resolution called for Kennedy to continue to &quot;pursue it with vigor, seeking the widest possible international support&quot; while suspending all atmospheric and underwater tests. The effect of the resolution was to bolster the general push for a test ban, though Kennedy initially was concerned that it would damage attempts to secure a comprehensive ban, and had administration figures (including the Joint Chiefs of Staff) reiterate a call for a comprehensive ban. That same spring of 1963, however, Kennedy had sent antinuclear activist Norman Cousins to Moscow to meet with Khrushchev, where he explained that the political situation in the US made it very difficult for Kennedy agree to a comprehensive ban with Khrushchev&#x27;s required terms. Cousins also assured Khrushchev that though Kennedy had rejected Khrushchev&#x27;s offer of three yearly inspections, he still was set on achieving a test ban. In March 1963, Kennedy had also held a press conference in which he re-committed to negotiations with the Soviet Union as a means of preventing rapid nuclear proliferation, which he characterized as &quot;the greatest possible danger and hazard.&quot;
One of Kennedy&#x27;s advisors, Walt Whitman Rostow, advised the President to make a test ban conditional on the Soviet Union withdrawing troops from Cuba and abiding by a 1962 agreement on Laos, but Kennedy opted instead for test-ban negotiations without preconditions. On 10 June 1963, in an effort to reinvigorate and recontextualize a test ban, President Kennedy dedicated his commencement address at American University to &quot;the most important topic on earth: world peace&quot; and proceeded to make his case for the treaty. Kennedy first called on Americans to dispel the idea that peace is unattainable. &quot;Let us focus instead on a more practical, more attainable peace,&quot; Kennedy said, &quot;based not on a sudden revolution in human nature but on a gradual evolution in human institutionson a series of concrete actions and effective agreements which are in the interest of all concerned.&quot; Second, Kennedy appealed for a new attitude towards the Soviet Union, calling Americans to not &quot;see only a distorted and desperate view of the other side, not to see conflict as inevitable, accommodations as impossible and communication as nothing more than an exchange of threats.&quot; Finally, Kennedy argued for a reduction in Cold War tensions, with a test ban serving as a first step towards complete disarmament:

 ...where a fresh start is badly neededis in a treaty to outlaw nuclear tests. The conclusion of such a treatyso near and yet so farwould check the spiraling arms race in one of its most dangerous areas. It would place the nuclear powers in a position to deal more effectively with one of the greatest hazards which man faces in 1963, the further spread of nuclear arms. It would increase our securityit would decrease the prospects of war. Surely this goal is sufficiently important to require our steady pursuit, yielding neither to the temptation to give up the whole effort nor the temptation to give up our insistence on vital and responsible safeguards.

Kennedy proceeded to announce an agreement with Khrushchev and Macmillan to promptly resume comprehensive test-ban negotiations in Moscow and a US decision to unilaterally halt atmospheric tests. The speech was well received by Khrushchev, who later called it &quot;the greatest speech by any American President since Roosevelt,&quot; though was met with some skepticism within the US. The speech was endorsed by Humphrey and other Democrats, but labeled a &quot;dreadful mistake&quot; by Republican Senator Barry Goldwater and &quot;another case of concession&quot; by Everett Dirksen, the leader of the Senate Republicans. Dirksen and Charles A. Halleck, the second-ranking House Republican, warned that the renewed negotiations might end in &quot;virtual surrender.&quot;

Due to prior experience in arms control and his personal relationship with Khrushchev, former Assistant Secretary of War John J. McCloy was first considered the likely choice for chief US negotiator in Moscow, but his name was withdrawn after he turned out to be unavailable over the summer. W. Averell Harriman, a former ambassador to the Soviet Union well respected in Moscow, was chosen instead. The US delegation would also include Adrian S. Fisher, Carl Kaysen, John McNaughton, and William R. Tyler. In Britain, Macmillan initially wanted David Ormsby-Gore, who had just completed a term as foreign minister, to lead his delegation, but there were concerns that Ormsby-Gore would appear to be a US &quot;stooge&quot; (Kennedy described him as &quot;the brightest man he ever knew&quot;). Instead, Macmillan chose Quintin Hogg. Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., a special advisor to Kennedy, believed that Hogg was &quot;ill prepared on the technicalities of the problem and was consumed by a desire to get a treaty at almost any cost.&quot; Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, served as Moscow&#x27;s emissary.

Heading into the negotiations, there was still no resolution within the Kennedy Administration of the question of whether to pursue a comprehensive or partial ban. In an effort to achieve the former, Britain proposed reducing the number of mandated inspections to allay Soviet concerns, but Harriman believed such a reduction would have to be paired with other concessions that Khrushchev would be able to show off within the Soviet Union and to China. Withdrawing PGM-19 Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey would have been an option, had they not already been removed in the wake of the Cuban Missile Crisis. In meetings prior to the negotiations, Kennedy informed Harriman that he would be willing to make concessions on the Berlin question.

On 2 July 1963, Khrushchev proposed a partial ban on tests in the atmosphere, outer space, and underwater, which would avoid the contentious issue of detecting underground tests. Notably, Khrushchev did not link this proposal to a moratorium on underground tests (as had been proposed earlier), but said it should be followed by a non-aggression pact between NATO and the Warsaw Pact. &quot;A test ban agreement combined with the signing of a non-aggression pact between the two groups of state will create a fresh international climate more favorable for a solution of the major problems of our time, including disarmament,&quot; Khrushchev said.

As the nuclear powers pursued a test ban agreement, they also sought to contend with a rising communist China, which at the time was pursuing its own nuclear program. In 1955, Mao Zedong expressed to the Soviet Union his belief that China could withstand a first nuclear strike and more than 100million casualties. In the 1950s, the Soviet Union assisted the Chinese nuclear program, but stopped short of providing China with an actual nuclear bomb, which was followed by increasingly tense relations in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Khrushchev began the test-ban talks of 1958 with minimal prior discussion with China, and the two countries&#x27; agreement on military-technology cooperation was terminated in June 1959. Prior to the Moscow negotiations of the summer of 1963, Kennedy granted Harriman significant latitude in reaching a &quot;Soviet-American understanding&quot; vis--vis China. Secret Sino-Soviet talks in July 1963 revealed further discord between the two communist powers, as the Soviet Union released a statement that it did not &quot;share the views of the Chinese leadership about creating &#x27;a thousand times higher civilization&#x27; on the corpses of hundreds of millions of people.&quot; The Soviet Union also issued an ideological critique of China&#x27;s nuclear policy, declaring that China&#x27;s apparent openness to nuclear war was &quot;in crying contradiction to the idea of MarxismLeninism,&quot; as a nuclear war would &quot;not distinguish between imperialists and working people.&quot;

The negotiations were inaugurated on 15 July 1963 at the Kremlin with Khrushchev in attendance. Khrushchev reiterated that the Anglo-American inspection plan would amount to espionage, effectively dismissing the possibility of a comprehensive ban. Following the script of his 3 July 1963 speech, Khrushchev did not demand a simultaneous moratorium on underground testing and instead proposed a non-aggression pact. Under instruction from Washington, Harriman replied that the US would explore the possibility of a non-aggression pact in good faith, but indicated that while a test ban could be quickly completed, a non-aggression pact would require lengthy discussions. Additionally, such a pact would complicate the issue of Western access to West Berlin. Harriman also took the opportunity to propose a non-proliferation agreement with would bar the transfer of nuclear weapons between countries. Khrushchev said that such an agreement should be considered in the future, but in the interim, a test ban would have the same effect on limiting proliferation.

Following initial discussions, Gromyko and Harriman began examining drafts of a test-ban agreement. First, language in the drafted preamble appeared to Harriman to prohibit the use of nuclear weapons in self-defense, which Harriman insisted be clarified. Harriman additionally demanded that an explicit clause concerning withdrawal from the agreement be added to the treaty; Khrushchev believed that each state had a sovereign right to withdraw, which should simply be assumed. Harriman informed Gromyko that without a clause governing withdrawal, which he believed the US Senate would demand, the US could not assent. Ultimately, the two sides settled upon compromise language:

Each Party shall in exercising its national sovereignty have the right to withdraw from the Treaty if it decides that extraordinary events, related to the subject matter of this Treaty, have jeopardized the supreme interests of its country.

Gromyko and Harriman debated how states not universally recognized (e.g., East Germany and China) could join the agreement. The US proposed asserting that accession to the treaty would not indicate international recognition. This was rejected by the Soviet Union. Eventually, with Kennedy&#x27;s approval, US envoys Fisher and McNaughton devised a system whereby multiple government would serve as depositaries for the treaty, allowing individual states to sign only the agreement held by the government of their choice in association with other like-minded states. This solution, which overcame one of the more challenging roadblocks in the negotiations, also served to allay mounting concerns from Macmillan, which were relayed to Washington, that an agreement would once again be derailed. Finally, in an original Soviet draft, the signature of France would have been required for the treaty to come into effect. At Harriman&#x27;s insistence, this requirement was removed.
The agreement was initialed on 25 July 1963, just 10 days after negotiations commenced. The following day, Kennedy delivered a 26-minute televised address on the agreement, declaring that since the invention of nuclear weapons, &quot;all mankind has been struggling to escape from the darkening prospect of mass destruction on earth... Yesterday a shaft of light cut into the darkness.&quot; Kennedy expressed hope that the test ban would be the first step towards broader rapprochement, limit nuclear fallout, restrict nuclear proliferation, and slow the arms race in such a way that fortifies US security. Kennedy concluded his address in reference to a Chinese proverb that he had used with Khrushchev in Vienna two years prior. &quot;&#x27;A journey of a thousand miles must begin with a single step,&#x27;&quot; Kennedy said. &quot;And if that journey is a thousand miles, or even more, let history record that we, in this land, at this time, took the first step.&quot;

In a speech in Moscow following the agreement, Khrushchev declared that the treaty would not end the arms race and by itself could not &quot;avert the danger of war,&quot; and reiterated his proposal of a NATO-Warsaw Pact non-aggression accord. For Khrushchev, the test ban negotiations had long been a means of improving the Soviet Union&#x27;s global image and reducing strain in relations with the West. There are also some indications that military experts within the Soviet Union saw a test ban as a way to restrict US development of tactical nuclear weapons, which could have increased US willingness to deploy small nuclear weapons on battlefields while circumventing the Soviet nuclear deterrent. Concern that a comprehensive ban would retard modernization of the Soviet arsenal may have pushed Khrushchev towards a partial ban. Counteracting the move towards a partial ban was Khrushchev&#x27;s interest in reducing spending on testing, as underground testing was more expensive than the atmospheric tests the Soviet Union had been conducting; Khrushchev preferred a comprehensive ban as it would have eliminated the cost of testing entirely. Furthermore, there was internal concern about nuclear proliferation, particularly regarding the prospect of France and China crossing the threshold and the possibility of a multilateral NATO nuclear force, which was seen as a step towards West Germany acquiring nuclear weapons (the first Soviet test ban proposal in 1955 was made in the same month than West Germany joined NATO).

It was not until after the agreement was reached that the negotiators broached the question of France and China joining the treaty. Harriman proposed to Khrushchev that the US lobby France while the Soviet Union pursued a Chinese signature. &quot;That&#x27;s your problem,&quot; Khrushchev said in reply. Earlier, the Soviet ambassador to the US, Mikhail A. Menshikov, reportedly asked whether the US could &quot;deliver the French.&quot; Both Kennedy and Macmillan personally called on de Gaulle to join, offering assistance to the French nuclear program in return. Nevertheless, on 29 July 1963, France announced it would not join the treaty. It was followed by China two days later. China viewed the treaty as demonstrating a re-alignment by the United States and the Soviet Union against China, with Marshal Chen Yi characterizing the treaty as &quot;targeted against us.&quot;

On 5 August 1963, British Foreign Secretary Alec Douglas-Home, Soviet foreign minister Gromyko, and US Secretary of State Dean Rusk signed the final agreement.

====After the Moscow agreement====
Between 8 and 27 August 1963, the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations held hearings on the treaty. The Kennedy administration largely presented a united front in favor of the deal. Leaders of the once-opposed Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) and AEC acknowledged that the treaty would be of net benefit, though Teller, former members of the JCS and AEC, and the commander of the Strategic Air Command made clear their firm opposition. The opponents&#x27; argument centered on four themes. First, banning atmospheric tests would prevent the US from ensuring the hardness of its LGM-30 Minuteman missile silos and, second, from developing a capable missile defense system. Third, it was argued that the Soviet Union led the US in high-yield weapons (recall the Soviet Tsar Bomba test of 1961), which required atmospheric testing banned by the treaty, while the US led the Soviet Union in low-yield weapons, which were tested underground and would be permitted by the treaty. Fourth, the ban would prevent peaceful, civilian uses of nuclear detonations. Teller declared that the treaty would be a &quot;step away from safety and possibly... toward war.&quot;

Administration testimony sought to counteract these arguments. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara announced his &quot;unequivocal support&quot; for the treaty before the Foreign Relations Committee, arguing that US nuclear forces were secure and clearly superior to those of the Soviet Union, and that any major Soviet tests would be detected. Glenn T. Seaborg, the chairman of the AEC, also gave his support to the treaty in testimony, as did Harold Brown, the Department of Defense&#x27;s lead scientist, and Norris Bradbury, the longtime director of the Los Alamos Laboratory. Maxwell D. Taylor, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also testified in favor of the deal. Taylor and other members of the JCS, including Curtis LeMay, had made their support for the treaty conditional on four &quot;safeguards&quot;: (1) a continued, aggressive underground testing program, (2) continued nuclear research programs, (3) continued readiness to resume atmospheric tests, and (4) improved verification equipment. Kennedy emphasized that the US would retain the ability to use nuclear weapons in war, would not be bound by the treaty if the Soviets violated it, and would continue an aggressive underground testing program. Kennedy also stressed that a ban would be a key step in preventing nuclear war.

The testimonies of the Joint Chiefs were seen as particularly effective in allaying concerns, as were the reassurances issued by Kennedy, who had acquired a reputation for resoluteness against the Soviet Union in the wake of the Cuban Missile Crisis. Additionally, a number of prominent Republicans came out in support of the deal, including Eisenhower, Eisenhower&#x27;s vice president Richard Nixon, and Senator Everett Dirksen, who had initially been skeptical of the treaty. Eisenhower&#x27;s science advisor and former PSAC head, George Kistiakowsky, endorsed the treaty. Former President Harry S. Truman also lent his support. Supporters of the deal mounted a significant pressure campaign, with active lobbying in favor by a range of civilian groups, including the United Automobile Workers/AFLCIO, the National Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy, Women Strike for Peace, and Methodist, Unitarian Universalist, and Reform Jewish organizations. Jerome Wiesner, the chairman of PSAC, later said that this public advocacy was a primary motivation for Kennedy&#x27;s push for a test ban. Civil opposition to the deal was less prominent, though the Veterans of Foreign Wars announced opposition to the deal along with the International Council of Christian Churches, which rejected a &quot;covenant with a godless power.&quot; Polling in late August 1963 indicated that more than 60% of Americans supported the deal while less than 20% opposed it.

On 3 September 1963, the Foreign Relations Committee approved the treaty by a 161 vote. On 24 September 1963, the US Senate voted 8014 to approve ratification of the treaty, exceeding the necessary two-thirds majority by 14 votes. The Soviet Union ratified the treaty the following day with a unanimous vote of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. On 10 October 1963, the treaty entered into effect.

==Implementation==
===Provisions===
The treaty declares as its &quot;principal aim the speediest possible achievement of an agreement on general and complete disarmament under strict international control&quot; and explicitly states the goal of achieving a comprehensive test ban (one that bans underground tests). The treaty permanently forbids the parties to the treaty from conducting, permitting, or encouraging any nuclear explosion in the atmosphere, outer space, or underwater as well as &quot;any other nuclear explosion&quot; that threatens to send nuclear debris into another state&#x27;s territory. The wording &quot;any other nuclear explosion&quot; prohibited peaceful nuclear explosions because of the difficulty in differentiating those from military tests without expanded verification measures.

According to the compromise reached by U.S. delegates Adrian S. Fisher and John McNaughton in Moscow, Article 3 of the treaty permits states to deposit instruments of ratification or accession with the governments of the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, or the United States. This arrangement effectively avoids the issue of the treaty appearing to legitimize governments that lack universal recognition. Article 4 embodies the compromise reached by Gromyko and Harriman in Moscow regarding withdrawal from the treaty. It acknowledges the sovereign right of states to withdraw, as emphasized by Khrushchev, while also explicitly granting parties the right to withdraw if &quot;extraordinary events... have jeopardized the supreme interests of its country,&quot; in accordance with the demands of the United States.

===Signatories===
By 15 April 1964, six months after the PTBT went into effect, more than 100 states had joined the treaty as signatories and 39 had ratified or acceded to it. The most recent party to the PTBT is Montenegro, which succeeded to the treaty in 2006. , 126 states were party to the treaty, with 10 other states having signed but not deposited instruments of ratification. There are 60 states that have not signed the PTBT, including the nuclear states of China, France, and North Korea. Albania, an ideological ally of China during the PTBT&#x27;s enactment, also has not signed.

===Effectiveness===
The ratification of the PTBT coincided with a significant decline in the levels of radioactive particles in the atmosphere, following the &quot;bomb spike&quot; of the early 1960s. However, it did not effectively stop the proliferation of nuclear weapons. One year after the PTBT&#x27;s entry into force, the nonsignatory China conducted the 596 test and became the world&#x27;s fifth nuclear power. Since China, four other states are known or believed to have acquired nuclear weapons. However, the PTBT has been credited with slowing proliferation because of the greater expense associated with underground tests. Kennedy had warned in 1963 that without a test ban, there could be 10 nuclear states by 1970 and 15 to 20 by 1975.

The decade following ratification of the PTBT (19631972) featured more US nuclear tests than the decade prior (19531962). In the following decade, the US conducted 385 nuclear tests and 23 peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs), as opposed to 268 tests and three PNEs in the prior decade. In contrast, the number of Soviet detonations fell from 218 in the preceding decade to 157 in the following decade, as the Soviet Union was never able to meet the pace of US underground explosions. China and France, both nonsignatories, conducted 53 tests between 1963 and 1973. In all, 436 tests were conducted between the signing of the PTBT and 1 July 1973, compared to 499 tests between 16 July 1945 and the signing of the PTBT. In the 1960s and the 1970s, China conducted 22 atmospheric tests and France conducted 50. The last atmospheric test was conducted by China in 1980, after French atmospheric testing stopped in 1974. Public opposition to nuclear testing continued after the treaty&#x27;s enactment. Greenpeace was founded in 1971 in opposition to a planned underground test on the Alaskan island of Amchitka. In 1982, a Greenpeace ship docked at Leningrad without permission to demand the Soviet Union to stop testing.

The PTBT was a first of a series of nuclear arms control treaties in the second half of 20th century. The PTBT has been considered the stepping stone to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) of 1968, which explicitly referred to the progress provided by the PTBT. In addition to the NPT, the PTBT was followed within ten years by the Outer Space Treaty and Treaty of Tlatelolco in 1967, the Seabed Arms Control Treaty in 1971, and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty in 1972. In 1974, the Threshold Test Ban Treaty prohibited underground tests with yields above 150 kilotons.

In October 1977, the original parties to the PTBT renewed discussions about establishing a comprehensive test ban in Geneva. By the end of the 1970s, the US, the UK, and the Soviet Union reached an agreement on draft provisions that would prohibit all testing, temporarily ban peaceful nuclear explosions (PNEs), and establish a verification system that included on-site inspections. However, the parties remained divided over the specific details of the verification process, and the talks ultimately came to a halt with the departure of President Jimmy Carter in 1981.
Momentum towards a comprehensive ban re-emerged under Mikhail Gorbachev and President Ronald Reagan, with Gorbachev initiating a testing moratorium in 1985. In December 1986, the US indicated support for the &quot;long-term objective&quot; of a comprehensive ban, followed by the commencement of testing negotiations between the US and Soviet Union in November 1987. In December 1987, the US and the Soviet Union agreed to a joint program of experiments on detecting underground tests. In August 1988, Indonesia, Mexico, Peru, Sri Lanka, Venezuela, and Yugoslavia petitioned to transform the PTBT into a comprehensive ban by extending the treaty to underground tests. At a conference on the plan in January 1991, the US indicated that it would not permit efforts to achieve a comprehensive ban by consensus with amendments to the PTBT.

Throughout the 1990s, progress accelerated towards a comprehensive test ban treaty (CTBT). Following a series of international meetings on the subject, the UN General Assembly approved Resolution 50/64, which appealed for states to follow the PTBT and called for conclusion of the CTBT talks. In September 1996, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty was signed and superseded the PTBT, but the PTBT is still in effect for states not party to the CTBT. The CTBT has yet to enter into force, as 8 required states have not ratified the treaty, including the US and China. France, Russia, and the UK have ratified the CTBT. The technology for detecting underground tests has significantly improved since the 1950s and 1960s, with monitors detecting tests down to 1 kiloton with a high degree of confidence.

====Violations and accidents====
Early compliance with the PTBT was believed to be good, but there have been a number of accidental releases of nuclear debris into the atmosphere by parties to the treaty. Additionally, &quot;venting&quot; of underground tests by the US and the Soviet Union also continued to release radioactive debris into the atmosphere. Fully contained underground tests were not wholly &quot;clean&quot; either. Underground testing reduced the risk caused by radionuclides with short half-lives, such as iodine-131, and is generally safer than other forms of testing. However, underground testing may also cause long-lived radionuclides, including caesium-135, iodine-129, and plutonium, to seep into the ground.

A notable atmospheric release of radioactive gas followed the Soviet Chagan test of 15 January 1965 in present-day Kazakhstan. Roughly 20% of the radioactive debris produced by the 140-kiloton detonation was released into the atmosphere, with some fallout occurring over Japan. The US complained to Moscow, but no subsequent action was taken. On 25 April 1966, the &quot;Pin Stripe&quot; underground test in Nevada (part of Operation Flintlock) experienced a venting malfunction and produced a radioactive plume headed towards the Midwestern United States; the AEC determined that the test did not threaten human health.

Another accidental release occurred following the Baneberry shot at the Nevada Test Site on 18 December 1970 (part of Operation Emery). The 10-kiloton underground detonation created a fissure in the ground, allowing radioactive gas to escape into the atmosphere. Radioactive material released by the fissure reached an altitude of and exposed 86 workers to radiation but none at excessive levels. The incident has since been described as one of the &quot;world&#x27;s worst nuclear disasters.&quot;

Declassified US documents indicate that the US may have violated the PTBT&#x27;s ban on atmospheric testing in 1972 by, at the instruction of Henry Kissinger, monitoring and collecting data on French atmospheric tests over the Pacific Ocean, which may have amounted to co-operation with the French program. Declassified documents also indicate that the US and the UK circumvented the prescribed verification system in 196465 by establishing a series of additional control posts in Australia, Fiji, Mauritius, Pakistan, and South Africa.

The 1979 Vela incident in the southern Atlantic may have been an atmospheric nuclear test in contravention of the PTBT by Israel and South Africa, both of which were parties to the treaty.

==See also==
* Air Force Technical Applications Center  US organization dedicated to monitoring nuclear treaty compliance
* Boeing WC-135 Constant Phoenix  US aircraft used to detect nuclear explosions
* National technical means of verification (NTM)
* Project Orion (nuclear propulsion)  US project that ended shortly after ratification of the PTBT

==References==
===Citations===
===Publications===
* 
* 
* 
* Pietrobon, Allen. (2016)&quot;The Role of Norman Cousins and Track II Diplomacy in the Breakthrough to the 1963 Limited Test Ban Treaty.&quot; &quot;Journal of Cold War Studies&quot; 18.1 (2016): 6079.
* 
* 
* Sachs, Jeffrey D. (2013) &quot;JFK and the future of global leadership.&quot; &quot;International Affairs&quot; 89.6 (2013): 13791387. online, focuses on American University speech.
* 
* 


==External links==

*Treaty at United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
*Internal US documents relating to the test ban at the National Security Archive
*Video of John F. Kennedy&#x27;s announcement of the test-ban agreement
*Video of a 1986 PBS program on reported Soviet arms violations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="4" end="27" title="Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" label="Partial Test Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="29" end="33" title="Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" label="PTBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="63" end="148" title="Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" label="Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="165" end="181" title="nuclear weapons testing" label="test detonations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="185" end="199" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058675" start="228" end="239" title="underground nuclear weapons testing" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="271" end="294" title="Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" label="Limited Test Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="296" end="300" title="Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" label="LTBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="306" end="329" title="Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" label="Nuclear Test Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="331" end="335" title="Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" label="NTBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="378" end="415" title="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty" label="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="836" end="857" title="thermonuclear weapons" label="thermonuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="894" end="909" title="nuclear fallout" label="nuclear fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364891" start="958" end="979" title="nuclear proliferation" label="nuclear proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q550452" start="988" end="1005" title="nuclear arms race" label="nuclear arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1234" end="1246" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1252" end="1266" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1276" end="1289" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="1293" end="1299" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="1624" end="1630" title="IsraeliPalestinian conflict" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1635" end="1647" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192659" start="1683" end="1696" title="Vela incident" label="Vela incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1714" end="1720" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1725" end="1730" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="1807" end="1829" title="nuclear weapons states" label="nuclear weapons states"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="2336" end="2357" title="thermonuclear weapons" label="thermonuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2424" end="2436" title="atomic bombs" label="atomic bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207342" start="2481" end="2493" title="Trinity test" label="Trinity test"/>
<link wikidata="Q304419" start="2535" end="2547" title="Castle Bravo" label="Castle Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152225" start="2556" end="2568" title="Bikini Atoll" label="Bikini Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q729219" start="2580" end="2596" title="Operation Castle" label="Operation Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="2630" end="2645" title="megatons of TNT" label="megatons of TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q542619" start="2970" end="2984" title="Rongelap Atoll" label="Rongelap Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q700015" start="2989" end="3001" title="Utirik Atoll" label="Utirik Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q510109" start="3053" end="3065" title="Daigo Fukury Maru" label="Lucky Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="3229" end="3256" title="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombing of Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q188596" start="3373" end="3383" title="Tsar Bomba" label="Tsar Bomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="3504" end="3508" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q108293603" start="3509" end="3515" title="Tamper (nuclear weapon)" label="tamper"/>
<link wikidata="Q299595" start="4051" end="4064" title="Vannevar Bush" label="Vannevar Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="4125" end="4142" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673632" start="4609" end="4634" title="AchesonLilienthal Report" label="AchesonLilienthal Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="4677" end="4692" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="4738" end="4759" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="4773" end="4803" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="5017" end="5024" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="5029" end="5036" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677422" start="5100" end="5139" title="United Nations Atomic Energy Commission" label="United Nations Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082055" start="5155" end="5166" title="Baruch Plan" label="Baruch Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="5366" end="5386" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q783785" start="5397" end="5437" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="Chief of Staff of the United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="6515" end="6523" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q304419" start="6991" end="7003" title="Castle Bravo" label="Castle Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="7032" end="7048" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="7345" end="7365" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="British Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="7379" end="7393" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="7521" end="7538" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="7730" end="7736" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7738" end="7744" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="8231" end="8251" title="fissionable material" label="fissionable material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208337" start="8278" end="8301" title="pre-emptive nuclear strike" label="surprise nuclear strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8603" end="8615" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q705698" start="8651" end="8669" title="Stafford L. Warren" label="Stafford L. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q49355" start="8805" end="8824" title="James Bryant Conant" label="James Bryant Conant"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="9174" end="9199" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="9457" end="9475" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q887520" start="9665" end="9679" title="Harold Stassen" label="Harold Stassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="10089" end="10113" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822160" start="10129" end="10142" title="Lewis Strauss" label="Lewis Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064288" start="10169" end="10189" title="Charles Erwin Wilson" label="Charles Erwin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699548" start="10294" end="10298" title="1952 United States presidential election" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q699567" start="10303" end="10307" title="1956 United States presidential election" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q311719" start="10365" end="10380" title="Adlai Stevenson II" label="Adlai Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="10473" end="10486" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="10487" end="10504" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="10506" end="10518" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="10524" end="10540" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644880" start="10630" end="10641" title="85th United States Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293979" start="10725" end="10749" title="Operation Grapple" label="its first hydrogen bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q744593" start="11040" end="11067" title="militaryindustrial complex" label="militaryindustrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q185110" start="11127" end="11141" title="Igor Kurchatov" label="Igor Kurchatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="11392" end="11407" title="nuclear fallout" label="nuclear fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q544529" start="11485" end="11497" title="strontium-90" label="strontium-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838415" start="11515" end="11532" title="Baby Tooth Survey" label="Baby Tooth Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822160" start="11880" end="11893" title="Lewis Strauss" label="Lewis Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733" start="11898" end="11911" title="Edward Teller" label="Edward Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="12457" end="12474" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q49325" start="12484" end="12501" title="Albert Schweitzer" label="Albert Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="12534" end="12547" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="12553" end="12566" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="12710" end="12725" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="12920" end="12927" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="13160" end="13169" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="13171" end="13177" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="13183" end="13189" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349539" start="13412" end="13428" title="Kyshtym disaster" label="Kyshtym disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q169577" start="14269" end="14284" title="Ernest Lawrence" label="Ernest Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768962" start="14289" end="14304" title="Mark Muir Mills" label="Mark Muir Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q153717" start="14573" end="14586" title="Freeman Dyson" label="Freeman Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q997" start="14735" end="14750" title="Andrei Sakharov" label="Andrei Sakharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="14932" end="14941" title="carbon-14" label="carbon-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="15136" end="15145" title="carbon-14" label="carbon-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q188596" start="15460" end="15470" title="Tsar Bomba" label="Tsar Bomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q80413" start="15501" end="15514" title="Novaya Zemlya" label="Novaya Zemlya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817269" start="16190" end="16215" title="Atomic Energy Act of 1946" label="Atomic Energy Act of 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="16363" end="16374" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889644" start="16464" end="16496" title="United States Congress Joint Committee on Atomic Energy" label="Joint Committee on Atomic Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="16925" end="16929" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="17443" end="17459" title="Nevada Test Site" label="Nevada Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17477" end="17484" title="Operation Plumbbob#Rainier" label="Rainier"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="17955" end="17964" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Livermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241184" start="18630" end="18673" title="President&amp;#x27;s Science Advisory Committee" label="President&amp;#x27;s Science Advisory Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="19283" end="19298" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415242" start="19714" end="19730" title="Anti-Party Group" label="Anti-Party Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="19750" end="19756" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215705" start="19764" end="19780" title="Lazar Kaganovich" label="Lazar Kaganovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q180588" start="19782" end="19797" title="Georgy Malenkov" label="Georgy Malenkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q132899" start="19803" end="19821" title="Vyacheslav Molotov" label="Vyacheslav Molotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="19867" end="19907" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary of the Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48093" start="19958" end="19974" title="Nikolai Bulganin" label="Nikolai Bulganin"/>
<link wikidata="Q462189" start="19985" end="20012" title="Premier of the Soviet Union" label="Premier of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="20250" end="20263" title="Georgy Zhukov" label="Georgy Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="20756" end="20763" title="dtente" label="dtente"/>
<link wikidata="Q322197" start="20848" end="20861" title="Geneva Summit (1955)" label="Geneva Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140920" start="21021" end="21050" title="20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="20th Communist Party Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q326465" start="21394" end="21428" title="Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union" label="Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q734773" start="21852" end="21872" title="Operation Hardtack I" label="Operation Hardtack I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="22446" end="22463" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333080" start="22464" end="22476" title="Selwyn Lloyd" label="Selwyn Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q49618" start="22532" end="22551" title="James Rhyne Killian" label="James Rhyne Killian"/>
<link wikidata="Q902967" start="22556" end="22575" title="George Kistiakowsky" label="George Kistiakowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="22743" end="22753" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165969" start="22758" end="22775" title="Isidor Isaac Rabi" label="Isidor Isaac Rabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="24159" end="24165" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q336759" start="24468" end="24482" title="William Penney, Baron Penney" label="William Penney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883277" start="24898" end="24912" title="Bell Telephone Company" label="Bell Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349434" start="24944" end="24957" title="Robert Bacher" label="Robert Bacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882459" start="25467" end="25480" title="acoustic wave" label="acoustic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="25500" end="25510" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="27902" end="27934" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="28079" end="28100" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="29163" end="29176" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904128" start="29208" end="29232" title="James Jeremiah Wadsworth" label="James Jeremiah Wadsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605189" start="29269" end="29286" title="David Ormsby-Gore, 5th Baron Harlech" label="David Ormsby-Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q124041020" start="29292" end="29329" title="Minister of State for Foreign Affairs (United Kingdom)" label="Minister of State for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503137" start="29350" end="29369" title="Semyon K. Tsarapkin" label="Semyon K. Tsarapkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q577160" start="30020" end="30035" title="Albert Gore Sr." label="Albert Gore Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q181013" start="32152" end="32162" title="Little Boy" label="Little Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="32179" end="32188" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780403" start="33949" end="33980" title="high-altitude nuclear explosion" label="high-altitude nuclear explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574099" start="34376" end="34395" title="radiation shielding" label="radiation shielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q322667" start="34712" end="34725" title="Lloyd Berkner" label="Lloyd Berkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="35191" end="35207" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q309202" start="35910" end="35920" title="Camp David" label="Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q38768" start="37430" end="37443" title="Richter scale" label="Richter scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q762201" start="38417" end="38450" title="Federation of American Scientists" label="Federation of American Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q973836" start="38576" end="38590" title="John A. McCone" label="John A. McCone"/>
<link wikidata="Q464733" start="38603" end="38626" title="Clinton Presba Anderson" label="Clinton Presba Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q934934" start="39228" end="39243" title="Neil H. McElroy" label="Neil H. McElroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q927712" start="39248" end="39265" title="Donald A. Quarles" label="Donald A. Quarles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="40149" end="40166" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q975058" start="40309" end="40327" title="Gerboise Bleue" label="first nuclear test"/>
<link wikidata="Q189064" start="40470" end="40483" title="Lockheed U-2" label="U-2 spy plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q748379" start="40488" end="40497" title="1960 U-2 incident" label="shot down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773926" start="40854" end="40866" title="Congo Crisis" label="Congo Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="40960" end="40975" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q557507" start="41928" end="41941" title="Robert Gilpin" label="Robert Gilpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q281170" start="42110" end="42124" title="Harlow Shapley" label="Harlow Shapley"/>
<link wikidata="Q443953" start="42801" end="42819" title="Stephen E. Ambrose" label="Stephen E. Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q24070" start="43029" end="43046" title="John Lewis Gaddis" label="John Lewis Gaddis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061526" start="43498" end="43508" title="Paul Nitze" label="Paul Nitze"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="43784" end="43799" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="43977" end="43987" title="Eisenhower" label="Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="44449" end="44454" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="44470" end="44476" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="45045" end="45052" title="John F. Kennedy" label="Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="45152" end="45164" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="45346" end="45349" title="JFK" label="JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798441" start="45542" end="45553" title="Arthur Dean (lawyer)" label="Arthur Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="46269" end="46286" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="nonaligned states"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="46459" end="46476" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q668939" start="46606" end="46619" title="Vienna summit" label="Vienna summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="47064" end="47073" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q668939" start="48427" end="48440" title="Vienna Summit" label="Vienna Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q708321" start="48467" end="48488" title="Berlin Crisis of 1961" label="Berlin Crisis of 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="48505" end="48517" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q707116" start="49231" end="49254" title="Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky" label="Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="49293" end="49305" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="49460" end="49481" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q188596" start="50126" end="50136" title="Tsar Bomba" label="Tsar Bomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q80413" start="50185" end="50198" title="Novaya Zemlya" label="Novaya Zemlya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="50318" end="50324" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q831222" start="50675" end="50680" title="Bethe" label="Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="51121" end="51128" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q193331" start="51252" end="51268" title="Kiritimati" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q112177529" start="51665" end="51678" title="United States Ambassador to the United Nations" label="UN ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="51685" end="51701" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754777" start="51707" end="51739" title="United States Information Agency" label="United States Information Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q729661" start="51745" end="51759" title="Jerome Wiesner" label="Jerome Wiesner"/>
<link wikidata="Q191999" start="52046" end="52061" title="Robert McNamara" label="Robert McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q243760" start="52450" end="52474" title="second strike" label="second-strike capability"/>
<link wikidata="Q186042" start="53167" end="53189" title="John Kenneth Galbraith" label="John Kenneth Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837650" start="53200" end="53219" title="United States Ambassador to India" label="ambassador to India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793847" start="53728" end="53763" title="Arms Control and Disarmament Agency" label="Arms Control and Disarmament Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="54062" end="54068" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="55930" end="55942" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="55959" end="55979" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q987363" start="56123" end="56136" title="rapprochement" label="rapprochement"/>
<link wikidata="Q561752" start="56623" end="56637" title="Yulii Khariton" label="Yulii Khariton"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="57279" end="57296" title="thermonuclear war" label="thermonuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="57298" end="57308" title="Khrushchev" label="Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="57551" end="57555" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="57564" end="57575" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="57851" end="57863" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="57868" end="57880" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364026" start="58121" end="58135" title="Norman Cousins" label="Norman Cousins"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="58363" end="58378" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645092" start="59829" end="59840" title="88th United States Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619366" start="59971" end="59985" title="Thomas J. Dodd" label="Thomas J. Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520824" start="60000" end="60010" title="simple resolution" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364026" start="60714" end="60728" title="Norman Cousins" label="Norman Cousins"/>
<link wikidata="Q359560" start="61369" end="61388" title="Walt Whitman Rostow" label="Walt Whitman Rostow"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="61487" end="61491" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="61527" end="61531" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745325" start="61718" end="61761" title="American University speech" label="commencement address at American University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="63664" end="63673" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="63854" end="63869" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382002" start="63916" end="63931" title="Everett Dirksen" label="Everett Dirksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q525619" start="63983" end="64001" title="Charles A. Halleck" label="Charles A. Halleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="64022" end="64027" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550731" start="64216" end="64242" title="United States Assistant Secretary of War" label="Assistant Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q563577" start="64243" end="64257" title="John J. McCloy" label="John J. McCloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q345531" start="64414" end="64433" title="W. Averell Harriman" label="W. Averell Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q736861" start="64558" end="64574" title="Adrian S. Fisher" label="Adrian S. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039196" start="64576" end="64587" title="Carl Kaysen" label="Carl Kaysen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248212" start="64589" end="64604" title="John McNaughton (government official)" label="John McNaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017301" start="64610" end="64626" title="William R. Tyler" label="William R. Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q175366" start="64941" end="64953" title="Quintin Hogg, Baron Hailsham of St Marylebone" label="Quintin Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q435195" start="64955" end="64980" title="Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr." label="Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q184267" start="65162" end="65176" title="Andrei Gromyko" label="Andrei Gromyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959942" start="65189" end="65216" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Soviet Union)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473449" start="65718" end="65732" title="PGM-19 Jupiter" label="PGM-19 Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="65747" end="65752" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="65757" end="65763" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="65983" end="65989" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412901" start="66332" end="66351" title="non-aggression pact" label="non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="66360" end="66364" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="66373" end="66384" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66800" end="66815" title="China and weapons of mass destruction#Nuclear weapons" label="nuclear program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="66826" end="66836" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="67123" end="67151" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="increasingly tense relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="68067" end="68083" title="MarxismLeninism" label="MarxismLeninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="68241" end="68248" title="Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="68928" end="68939" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="70240" end="70252" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191707" start="70564" end="70576" title="depositary" label="depositaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="71808" end="71815" title="proverb" label="proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050866" start="72659" end="72682" title="tactical nuclear weapon" label="tactical nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="72814" end="72823" title="deterrence theory" label="deterrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q188408" start="74466" end="74473" title="Chen Yi (marshal)" label="Chen Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="74581" end="74598" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q313258" start="74659" end="74668" title="Dean Rusk" label="Dean Rusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="74767" end="74818" title="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" label="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q937064" start="75123" end="75144" title="Strategic Air Command" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026015" start="75305" end="75313" title="radiation hardening" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q861662" start="75321" end="75337" title="LGM-30 Minuteman" label="LGM-30 Minuteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155630" start="75391" end="75406" title="missile defense" label="missile defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382347" start="75747" end="75793" title="peaceful nuclear explosion" label="peaceful, civilian uses of nuclear detonations"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973" start="76245" end="76261" title="Glenn T. Seaborg" label="Glenn T. Seaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q552916" start="76345" end="76357" title="Harold Brown (Secretary of Defense)" label="Harold Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q322456" start="76412" end="76427" title="Norris Bradbury" label="Norris Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q313972" start="76481" end="76498" title="Maxwell D. Taylor" label="Maxwell D. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763459" start="76504" end="76541" title="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q15866" start="76627" end="76639" title="Curtis LeMay" label="Curtis LeMay"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="77493" end="77504" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="77593" end="77606" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814260" start="77978" end="78003" title="United Automobile Workers" label="United Automobile Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q464271" start="78004" end="78011" title="AFLCIO" label="AFLCIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157308" start="78017" end="78061" title="Peace Action" label="National Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031334" start="78063" end="78085" title="Women Strike for Peace" label="Women Strike for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="78091" end="78100" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="78102" end="78124" title="Unitarian Universalism" label="Unitarian Universalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="78130" end="78143" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556413" start="78359" end="78383" title="Veterans of Foreign Wars" label="Veterans of Foreign Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273359" start="78432" end="78475" title="International Council of Christian Churches" label="International Council of Christian Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187324" start="78516" end="78529" title="religion in the Soviet Union" label="godless power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643162" start="78976" end="79007" title="Presidium of the Supreme Soviet" label="Presidium of the Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q736861" start="79929" end="79945" title="Adrian S. Fisher" label="Adrian S. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q184267" start="80326" end="80333" title="Gromyko" label="Gromyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q345531" start="80338" end="80346" title="W. Averell Harriman" label="Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="80471" end="80481" title="Khrushchev" label="Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="80905" end="80915" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="81179" end="81190" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="81192" end="81199" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="81330" end="81334" title="PTBT" label="PTBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420139" start="81648" end="81656" title="Project 596" label="596 test"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="81719" end="81736" title="list of states with nuclear weapons" label="four other states"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="83038" end="83048" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="83120" end="83126" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q460282" start="83138" end="83146" title="Amchitka" label="Amchitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="83185" end="83194" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="83416" end="83466" title="Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" label="Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q256608" start="83616" end="83634" title="Outer Space Treaty" label="Outer Space Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567567" start="83639" end="83659" title="Treaty of Tlatelolco" label="Treaty of Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274517" start="83673" end="83699" title="Seabed Arms Control Treaty" label="Seabed Arms Control Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q287422" start="83717" end="83746" title="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty" label="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q950957" start="83769" end="83794" title="Threshold Test Ban Treaty" label="Threshold Test Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="83902" end="83906" title="PTBT" label="PTBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="84406" end="84418" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="84482" end="84499" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="84514" end="84527" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="84930" end="84939" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="84941" end="84947" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="84949" end="84953" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="84955" end="84964" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="84966" end="84975" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="84981" end="84991" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="85421" end="85440" title="UN General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="85581" end="85618" title="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty" label="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="86553" end="86565" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="86578" end="86588" title="half-life" label="half-lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q927316" start="86598" end="86608" title="iodine-131" label="iodine-131"/>
<link wikidata="Q24638" start="86742" end="86753" title="caesium-135" label="caesium-135"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515411" start="86755" end="86765" title="iodine-129" label="iodine-129"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="86771" end="86780" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825680" start="86877" end="86888" title="Chagan (nuclear test)" label="Chagan test"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="86923" end="86933" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142443" start="87232" end="87251" title="Operation Flintlock (nuclear test)" label="Operation Flintlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="87339" end="87363" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060164" start="87480" end="87489" title="Baneberry Nuclear Test" label="Baneberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="87502" end="87518" title="Nevada Test Site" label="Nevada Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026069" start="87548" end="87563" title="Operation Emery" label="Operation Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="88072" end="88087" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="88412" end="88421" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="88423" end="88427" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="88429" end="88438" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="88440" end="88448" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="88454" end="88466" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192659" start="88478" end="88491" title="Vela incident" label="Vela incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="88591" end="88597" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697967" start="88674" end="88713" title="Air Force Technical Applications Center" label="Air Force Technical Applications Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q218645" start="88784" end="88814" title="Boeing WC-135 Constant Phoenix" label="Boeing WC-135 Constant Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979738" start="88865" end="88905" title="National technical means of verification" label="National technical means of verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q927766" start="88914" end="88948" title="Project Orion (nuclear propulsion)" label="Project Orion (nuclear propulsion)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928381" start="89507" end="89552" title="United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs" label="United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q649857" start="89608" end="89633" title="National Security Archive" label="National Security Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="89723" end="89726" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30594" wikidata="Q190401" url="?curid=30594" title="Tribune">
<text>Tribune () was the title of various elected officials in ancient Rome. The two most important were the tribunes of the plebs and the military tribunes. For most of Roman history, a college of ten tribunes of the plebs acted as a check on the authority of the senate and the annual magistrates, holding the power of &quot;ius intercessionis&quot; to intervene on behalf of the plebeians, and veto unfavourable legislation. There were also military tribunes, who commanded portions of the Roman army, subordinate to higher magistrates, such as the consuls and praetors, promagistrates, and their legates. Various officers within the Roman army were also known as tribunes. The title was also used for several other positions and classes in the course of Roman history.

==Tribal tribunes==
The word &quot;tribune&quot; is derived from the Roman tribes. The three original tribes known as the &quot;Ramnes&quot; or &quot;Ramnenses&quot;, &quot;Tities&quot; or &quot;Titienses,&quot; and the &quot;Luceres,&quot; were each headed by a tribune, who represented each tribe in civil, religious, and military matters. Subsequently, each of the Servian tribes was also represented by a tribune.

==Tribune of the &quot;celeres&quot;==
Under the Roman Kingdom, the &quot;tribunus celerum&quot;, in English &quot;tribune of the celeres,&quot; or &quot;tribune of the knights&quot;, was commander of the king&#x27;s personal bodyguard, known as the &quot;celeres&quot;. This official was second only to the king, and had the authority to pass law, known as &quot;lex tribunicia&quot;, and to preside over the &quot;comitia curiata&quot;. Unless the king himself elected to lead the cavalry into battle, this responsibility fell to the tribune of the celeres. In theory he could deprive the king of his imperium, or authority to command, with the agreement of the &quot;comitia curiata&quot;.

In the reign of Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, the last Roman king, this office was held by Lucius Junius Brutus, the king&#x27;s nephew, and thus the senior member of the king&#x27;s household, after the king himself and his sons. It was Brutus who convened the &quot;comitia&quot; and asked that they revoke the king&#x27;s imperium. After the fall of the monarchy, the powers of the tribune of the celeres were divided between the &quot;Magister Militum&quot;, or Master of the Infantry, also known as the &quot;Praetor Maximus&quot; or &quot;dictator&quot;, and his lieutenant, the &quot;magister equitum&quot; or &quot;Master of the Horse&quot;.

==Tribune of the plebs==

The &quot;tribuni plebis&quot;, known in English as &quot;tribunes of the plebs, tribunes of the people,&quot; or &quot;plebeian tribunes,&quot; were instituted in 494 BC, after the first secession of the plebs, to protect the interests of the plebeians against the actions of the senate and the annual magistrates, who were uniformly patrician. The ancient sources indicate the tribunes may have originally been two or five in number. If the former, the college of tribunes was expanded to five in 470 BC. Either way, the college was increased to ten in 457 BC, and remained at this number throughout Roman history. They were assisted by two &quot;aediles plebis&quot;, or plebeian aediles. Only plebeians were eligible for these offices, although at least two exceptions existed.

The tribunes of the plebs had the power to convene the &quot;concilium plebis&quot;, or plebeian assembly, and propose legislation before it. Only one of the tribunes could preside over this assembly, which had the power to pass laws affecting only the plebeians, known as &quot;plebiscita&quot;, or plebiscites. After 287 BC, the decrees of the &quot;concilium plebis&quot; had the effect of law over all Roman citizens. By the 3rd century BC, the tribunes could also convene and propose legislation before the senate.

Although sometimes referred to as &quot;plebeian magistrates,&quot; technically the tribunes of the plebs were not magistrates, having been elected by the plebeians alone, and not the whole Roman people. However, they were sacrosanct, and the whole body of the plebeians were pledged to protect the tribunes against any assault or interference with their persons during their terms of office. Anyone who violated the sacrosanctity of the tribunes might be killed without penalty.

This was also the source of the tribunes&#x27; power, known as &quot;ius intercessionis,&quot; or &quot;intercessio,&quot; by which any tribune could intercede on behalf of a Roman citizen to prohibit the act of a magistrate or other official. Citizens could appeal the decisions of the magistrates to the tribunes, who would then be obliged to determine the legality of the action before a magistrate could proceed. This power also allowed the tribunes to forbid, or &quot;veto&quot; any act of the senate or another assembly. Only a dictator was exempt from these powers.

The &quot;tribunicia potestas&quot;, or tribunician power, was limited because it was derived from the people&#x27;s oath to defend the tribunes. This limited most of the tribunes&#x27; actions to the boundaries of the city itself, as well as a radius of one mile around. They had no power to affect the actions of provincial governors.

The powers of the tribunes were severely curtailed during the constitutional reforms of the dictator Sulla in 81 BC. Although many of these powers were restored in further reforms of 75 BC and 70 BC, the prestige and authority of the tribunes had been irreparably damaged. In 48 BC, the senate granted tribunician powers (&quot;tribunicia potestas&quot;, powers equivalent to those of a tribune without actually being one) to the dictator Julius Caesar. Caesar used them to prevent the other tribunes interfering with his actions. In 23 BC, the senate granted the same power to Augustus, the first Roman emperor, and from that point onwards it was regularly granted to each emperor as part of their formal titles. Under the Roman Empire, the tribunes continued to be elected, but had lost their independence and most of their practical power. The office became merely a step in the political careers of plebeians who aspired toward a seat in the senate.

==Military tribunes==

The &quot;tribuni militum,&quot; known in English as &quot;military tribunes&quot; or literally, &quot;tribunes of the soldiers&quot;, were elected each year along with the annual magistrates. Their number varied throughout Roman history, but eventually reached twenty-four. These were usually young men in their late twenties, who aspired to a senatorial career. Each tribune would be assigned to command a portion of the Roman army, subordinate to the magistrates and promagistrates appointed by the senate, and their legates.

Within each of the legions, various middle-ranking officers were also styled &quot;tribune&quot;. These officers included:

* &quot;Tribunus laticlavius&quot;, a senatorial officer, second in command of a legion; identified by a broad stripe, or &quot;laticlavus.&quot;
* &quot;Tribunus angusticlavius&quot;, an officer chosen from among the equites, five to each legion; identified by a narrow stripe, or &quot;angusticlavus&quot;.
* &quot;Tribunus rufulus&quot;, an officer chosen by the commander.
* &quot;Tribunus vacans&quot;, an unassigned officer in the Late Roman army; a member of the general&#x27;s staff.
* &quot;Tribunus cohortis&quot;, an officer commanding a cohort, part of a legion usually consisting of six centuries.
* &quot;Tribunus cohortis urbanae&quot;, commander of one of the urban cohorts, a sort of military police unit stationed at Rome.
* &quot;Tribunus sexmestris&quot;, a tribune serving a tour of duty of only six months; there is no evidence to identify this officer as a cavalry commander, as sometimes stated in modern literature.

In the late Roman army, a &quot;tribunus&quot; was a senior officer, sometimes called a &quot;comes&quot;, who commanded a cavalry vexillatio. As &quot;tribounos&quot;, the title survived in the East Roman army until the early 7th century.

From the use of &quot;tribunus&quot; to describe various military officers is derived the word &quot;tribunal&quot;, originally referring to a raised platform used to address the soldiers or administer justice.

Military tribunes are featured in notable works of historical fiction, including &quot;Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ&quot;, by Lew Wallace, and &quot;The Robe&quot; by Lloyd C. Douglas. Both novels involve characters affected by the life and death of Jesus, and were turned into epic films during the 1950s. Messala, the primary antagonist in &quot;Ben-Hur&quot;, was played by Stephen Boyd, while Marcellus Gallio, the protagonist of &quot;The Robe&quot;, was played by a young Richard Burton.

==Consular tribunes==

In 445 BC, the tribunes of the plebs succeeded in passing the &quot;lex Canuleia&quot;, repealing the law forbidding the intermarriage of patricians and plebeians, and providing that one of the consuls might be a plebeian. Rather than permit the consular dignity to pass into the hands of a plebeian, the senate proposed a compromise whereby three military tribunes, who might be either patrician or plebeian, should be elected in place of the consuls. The first &quot;tribuni militum consulare potestate&quot;, or &quot;military tribunes with consular power&quot;, were elected for the year 444. Although plebeians were eligible for this office, each of the first &quot;consular tribunes&quot; was a patrician.

Military tribunes were elected in place of the consuls in half the years from 444 to 401 BC, and in each instance, all of the tribunes were patricians; nor did any plebeian succeed in obtaining the consulship. The number of tribunes increased to four beginning in 426, and six beginning in 405. At last, the plebeians elected four of their number military tribunes for the year 400; others were elected in 399, 396, 383, and 379. But apart from these years, no plebeian obtained the highest offices of the Roman State.

The patricians&#x27; monopoly on power was finally broken by Gaius Licinius Calvus Stolo and Lucius Sextius Lateranus, tribunes of the people, who in 376 BC brought forward legislation demanding not merely that one of the consuls &quot;might&quot; be a plebeian, but that henceforth one &quot;must&quot; be chosen from their order. When the senate refused their demand, the tribunes prevented the election of annual magistrates for five years, before relenting and permitting the election of consular tribunes from 370 to 367. In the end, and with the encouragement of the dictator Marcus Furius Camillus, the senate conceded the battle, and passed the Licinian Rogations. Sextius was elected the first plebeian consul, followed by Licinius two years later; and with this settlement, the consular tribunes were abolished.

==Tribunes of the treasury==
The exact nature of the &quot;Tribuni Aerarii&quot;, or &quot;Tribunes of the Treasury&quot; is shrouded in mystery. Originally they seem to have been tax collectors, but this power was slowly lost to other officials. By the end of the Republic, this style belonged to a class of persons slightly below the equites in wealth. When the makeup of Roman juries was reformed in 70 BC, it was stipulated that one-third of the members of each jury should belong to this class.

==Later uses of the title==

=== Post-Roman Britain ===
In his &quot;Vita Germani&quot;, a hagiography of St. Germanus of Auxerre, Constantius of Lyon writes that during his visit to Britain in AD 429, Germanus miraculously healed the blind daughter of &quot;a man with tribunician power&quot; (&quot;vir tribunicae potestatis&quot;). Being that the Roman Empire had withdrawn from Britain in AD 410, the use of this term may imply a continuation of some form of local Roman political system. There exists the possibility that this tribune had commanded a unit of the Roman army which had disbanded after the break with Rome, and was now occupying a more locally-granted appointment to help manage his city&#x27;s defences.

===Republic of Venice===
In the early history of the Republic of Venice, during the tenure of the sixth Doge Domenico Monegario, Venice instituted a dual Tribunal modeled on the above Roman institution - two new Tribunes being elected each year, with the intention to oversee the Doge and prevent abuse of power (though this aim was not always successfully achieved).

===French revolutionary &quot;tribunat&quot;===

The &quot;Tribunat&quot;, the French word for tribunate, derived from the Latin term &quot;tribunatus&quot;, meaning the office or term of a Roman &quot;tribunus&quot; (see above), was a collective organ of the young revolutionary French Republic composed of members styled &quot;tribun&quot; (the French for tribune), which, despite the apparent reference to one of ancient Rome&#x27;s prestigious magistratures, never held any real political power as an assembly, its individual members no role at all.

It was instituted by Napoleon I Bonaparte&#x27;s Constitution of the Year VIII &quot;in order to moderate the other powers&quot; by discussing every legislative project, sending its &quot;orateurs&quot; (&quot;orators&quot;, i.e. spokesmen) to defend or attack them in the Corps lgislatif, and asking the Senate to overturn &quot;the lists of eligibles, the acts of the Legislative Body and those of the government&quot; on account of unconstitutionality. Its 100 members were designated by the Senate from the list of citizens from 25 years up, and annually one fifth was renewed for a five-year term.

When it opposed the first parts of Bonaparte&#x27;s proposed penal code, he made the Senate nominate 20 new members at once to replace the 20 first opponents to his politic; they accepted the historically important reform of penal law. As the Tribunate opposed new despotic projects, he got the Senate in year X to allow itself to dissolve the Tribunate. In XIII it was further downsized to 50 members. On August 16, 1807, it was abolished and never revived.

==See also==

*Constitution of the Roman Republic
*List of Roman tribunes

==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* for information on Tribunes of the Treasury

==External links==
*Livius.org: Tribune </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="0" end="7" title="Tribune" label="Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="57" end="69" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704729" start="103" end="124" title="Tribune of the Plebs" label="tribunes of the plebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q849288" start="133" end="149" title="military tribune" label="military tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="259" end="265" title="Roman senate" label="senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20778343" start="274" end="292" title="Roman magistrate" label="annual magistrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="376" end="385" title="Plebs" label="plebeians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849288" start="438" end="454" title="military tribune" label="military tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="487" end="497" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="546" end="553" title="Roman consul" label="consuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="558" end="565" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q731997" start="568" end="581" title="promagistrate" label="promagistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212624" start="594" end="601" title="legatus" label="legates"/>
<link wikidata="Q938560" start="837" end="849" title="Roman tribes" label="Roman tribes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1136" end="1150" title="Roman tribe#The Servian tribes" label="Servian tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201038" start="1236" end="1249" title="Roman Kingdom" label="Roman Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q55375123" start="1392" end="1403" title="Roman King" label="king&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639495" start="1443" end="1450" title="celeres" label="celeres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339377" start="1603" end="1618" title="Curiate Assembly" label="comitia curiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="1790" end="1798" title="imperium" label="imperium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193047" start="1897" end="1923" title="Lucius Tarquinius Superbus" label="Lucius Tarquinius Superbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223440" start="1970" end="1990" title="Lucius Junius Brutus" label="Lucius Junius Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q236885" start="2318" end="2334" title="Roman dictator" label="Magister Militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921039" start="2470" end="2486" title="Master of the Horse" label="magister equitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15651483" start="2738" end="2766" title="first secessio plebis" label="first secession of the plebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="2891" end="2900" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q205757" start="3205" end="3219" title="aedile" label="aediles plebis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056619" start="3400" end="3416" title="Plebeian Council" label="concilium plebis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213665" start="4083" end="4093" title="sacrosanct" label="sacrosanct"/>
<link wikidata="Q236885" start="4876" end="4884" title="Roman dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812526" start="5312" end="5338" title="Constitutional reforms of Sulla" label="the constitutional reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="5355" end="5360" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="5693" end="5706" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="5832" end="5840" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="5852" end="5865" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5947" end="5966" title="Roman emperor#Titles" label="their formal titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5978" end="5990" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="6781" end="6788" title="Roman legion" label="legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q612499" start="6894" end="6914" title="Tribunus laticlavius" label="Tribunus laticlavius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998654" start="7040" end="7063" title="Tribunus angusticlavius" label="Tribunus angusticlavius"/>
<link wikidata="Q202167" start="7435" end="7441" title="cohort (military unit)" label="cohort"/>
<link wikidata="Q191306" start="7486" end="7495" title="centuria" label="centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107163" start="7562" end="7575" title="cohortes urbanae" label="urban cohorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071047" start="7922" end="7927" title="comes" label="comes"/>
<link wikidata="Q593565" start="7959" end="7969" title="vexillatio" label="vexillatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329305" start="8023" end="8038" title="East Roman army" label="East Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q816528" start="8368" end="8397" title="Ben-Hur (novel)" label="Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q357102" start="8408" end="8419" title="Lew Wallace" label="Lew Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554584" start="8431" end="8439" title="The Robe" label="The Robe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318617" start="8449" end="8465" title="Lloyd C. Douglas" label="Lloyd C. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="8532" end="8537" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="8560" end="8569" title="epic film" label="epic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q180098" start="8630" end="8637" title="Ben-Hur (1959 film)" label="Ben-Hur"/>
<link wikidata="Q683299" start="8659" end="8671" title="Stephen Boyd" label="Stephen Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139023" start="8722" end="8730" title="The Robe (film)" label="The Robe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="8760" end="8774" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068109" start="8868" end="8880" title="lex Canuleia" label="lex Canuleia"/>
<link wikidata="Q762148" start="10094" end="10121" title="Gaius Licinius Stolo" label="Gaius Licinius Calvus Stolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q957585" start="10126" end="10150" title="Lucius Sextius" label="Lucius Sextius Lateranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q294862" start="10615" end="10637" title="Marcus Furius Camillus" label="Marcus Furius Camillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068100" start="10686" end="10704" title="lex Licinia Sextia" label="Licinian Rogations"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909664" start="11426" end="11438" title="Vita Germani" label="Vita Germani"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="11448" end="11459" title="hagiography" label="hagiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q442516" start="11463" end="11486" title="Germanus of Auxerre" label="St. Germanus of Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q363827" start="11488" end="11507" title="Constantius of Lyon" label="Constantius of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="12135" end="12153" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q202691" start="12186" end="12190" title="Doge (title)" label="Doge"/>
<link wikidata="Q521657" start="12191" end="12209" title="Domenico Monegario" label="Domenico Monegario"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="13027" end="13047" title="Napoleon I Bonaparte" label="Napoleon I Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347313" start="13055" end="13084" title="Constitution of the Year VIII" label="Constitution of the Year VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997799" start="13279" end="13295" title="Corps lgislatif" label="Corps lgislatif"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576746" start="14086" end="14120" title="Constitution of the Roman Republic" label="Constitution of the Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853571" start="14122" end="14144" title="List of Roman tribunes" label="List of Roman tribunes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30595" wikidata="Q351303" url="?curid=30595" title="Track">
<text>Track or Tracks may refer to:

==Routes or imprints==
* Ancient trackway, any track or trail whose origin is lost in antiquity
* Animal track, imprints left on surfaces that an animal walks across
* Desire path, a line worn by people taking the shortest/most convenient route across fields, parks or woods
* Forest track, a track (unpaved road) or trail through a forest
* Fossil trackway, a type of trace fossil, usually preserving a line of animal footprints
* Trackway, an ancient route of travel or track used by animals
* Trail
* Vineyard track, a land estate (defined by law) meant for the growing of vine grapes

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Films===
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (1976 film), an American film starring Dennis Hopper
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (2003 film), a 2003 animated short film
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (2013 film), an Australian film starring Mia Wasikowska
* &quot;The Track&quot; (film), a 1975 French thrillerdrama film

===Literature===
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (novel), written by Native American author Louise Erdrich
* &quot;Tracks&quot;, a 1980 book by Australian writer Robyn Davidson, source of the 2013 film in the section above
* &quot;The Tracks&quot;, a young adult novel series by J. Gabriel Gates and Charlene Keel

===Music===
* Track Records, a record label founded in 1966 in London, England
* Soundtrack, a recorded song

====Albums====
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (Oscar Peterson album), 1970
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (Liverpool Express album), 1976
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (Bruce Springsteen album), 1998
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (Collin Raye album), 2000

====Songs====
* &quot;Track #1&quot;, the original title of &quot;Stinkfist&quot;, at the time of its release to avoid removal from the band Tool
* &quot;Tracks&quot;, by Gary Numan on his album &quot;The Pleasure Principle&quot;
* &quot;Tracks&quot;, by Juliana Hatfield on her album &quot;Wild Animals&quot;
* &quot;Tracks&quot;, by Roam on their album &quot;Backbone&quot;

====Music production====
* Audio signal or Audio channel, recorded in a recording studio
* Music track, a recorded piece of music

===Television===
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (&quot;Law &amp; Order: UK&quot;), a 2013 episode on the television series &quot;Law and Order: UK&quot;
* &quot;Tracks&quot;, a 1999 episode of the television series &quot;Zoboomafoo&quot;
* &quot;T.R.A.C.K.S.&quot;, an episode of Marvel TV show &quot;Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.&quot; 

===Other arts, entertainment, and media===
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (magazine), an Australian surf magazine published since 1970
* &quot;Tracks&quot; (podcast), a British thriller-mystery fiction podcast released from 2016 to 2020
* &quot;Tracks  The Train Set Game&quot;, a 2017 video game developed by Whoop Games, commonly referred to as &quot;Tracks&quot;
* Tracks (Transformers), a &quot;Transformers&quot; character

==Electronics and computing==
* Track (optical disc), consecutive set of sectors on the disc containing a block of data
* Track (disk drive), a circular path on the surface of a disk or diskette on which information is recorded and read
* Tracks in magnetic stripe card
==Sport==
* All-weather running track, a rubberized surface for track and field competitions
* Cinder track, generally a refined dirt running track for track and field competitions
* First tracks, in winter sports, cutting through fresh snow or ice before anyone else does
* List of bobsleigh, luge, and skeleton tracks
* Long track speed skating
* Race track, racing
* Tartan track, a brand of all-weather running track that has become genericized
* The Track, a multi-use stadium in Saint Sampson, Guernsey
* Track and field athletics
* Track cycling
* Velodrome, a track for bicycles, track cycling competitions

==Transportation==
* Railway track, metal tracks on which trains ride
** Track gauge, the distance between rails
* Bus track, a track for certain buses, like the O-Bahn buses
* Axle track, the distance between centres of roadwheels on an axle of a motor vehicle
* Continuous track, a belt providing motive traction for a tracked vehicle such as a tank or a bulldozer
* Track (navigation), the path a vessel or aircraft plots over the surface of the Earth
** Ground track, the path on the surface of the Earth directly below an aircraft or satellite
** Ocean track, in flight planning, the path of an aircraft as determined by heading, slip, and wind effects

==Other uses==
* Conference track, a group of talks on a certain topic that are usually made in parallel with others
* Green track, a type of railway track in which the track bed and surrounding area are planted with grass turf or other vegetation as ground cover
* Tracks Inc (Tracks Dance Theatre), based in Darwin, Australia
*Recording of one song or piece of music

==See also==
* Sidetrack (disambiguation)
* Sidetracked (disambiguation)
* TRAC (disambiguation)
* Track and trace
* Tracker (disambiguation)
* Tracking (disambiguation)
* Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools (TRACCS)
* Trek (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q351303" start="0" end="5" title="Track" label="Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q351303" start="9" end="15" title="Track" label="Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q445741" start="56" end="72" title="Ancient trackway" label="Ancient trackway"/>
<link wikidata="Q135790" start="129" end="141" title="Animal track" label="Animal track"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143085" start="199" end="210" title="Desire path" label="Desire path"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444700" start="308" end="320" title="Forest track" label="Forest track"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114983" start="373" end="388" title="Fossil trackway" label="Fossil trackway"/>
<link wikidata="Q445741" start="463" end="471" title="Trackway" label="Trackway"/>
<link wikidata="Q628179" start="527" end="532" title="Trail" label="Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903030" start="535" end="549" title="Vineyard track" label="Vineyard track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831577" start="669" end="699" title="Tracks (1976 film)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (1976 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831578" start="743" end="773" title="Tracks (2003 film)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (2003 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831579" start="804" end="834" title="Tracks (2013 film)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (2013 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213250" start="881" end="909" title="The Track (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Track&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831586" start="965" end="991" title="Tracks (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353583" start="1097" end="1111" title="Robyn Davidson" label="Robyn Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105813" start="1214" end="1230" title="J. Gabriel Gates" label="J. Gabriel Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142601" start="1264" end="1277" title="Track Records" label="Track Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="1331" end="1341" title="Soundtrack" label="Soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831584" start="1377" end="1418" title="Tracks (Oscar Peterson album)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (Oscar Peterson album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831583" start="1427" end="1471" title="Tracks (Liverpool Express album)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (Liverpool Express album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299364" start="1480" end="1524" title="Tracks (Bruce Springsteen album)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (Bruce Springsteen album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831582" start="1533" end="1571" title="Tracks (Collin Raye album)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (Collin Raye album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531325" start="1645" end="1654" title="Stinkfist" label="Stinkfist"/>
<link wikidata="Q941491" start="1780" end="1802" title="The Pleasure Principle (Gary Numan album)" label="The Pleasure Principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065923" start="1870" end="1882" title="Wild Animals (Juliana Hatfield album)" label="Wild Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q22305639" start="1940" end="1948" title="Backbone (Roam album)" label="Backbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650799" start="1983" end="1995" title="Audio signal" label="Audio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="2047" end="2058" title="Music track" label="Music track"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2106" end="2158" title="Tracks (Law &amp;amp; Order: UK)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Law &amp;amp; Order: UK&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109770" start="2298" end="2308" title="Zoboomafoo" label="Zoboomafoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21191269" start="2323" end="2335" title="T.R.A.C.K.S." label="T.R.A.C.K.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q7831585" start="2454" end="2483" title="Tracks (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119398966" start="2536" end="2564" title="Tracks (podcast)" label="&amp;quot;Tracks&amp;quot; (podcast)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642420" start="2644" end="2671" title="Tracks  The Train Set Game" label="Tracks  The Train Set Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q602883" start="2768" end="2789" title="Tracks (Transformers)" label="Tracks (Transformers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831478" start="2861" end="2881" title="Track (optical disc)" label="Track (optical disc)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961558" start="2951" end="2969" title="Track (disk drive)" label="Track (disk drive)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907797" start="3078" end="3098" title="magnetic stripe card" label="magnetic stripe card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004435" start="3123" end="3136" title="running track" label="running track"/>
<link wikidata="Q722354" start="3194" end="3206" title="Cinder track" label="Cinder track"/>
<link wikidata="Q204686" start="3299" end="3311" title="winter sport" label="winter sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510127" start="3374" end="3418" title="List of bobsleigh, luge, and skeleton tracks" label="List of bobsleigh, luge, and skeleton tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165362" start="3421" end="3445" title="Long track speed skating" label="Long track speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777138" start="3448" end="3458" title="Race track" label="Race track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783547" start="3469" end="3481" title="Tartan track" label="Tartan track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769830" start="3550" end="3559" title="The Track" label="The Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="3610" end="3625" title="Track and field" label="Track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q221635" start="3638" end="3651" title="Track cycling" label="Track cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q830528" start="3654" end="3663" title="Velodrome" label="Velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="3736" end="3749" title="Railway track" label="Railway track"/>
<link wikidata="Q214519" start="3788" end="3799" title="Track gauge" label="Track gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q836547" start="3877" end="3883" title="O-Bahn" label="O-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q125770" start="3892" end="3902" title="Axle track" label="Axle track"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="3979" end="3995" title="Continuous track" label="Continuous track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962728" start="4084" end="4102" title="Track (navigation)" label="Track (navigation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q218124" start="4173" end="4185" title="Ground track" label="Ground track"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567059" start="4283" end="4298" title="flight planning" label="flight planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020153" start="4391" end="4407" title="Conference track" label="Conference track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381696" start="4493" end="4504" title="Green track" label="Green track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831589" start="4640" end="4650" title="Tracks Inc" label="Tracks Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366" start="4721" end="4725" title="song" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508491" start="4760" end="4786" title="Sidetrack (disambiguation)" label="Sidetrack (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508496" start="4789" end="4817" title="Sidetracked (disambiguation)" label="Sidetracked (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177528" start="4820" end="4841" title="TRAC (disambiguation)" label="TRAC (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q446087" start="4844" end="4859" title="Track and trace" label="Track and trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q298207" start="4862" end="4886" title="Tracker (disambiguation)" label="Tracker (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q237984" start="4889" end="4914" title="Tracking (disambiguation)" label="Tracking (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834704" start="4917" end="4976" title="Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools" label="Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q404453" start="4988" end="5009" title="Trek (disambiguation)" label="Trek (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30596" wikidata="Q226198" url="?curid=30596" title="Tocantins (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Tocantins]] is a state in Brazil.

Tocantins may also refer to:

== Places and jurisdictions ==
* Tocantins River, a river in Brazil
* Tocantins basin, a drainage basin in Brazil
* Tocantins River (Jamanxim River), a river in Par, Brazil
* Tocantins, Minas Gerais, a Brazilian municipality
* Territorial Prelature of So Jos de Alto Tocantins, a former Catholic pre-diocese in Brazil

== Sports and entertainment ==
* &quot;&quot;, a reality show set in Tocantins, Brazil
* Tocantins Esporte Clube, a Brazilian football (soccer) club
* Tocantins Esporte Clube (TO), a Brazilian football (soccer) club
* Tocantins Futebol Clube, a Brazilian football (soccer) club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226198" start="0" end="13" title="Tocantins (disambiguation)" label="[[Tocantins]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q226198" start="37" end="46" title="Tocantins (disambiguation)" label="Tocantins"/>
<link wikidata="Q156054" start="100" end="115" title="Tocantins River" label="Tocantins River"/>
<link wikidata="Q9642943" start="137" end="152" title="Tocantins basin" label="Tocantins basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811949" start="183" end="215" title="Tocantins River (Jamanxim River)" label="Tocantins River (Jamanxim River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22065025" start="243" end="266" title="Tocantins, Minas Gerais" label="Tocantins, Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405487" start="295" end="346" title="Territorial Prelature of So Jos de Alto Tocantins" label="Territorial Prelature of So Jos de Alto Tocantins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811948" start="478" end="501" title="Tocantins Esporte Clube" label="Tocantins Esporte Clube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811950" start="540" end="568" title="Tocantins Esporte Clube (TO)" label="Tocantins Esporte Clube (TO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4459454" start="607" end="630" title="Tocantins Futebol Clube" label="Tocantins Futebol Clube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30598" wikidata="Q870" url="?curid=30598" title="Train">
<text>A train (from Old French , from Latin , &quot;to pull, to draw&quot;) is a series of connected vehicles that run along a railway track and transport people or freight. Trains are typically pulled or pushed by locomotives (often known simply as &quot;engines&quot;), though some are self-propelled, such as multiple units or railcars. Passengers and cargo are carried in railroad cars, also known as wagons or carriages. Trains are designed to a certain gauge, or distance between rails. Most trains operate on steel tracks with steel wheels, the low friction of which makes them more efficient than other forms of transport. Many countries use rail transport.

Trains have their roots in wagonways, which used railway tracks and were powered by horses or pulled by cables. Following the invention of the steam locomotive in the United Kingdom in 1802, trains rapidly spread around the world, allowing freight and passengers to move over land faster and cheaper than ever possible before. Rapid transit and trams were first built in the late 1800s to transport large numbers of people in and around cities. Beginning in the 1920s, and accelerating following World War II, diesel and electric locomotives replaced steam as the means of motive power. Following the development of cars, trucks, and extensive networks of highways which offered greater mobility, as well as faster airplanes, trains declined in importance and market share, and many rail lines were abandoned. The spread of buses led to the closure of many rapid transit and tram systems during this time as well.

Since the 1970s, governments, environmentalists, and train advocates have promoted increased use of trains due to their greater fuel efficiency and lower greenhouse gas emissions compared to other modes of land transport. High-speed rail, first built in the 1960s, has proven competitive with cars and planes over short to medium distances. Commuter rail has grown in importance since the 1970s as an alternative to congested highways and a means to promote development, as has light rail in the 21st century. Freight trains remain important for the transport of bulk commodities such as coal and grain, as well as being a means of reducing road traffic congestion by freight trucks.

While conventional trains operate on relatively flat tracks with two rails, a number of specialized trains exist which are significantly different in their mode of operation. Monorails operate on a single rail, while funiculars and rack railways are uniquely designed to traverse steep slopes. Experimental trains such as high speed maglevs, which use magnetic levitation to float above a guideway, are under development in the 2020s and offer higher speeds than even the fastest conventional trains. Trains which use alternative fuels such as natural gas and hydrogen are another 21st-century development.

== Types and terminology ==

Trains can be sorted into types based on whether they haul passengers or freight (though mixed trains which haul both exist), by their weight (heavy rail for regular trains, light rail for lighter transit systems), by their speed, by their distance (short haul, long distance, transcontinental), and by what form of track they use. Conventional trains operate on two rails, but several other types of track systems are also in use around the world, such as monorail.

=== Terminology ===
The railway terminology that is used to describe a train varies between countries. The International Union of Railways seeks to provide standardised terminology across languages. The Association of American Railroads provides terminology for North America.

The British Rail Safety and Standards Board defines a train as a &quot;light locomotive, self-propelled rail vehicle or road-rail vehicle in rail mode.&quot; A collection of passenger or freight carriages connected together (not necessarily with a locomotive) is referred to as a rake. A collection of rail vehicles may also be called a consist. A set of vehicles that are coupled together (such as the &quot;Pioneer Zephyr&quot;) is called a trainset. The term &quot;rolling stock&quot; is used to describe any kind of railway vehicle.

== History ==
=== Early history ===

Trains are an evolution of wheeled wagons running on stone wagonways, the earliest of which were built by Babylon circa 2,200 BCE. Starting in the 1500s, wagonways were introduced to haul material from mines; from the 1790s, stronger iron rails were introduced. Following early developments in the second half of the 1700s, in 1804 a steam locomotive built by British inventor Richard Trevithick powered the first ever steam train. Outside of coal mines, where fuel was readily available, steam locomotives remained untried until the opening of the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1825. British engineer George Stephenson ran a steam locomotive named Locomotion No. 1 on this long line, hauling over 400 passengers at up to . The success of this locomotive, and Stephenson&#x27;s Rocket in 1829, convinced many of the value in steam locomotives, and within a decade the stock market bubble known as &quot;Railway Mania&quot; started across the United Kingdom.

News of the success of steam locomotives quickly reached the United States, where the first steam railroad opened in 1829. American railroad pioneers soon started manufacturing their own locomotives, designed to handle the sharper curves and rougher track typical of the country&#x27;s railroads. The other nations of Europe also took note of British railroad developments, and most countries on the continent constructed and opened their first railroads in the 1830s and 1840s, following the first run of a steam train in France in late 1829. In the 1850s, trains continued to expand across Europe, with many influenced by or purchases of American locomotive designs. Other European countries pursued their own distinct designs. Around the world, steam locomotives grew larger and more powerful throughout the rest of the century as technology advanced.

Trains first entered service in South America, Africa, and Asia through construction by imperial powers, which starting in the 1840s built railroads to solidify control of their colonies and transport cargo for export. In Japan, which was never colonized, railroads first arrived in the early 1870s. By 1900, railroads were operating on every continent besides uninhabited Antarctica.

=== New technologies ===

Even as steam locomotive technology continued to improve, inventors in Germany started work on alternative methods for powering trains. Werner von Siemens built the first train powered by electricity in 1879, and went on to pioneer electric trams. Another German inventor, Rudolf Diesel, constructed the first diesel engine in the 1890s, though the potential of his invention to power trains was not realized until decades later. Between 1897 and 1903, tests of experimental electric locomotives on the Royal Prussian Military Railway in Germany demonstrated they were viable, setting speed records in excess of .Early gas powered &quot;doodlebug&quot; self-propelled railcars entered service on railroads in the first decade of the 1900s. Experimentation with diesel and gas power continued, culminating in the German &quot;Flying Hamburger&quot; in 1933, and the influential American EMD FT in 1939. These successful diesel locomotives showed that diesel power was superior to steam, due to lower costs, ease of maintenance, and better reliability. Meanwhile, Italy developed an extensive network of electric trains during the first decades of the 20th century, driven by that country&#x27;s lack of significant coal reserves.

=== Dieselization and increased competition ===
World War II brought great destruction to existing railroads across Europe, Asia, and Africa. Following the war&#x27;s conclusion in 1945, nations which had suffered extensive damage to their railroad networks took the opportunity provided by Marshall Plan funds (or economic assistance from the USSR and Comecon, for nations behind the Iron Curtain) and advances in technology to convert their trains to diesel or electric power. France, Russia, Switzerland, and Japan were leaders in adopting widespread electrified railroads, while other nations focused primarily on dieselization. By 1980, the majority of the world&#x27;s steam locomotives had been retired, though they continued to be used in parts of Africa and Asia, along with a few holdouts in Europe and South America. China was the last country to fully dieselize, due to its abundant coal reserves; steam locomotives were used to haul mainline trains as late as 2005 in Inner Mongolia.

Trains began to face strong competition from automobiles and freight trucks in the 1930s, which greatly intensified following World War II. After the war, air transport also became a significant competitor for passenger trains. Large amounts of traffic shifted to these new forms of transportation, resulting in a widespread decline in train service, both freight and passenger. A new development in the 1960s was high-speed rail, which runs on dedicated rights of way and travels at speeds of or greater. The first high-speed rail service was the Japanese Shinkansen, which entered service in 1964. In the following decades, high speed rail networks were developed across much of Europe and Eastern Asia, providing fast and reliable service competitive with automobiles and airplanes. The first high-speed train in the Americas was Amtrak&#x27;s Acela in the United States, which entered service in 2000.
=== To the present day ===
Towards the end of the 20th century, increased awareness of the benefits of trains for transport led to a revival in their use and importance. Freight trains are significantly more efficient than trucks, while also emitting far fewer greenhouse gas emissions per ton-mile; passenger trains are also far more energy efficient than other modes of transport. According to the International Energy Agency, &quot;On average, rail requires 12 times less energy and emits 711 times less GHGs per passenger-km travelled than private vehicles and airplanes, making it the most efficient mode of motorised passenger transport. Aside from shipping, freight rail is the most energy-efficient and least carbon-intensive way to transport goods.&quot; As such, rail transport is considered an important part of achieving sustainable energy. Intermodal freight trains, carrying double-stack shipping containers, have since the 1970s generated significant business for railroads and gained market share from trucks. Increased use of commuter rail has also been promoted as a means of fighting traffic congestion on highways in urban areas.

== Components ==

=== Bogies ===
Bogies, also known in North America as trucks, support the wheels and axles of trains. Trucks range from just one axle to as many as four or more. Two-axle trucks are in the widest use worldwide, as they are better able to handle curves and support heavy loads than single axle trucks.

=== Couplers ===

Train vehicles are linked to one another by various systems of coupling. In much of Europe, India, and South America, trains primarily use buffers and chain couplers. In the rest of the world, Janney couplers are the most popular, with a few local variations persisting (such as Wilson couplers in the former Soviet Union). On multiple units all over the world, Scharfenberg couplers are common.

=== Brakes ===

Because trains are heavy, powerful brakes are needed to slow or stop trains, and because steel wheels on steel rails have relatively low friction, brakes must be distributed among as many wheels as possible. Early trains could only be stopped by manually applied hand brakes, requiring workers to ride on top of the cars and apply the brakes when the train went downhill. Hand brakes are still used to park cars and locomotives, but the predominant braking system for trains globally is air brakes, invented in 1869 by George Westinghouse. Air brakes are applied at once to the entire train using air hoses.

=== Warning devices ===

For safety and communication, trains are equipped with bells, horns, . Steam locomotives typically use steam whistles rather than horns. Other types of lights may be installed on locomotives and cars, such as classification lights, Mars Lights, and ditch lights.

=== Cabs ===
Locomotives are in most cases equipped with cabs, also known as driving compartments, where a train driver controls the train&#x27;s operation. They may also be installed on unpowered train cars known as cab or control cars, to allow for a train to operate with the locomotive at the rear.

== Operations ==
=== Scheduling and dispatching ===

To prevent collisions or other accidents, trains are often scheduled, and almost always are under the control of train dispatchers. Historically, trains operated based on timetables; most trains (including nearly all passenger trains), continue to operate based on fixed schedules, though freight trains may instead run on an as-needed basis, or when enough freight cars are available to justify running a train.

=== Maintenance ===

Simple repairs may be done while a train is parked on the tracks, but more extensive repairs will be done at a motive power depot. Similar facilities exist for repairing damaged or defective train cars. Maintenance of way trains are used to build and repair railroad tracks and other equipment.

=== Crew ===
Train drivers, also known as engineers, are responsible for operating trains. Conductors are in charge of trains and their cargo, and help passengers on passenger trains. Brakeman, also known as trainmen, were historically responsible for manually applying brakes, though the term is used today to refer to crew members who perform tasks such as operating switches, coupling and uncoupling train cars, and setting handbrakes on equipment. Steam locomotives require a fireman who is responsible for fueling and regulating the locomotive&#x27;s fire and boiler. On passenger trains, other crew members assist passengers, such as chefs to prepare food, and service attendants to provide food and drinks to passengers. Other passenger train specific duties include passenger car attendants, who assist passengers with boarding and alighting from trains, answer questions, and keep train cars clean, and sleeping car attendants, who perform similar duties in sleeping cars. Some trains can operate with automatic train operation without a driver directly present.

=== Gauge ===

Around the world, various track gauges are in use for trains. In most cases, trains can only operate on tracks that are of the same gauge; where different gauge trains meet, it is known as a break of gauge. Standard gauge, defined as between the rails, is the most common gauge worldwide, though both broad-gauge and narrow-gauge trains are also in use. Trains also need to fit within the loading gauge profile to avoid fouling bridges and lineside infrastructure with this being a potential limiting factor on loads such as intermodal container types that may be carried.

== Safety ==
Train accidents sometimes occur, including derailments (when a train leaves the tracks) and train wrecks (collisions between trains). Accidents were more common in the early days of trains, when railway signal systems, centralized traffic control, and failsafe systems to prevent collisions were primitive or did not yet exist. To prevent accidents, systems such as automatic train stop are used; these are failsafe systems that apply the brakes on a train if it passes a red signal and enters an occupied block, or if any of the train&#x27;s equipment malfunctions. More advanced safety systems, such as positive train control, can also automatically regulate train speed, preventing derailments from entering curves or switches too fast.

Modern trains have a very good safety record overall, comparable with air travel. In the United States between 2000 and 2009, train travel averaged 0.43 deaths per billion passenger miles traveled. While this was higher than that of air travel at 0.07 deaths per billion passenger miles, it was also far below the 7.28 deaths per billion passenger miles of car travel. In the 21st century, several derailments of oil trains caused fatalities, most notably the Canadian Lac-Mgantic rail disaster in 2013 which killed 47 people and leveled much of the town of Lac-Mgantic.

The vast majority of train-related fatalities, over 90 percent, are due to trespassing on railroad tracks, or collisions with road vehicles at level crossings. Organizations such as Operation Lifesaver have been formed to improve safety awareness at railroad crossings, and governments have also launched ad campaigns. Trains cannot stop quickly when at speed; even an emergency brake application may still require more than a mile of stopping distance. As such, emphasis is on educating motorists to yield to trains at crossings and avoid trespassing.

== Motive power ==
=== Before steam ===
The first trains were rope-hauled, gravity powered or pulled by horses.

=== Steam ===
Steam locomotives work by burning coal, wood or oil fuel in a boiler to heat water into steam, which powers the locomotive&#x27;s pistons which are in turn connected to the wheels. In the mid 20th century, most steam locomotives were replaced by diesel or electric locomotives, which were cheaper, cleaner, and more reliable. Steam locomotives are still used in heritage railways operated in many countries for the leisure and enthusiast market.

=== Diesel ===
Diesel locomotives are powered with a diesel engine, which generates electricity to drive traction motors. This is known as a dieselelectric transmission, and is used on most larger diesels. Diesel power replaced steam for a variety of reasons: diesel locomotives were less complex, far more reliable, cheaper, cleaner, easier to maintain, and more fuel efficient.

=== Electric ===
Electric trains receive their current via overhead lines or through a third rail electric system, which is then used to power traction motors that drive the wheels. Electric traction offers a lower cost per mile of train operation but at a higher initial cost, which can only be justified on high traffic lines. Even though the cost per mile of construction is much higher, electric traction is cheaper to operate thanks to lower maintenance and purchase costs for locomotives and equipment. Compared to diesel locomotives, electric locomotives produce no direct emissions and accelerate much faster, making them better suited to passenger service, especially underground.

=== Other types ===
Various other types of train propulsion have been tried, some more successful than others.

In the mid 1900s, gas turbine locomotives were developed and successfully used, though most were retired due to high fuel costs and poor reliability.

In the 21st century, alternative fuels for locomotives are under development, due to increasing costs for diesel and a desire to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from trains. Examples include hydrail (trains powered by hydrogen fuel cells) and the use of compressed or liquefied natural gas.

== Train cars ==
Train cars, also known as wagons, are unpowered rail vehicles which are typically pulled by locomotives. Many different types exist, specialized to handle various types of cargo. Some common types include boxcars (also known as covered goods wagons) that carry a wide variety of cargo, flatcars (also known as flat wagons) which have flat tops to hold cargo, hopper cars which carry bulk commodities, and tank cars which carry liquids and gases. Examples of more specialized types of train cars include bottle cars which hold molten steel, Schnabel cars which handle very heavy loads, and refrigerator cars which carry perishable goods.

Early train cars were small and light, much like early locomotives, but over time they have become larger as locomotives have become more powerful.

== Passenger trains ==
A passenger train is used to transport people along a railroad line. These trains may consist of unpowered passenger railroad cars (also known as coaches or carriages) hauled by one or more locomotives, or may be self-propelled; self propelled passenger trains are known as multiple units or railcars. Passenger trains travel between stations or depots, where passengers may board and disembark. In most cases, passenger trains operate on a fixed schedule and have priority over freight trains. In Europe, passenger trains are assinged to different train categories. 

Passenger trains can be divided into short and long distance services.

=== Long distance trains ===

Long distance passenger trains travel over hundreds or even thousands of miles between cities. The longest passenger train service in the world is Russia&#x27;s Trans-Siberian Railway between Moscow and Vladivostok, a distance of . In general, long distance trains may take days to complete their journeys, and stop at dozens of stations along their routes. For many rural communities, they are the only form of public transportation available.

=== Short distance trains ===
Short distance or regional passenger trains have travel times measured in hours or even minutes, as opposed to days. They run more frequently than long distance trains, and are often used by commuters. Short distance passenger trains specifically designed for commuters are known as commuter rail.

=== High speed trains ===

High speed trains are designed to be much faster than conventional trains, and typically run on their own separate tracks than other, slower trains. The first high speed train was the Japanese Shinkansen, which opened in 1964. In the 21st century, services such as the French TGV and German Intercity Express are competitive with airplanes in travel time over short to medium distances.

A subset of high speed trains are higher speed trains, which bridge the gap between conventional and high speed trains, and travel at speeds between the two. Examples include the Northeast Regional in the United States, the Gatimaan Express in India, and the KTM ETS in Malaysia.

=== Luxury trains ===

Luxury trains provide permium rail services on their journey, either within a given country or across country borders. Some use refurbished classic rail cars.

== Rapid transit trains ==
A number of types of trains are used to provide rapid transit to urban areas. These are distinct from traditional passenger trains in that they operate more frequently, typically do not share tracks with freight trains, and cover relatively short distances. Many different kinds of systems are in use globally.

Rapid transit trains that operate in tunnels below ground are known as subways, undergrounds, or metros. Elevated railways operate on viaducts or bridges above the ground, often on top of city streets. &quot;Metro&quot; may also refer to rapid transit that operates at ground level. In many systems, two or even all three of these types may exist on different portions of a network.
=== Trams ===

Trams, also known in North America as streetcars, typically operate on or parallel to streets in cities, with frequent stops and a high frequency of service.

=== Light rail ===
Light rail is a catchall term for a variety of systems, which may include characteristics of trams, heavier passenger trains, and rapid transit systems.

== Specialized trains ==
There are a number of specialized trains which differ from the traditional definition of a train as a set of vehicles which travels on two rails.

=== Monorail ===

Monorails were developed to meet medium-demand traffic in urban transit, and consist of a train running on a single rail, typically elevated. 

=== Maglev ===

Maglev technology uses magnets to levitate the train above the track, reducing friction and allowing higher speeds. The first commercial maglev train was an airport shuttle introduced in 1984 at Birmingham Airport in England.

The Shanghai maglev train, opened in 2002, is the fastest commercial train service of any kind, operating at speeds of up to . Japan&#x27;s L0 Series maglev holds the record for the world&#x27;s fastest train ever, with a top speed of . Maglev has not yet been used for inter-city mass transit routes, with only a few examples in use worldwide .

=== Mine trains ===
Mine trains are operated in large mines and carry both workers and goods. They are usually powered by electricity, to prevent emissions which would pose a health risk to workers underground.
=== Militarized trains ===

While they have long been important in transporting troops and military equipment, trains have occasionally been used for direct combat. Armored trains have been used in a number of conflicts, as have railroad based artillery systems. Railcar-launched ICBM systems have also been used by nuclear weapon states.

=== Rack railway ===

For climbing steep slopes, specialized rack railroads are used. In order to avoid slipping, a rack and pinion system is used, with a toothed rail placed between the two regular rails, which meshes with a drive gear under the locomotive.

=== Funicular ===

Funiculars are also used to climb steep slopes, but instead of a rack use a rope, which is attached to two cars and a pulley. The two funicular cars travel up and down the slope on parallel sets of rails when the pulley is rotated. This design makes funiculars an efficient means of moving people and cargo up and down slopes. The earliest funicular railroad, the Reisszug, opened around 1500.

=== Rubber-tired train ===

Rubber tire trains, or rubber-tired metro systems, employ rubber tires for traction and guidance, offering advantages like better acceleration and reduced noise. However, they come with disadvantages, including higher costs for installation and maintenance, faster tire wear, and complex tire inflation mechanisms that require regular upkeep. Nonetheless, these systems are utilized in many urban rapid transit networks worldwide, enhancing passenger comfort and urban transportation efficiency.

== Freight trains ==

Freight trains are dedicated to the transport of cargo (also known as goods), rather than people, and are made up of freight cars or wagons. Longer freight trains typically operate between classification yards, while local trains provide freight service between yards and individual loading and unloading points along railroad lines. Major origin or destination points for freight may instead be served by unit trains, which exclusively carry one type of cargo and move directly from the origin to the destination and back without any intermediate stops.

Under the right circumstances, transporting freight by train is less expensive than other modes of transport, and also more energy efficient than transporting freight by road. In the United States, railroads on average moved a ton of freight per gallon of fuel, as of 2008, an efficiency four times greater than that of trucks. The Environmental and Energy Study Institute estimates that train transportation of freight is between 1.9 and 5.5 times more efficient than by truck, and also generates significantly less pollution. Rail freight is most economic when goods are being carried in bulk and over large distances, but it is less suited to short distances and small loads. With the advent of containerization, freight rail has become part of an intermodal freight network linked with trucking and container ships.

The main disadvantage of rail freight is its lack of flexibility and for this reason, rail has lost much of the freight business to road competition. Many governments are trying to encourage more freight back on to trains because of the community benefits that it would bring.

== Cultural impact ==

From the dawn of railroading, trains have had a significant cultural impact worldwide. Fast train travel made possible in days or hours journeys which previously took months. Transport of both freight and passengers became far cheaper, allowing for networked economies over large areas. Towns and cities along railroad lines grew in importance, while those bypassed declined or even became ghost towns. Major cities such as Chicago became prominent because they were places where multiple train lines met. In the United States, the completion of the first transcontinental railroad played a major role in the settling of the western part of the nation by non-indigenous migrants and its incorporation into the rest of the country. The Russian Trans-Siberian Railway had a similar impact by connecting the vast country from east to west, and making travel across frozen Siberia possible.

Trains have long had a major influence on music, art, and literature. Many films heavily involve or are set on trains. Toy train sets are commonly used by children, traditionally boys. Railfans are found around the world, along with hobbyists who create model train layouts. Train enthusiasts generally have a positive relationship with the railroad industry, though sometimes cause issues by trespassing.

== See also ==

* List of railway companies
* Lists of named passenger trains
* Lists of rail accidents
* Overview of train systems by country
* Train ferries

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 

== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q870" start="2" end="7" title="Train" label="train"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="14" end="24" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="32" end="37" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="95" end="102" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="121" end="134" title="railway track" label="railway track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363599" start="139" end="155" title="Passenger train" label="transport people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234623" start="159" end="166" title="Rail freight transport" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="209" end="219" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959904" start="306" end="319" title="multiple unit" label="multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q752392" start="324" end="332" title="Railcar" label="railcars"/>
<link wikidata="Q208502" start="370" end="382" title="railroad car" label="railroad car"/>
<link wikidata="Q214519" start="453" end="458" title="Track gauge" label="gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="510" end="515" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423511" start="630" end="658" title="Rail transport by country" label="countries use rail transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959671" start="688" end="696" title="wagonway" label="wagonway"/>
<link wikidata="Q832003" start="734" end="751" title="Horsecar" label="powered by horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089865" start="755" end="771" title="Cable railway" label="pulled by cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="804" end="820" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="988" end="1001" title="Rapid transit" label="Rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="1006" end="1010" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1157" end="1169" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q34336" start="1171" end="1177" title="Diesel locomotive" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q625151" start="1182" end="1201" title="electric locomotive" label="electric locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="1277" end="1280" title="car" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="1283" end="1288" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="1317" end="1324" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="1376" end="1384" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="1485" end="1488" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="1606" end="1623" title="Environmentalism" label="environmentalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042317" start="1704" end="1719" title="fuel efficiency" label="fuel efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="1730" end="1754" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="1798" end="1813" title="High-speed rail" label="High-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="1917" end="1930" title="Commuter rail" label="Commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q374221" start="2034" end="2045" title="Transit-oriented development" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="2054" end="2064" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q187934" start="2436" end="2444" title="Monorail" label="Monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q142031" start="2478" end="2487" title="funicular" label="funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q378445" start="2493" end="2505" title="rack railway" label="rack railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q160047" start="2594" end="2600" title="maglev" label="maglev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061251" start="2613" end="2632" title="magnetic levitation" label="magnetic levitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077952" start="2779" end="2795" title="alternative fuel" label="alternative fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q162927" start="2805" end="2816" title="Natural gas vehicle" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261849" start="2821" end="2829" title="Hydrail" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q372314" start="2987" end="2998" title="mixed train" label="mixed train"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142599" start="3041" end="3051" title="heavy rail" label="heavy rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="3072" end="3082" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673753" start="3160" end="3173" title="Long-distance train" label="long distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064041" start="3175" end="3191" title="Transcontinental railroad" label="transcontinental"/>
<link wikidata="Q187934" start="3355" end="3363" title="monorail" label="monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341962" start="3390" end="3409" title="railway terminology" label="railway terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q388314" start="3473" end="3504" title="International Union of Railways" label="International Union of Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q616953" start="3569" end="3602" title="Association of American Railroads" label="Association of American Railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283908" start="3656" end="3687" title="Rail Safety and Standards Board" label="Rail Safety and Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q243802" start="3764" end="3781" title="Roadrail vehicle" label="road-rail vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571715" start="3924" end="3928" title="rake (train)" label="rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670890" start="4053" end="4067" title="Pioneer Zephyr" label="Pioneer Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414135" start="4112" end="4125" title="rolling stock" label="rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959671" start="4278" end="4286" title="wagonway" label="wagonway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="4325" end="4332" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217157" start="4596" end="4614" title="Richard Trevithick" label="Richard Trevithick"/>
<link wikidata="Q375044" start="4768" end="4799" title="Stockton and Darlington Railway" label="Stockton and Darlington Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q133614" start="4826" end="4843" title="George Stephenson" label="George Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q738131" start="4873" end="4889" title="Locomotion No. 1" label="Locomotion No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q777026" start="4984" end="5008" title="Stephenson&amp;#x27;s Rocket" label="Stephenson&amp;#x27;s Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405082" start="5092" end="5111" title="stock market bubble" label="stock market bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072191" start="5127" end="5140" title="Railway Mania" label="Railway Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080165" start="5244" end="5257" title="History of rail transportation in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5501" end="5507" title="History of rail transport#Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516728" start="5706" end="5712" title="History of rail transport in France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6071" end="6084" title="History of rail transport#Latin America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6086" end="6092" title="History of rail transport#Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6098" end="6102" title="History of rail transport#Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="6127" end="6142" title="Imperialism" label="imperial powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868525" start="6261" end="6266" title="History of rail transport in Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="6522" end="6529" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q58577" start="6587" end="6605" title="Werner von Siemens" label="Werner von Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="6692" end="6696" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q12674" start="6724" end="6737" title="Rudolf Diesel" label="Rudolf Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="6761" end="6774" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796099" start="6954" end="6985" title="Royal Prussian Military Railway" label="Royal Prussian Military Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296992" start="7088" end="7097" title="Doodlebug (railcar)" label="doodlebug"/>
<link wikidata="Q638825" start="7276" end="7292" title="DRG Class SVT 877" label="Flying Hamburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q940352" start="7337" end="7343" title="EMD FT" label="EMD FT"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7729" end="7741" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="7972" end="7985" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8025" end="8029" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="8034" end="8041" title="Comecon" label="Comecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="8066" end="8078" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13631" start="8160" end="8166" title="Rail transport in France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q837555" start="8168" end="8174" title="Rail transport in Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q629025" start="8176" end="8187" title="Rail transport in Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099973" start="8193" end="8198" title="Rail transport in Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="8235" end="8256" title="railway electrification" label="electrified railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275033" start="8299" end="8312" title="Dieselisation" label="dieselization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868481" start="8509" end="8514" title="History of rail transport in China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="8662" end="8676" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="9093" end="9108" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="9236" end="9246" title="Shinkansen" label="Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q251771" start="9360" end="9366" title="high-speed rail in Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="9512" end="9518" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q481759" start="9526" end="9531" title="Acela" label="Acela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754731" start="9539" end="9552" title="high-speed rail in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="9985" end="10012" title="International Energy Agency" label="International Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="10093" end="10097" title="Greenhouse gas" label="GHGs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962383" start="10419" end="10437" title="sustainable energy" label="sustainable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675313" start="10439" end="10449" title="Intermodal freight transport" label="Intermodal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299616" start="10475" end="10487" title="Double-stack rail transport" label="double-stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180158" start="10488" end="10506" title="shipping container" label="shipping container"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="10689" end="10707" title="traffic congestion" label="traffic congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q337205" start="11214" end="11239" title="buffers and chain coupler" label="buffers and chain coupler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383761" start="11268" end="11282" title="Janney coupler" label="Janney coupler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11354" end="11368" title="Wilson coupler" label="Wilson coupler"/>
<link wikidata="Q431525" start="11437" end="11457" title="Scharfenberg coupler" label="Scharfenberg coupler"/>
<link wikidata="Q262367" start="12007" end="12026" title="George Westinghouse" label="George Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="12177" end="12181" title="bell" label="bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784578" start="12184" end="12189" title="Train horn" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765082" start="12225" end="12238" title="steam whistle" label="steam whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536775" start="12331" end="12352" title="classification lights" label="classification lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773148" start="12354" end="12364" title="Mars Light" label="Mars Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536775" start="12371" end="12383" title="ditch lights" label="ditch lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775569" start="12493" end="12505" title="train driver" label="train driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q910157" start="12603" end="12622" title="Control car" label="cab or control cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392297" start="12856" end="12872" title="train dispatcher" label="train dispatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q221725" start="12914" end="12924" title="Public transport timetable" label="timetables"/>
<link wikidata="Q10283556" start="13289" end="13307" title="motive power depot" label="motive power depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12111866" start="13381" end="13399" title="Maintenance of way" label="Maintenance of way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775569" start="13487" end="13499" title="Train driver" label="Train driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q228422" start="13565" end="13575" title="Conductor (rail)" label="Conductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q637934" start="13658" end="13666" title="Brakeman" label="Brakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147709" start="13954" end="13961" title="Fireman (steam engine)" label="fireman"/>
<link wikidata="Q830565" start="14441" end="14453" title="sleeping car" label="sleeping car"/>
<link wikidata="Q787208" start="14485" end="14510" title="automatic train operation" label="automatic train operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214519" start="14588" end="14599" title="track gauge" label="track gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959245" start="14753" end="14767" title="break of gauge" label="break of gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="14769" end="14783" title="Standard-gauge railway" label="Standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q906942" start="14863" end="14874" title="Broad-gauge railway" label="broad-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="14879" end="14891" title="Narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9392675" start="14951" end="14964" title="loading gauge" label="loading gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q187956" start="15087" end="15107" title="intermodal container" label="intermodal container"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331380" start="15192" end="15202" title="derailment" label="derailment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078765" start="15241" end="15252" title="train wreck" label="train wreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q862562" start="15344" end="15358" title="railway signal" label="railway signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150451" start="15368" end="15395" title="centralized traffic control" label="centralized traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q231617" start="15515" end="15535" title="automatic train stop" label="automatic train stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316667" start="15655" end="15660" title="Block signal" label="block"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105716" start="15754" end="15776" title="positive train control" label="positive train control"/>
<link wikidata="Q13627958" start="16359" end="16385" title="Lac-Mgantic rail disaster" label="Lac-Mgantic rail disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q142020" start="16449" end="16461" title="Lac-Mgantic, Quebec" label="Lac-Mgantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171448" start="16607" end="16621" title="level crossing" label="level crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097233" start="16646" end="16665" title="Operation Lifesaver" label="Operation Lifesaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q420962" start="17507" end="17523" title="heritage railway" label="heritage railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163778" start="17733" end="17761" title="dieselelectric transmission" label="dieselelectric transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q110701" start="18033" end="18047" title="overhead lines" label="overhead lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q748825" start="18061" end="18087" title="Third rail" label="third rail electric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290873" start="18795" end="18817" title="gas turbine locomotive" label="gas turbine locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261849" start="19119" end="19126" title="hydrail" label="hydrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="19196" end="19217" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102978" start="19442" end="19448" title="boxcar" label="boxcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q260105" start="19465" end="19484" title="covered goods wagon" label="covered goods wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426316" start="19523" end="19530" title="flatcar" label="flatcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085766" start="19547" end="19557" title="flat wagon" label="flat wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387165" start="19596" end="19606" title="hopper car" label="hopper car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146040" start="19642" end="19650" title="tank car" label="tank car"/>
<link wikidata="Q12172082" start="19740" end="19751" title="Ladle transfer car" label="bottle cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592937" start="19777" end="19789" title="Schnabel car" label="Schnabel car"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016145" start="19826" end="19842" title="refrigerator car" label="refrigerator car"/>
<link wikidata="Q753779" start="20154" end="20176" title="passenger railroad car" label="passenger railroad car"/>
<link wikidata="Q935330" start="20215" end="20221" title="push-pull train" label="hauled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959904" start="20321" end="20334" title="multiple unit" label="multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q752392" start="20339" end="20346" title="railcar" label="railcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="20381" end="20399" title="train station" label="stations or depots"/>
<link wikidata="Q221725" start="20494" end="20502" title="Public transport timetable" label="schedule"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="20526" end="20539" title="freight train" label="freight train"/>
<link wikidata="Q837372" start="20545" end="20551" title="rail transport in Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q352226" start="20596" end="20612" title="train categories in Europe" label="train categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="20879" end="20901" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="20910" end="20916" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="20921" end="20932" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626453" start="21212" end="21220" title="Regional rail" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="21477" end="21490" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="21713" end="21723" title="Shinkansen" label="Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q129337" start="21796" end="21799" title="TGV" label="TGV"/>
<link wikidata="Q129172" start="21811" end="21828" title="Intercity Express" label="Intercity Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422352" start="21942" end="21960" title="higher speed train" label="higher speed train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218597" start="22087" end="22105" title="Northeast Regional" label="Northeast Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891551" start="22132" end="22148" title="Gatimaan Express" label="Gatimaan Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357521" start="22167" end="22174" title="KTM ETS" label="KTM ETS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="22447" end="22460" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601555" start="22816" end="22832" title="Elevated railway" label="Elevated railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032774" start="23948" end="23963" title="airport shuttle" label="airport shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8719" start="23986" end="24004" title="Birmingham Airport" label="Birmingham Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q769591" start="24022" end="24043" title="Shanghai maglev train" label="Shanghai maglev train"/>
<link wikidata="Q197658" start="24158" end="24167" title="L0 Series" label="L0 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="24299" end="24311" title="Public transport" label="mass transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q109466900" start="24839" end="24860" title="Railcar-launched ICBM" label="Railcar-launched ICBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q130157093" start="25032" end="25047" title="rack and pinion" label="rack and pinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303616" start="25559" end="25567" title="Reisszug" label="Reisszug"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166501" start="26254" end="26276" title="Freight car" label="freight cars or wagons"/>
<link wikidata="Q519608" start="26326" end="26345" title="classification yard" label="classification yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q373653" start="26543" end="26553" title="unit train" label="unit train"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381188" start="27025" end="27065" title="Environmental and Energy Study Institute" label="Environmental and Energy Study Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q428072" start="27391" end="27407" title="containerization" label="containerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675313" start="27444" end="27470" title="Intermodal freight transport" label="intermodal freight network"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210" start="27496" end="27510" title="container ship" label="container ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q516739" start="27646" end="27662" title="road transport" label="road competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="28205" end="28216" title="ghost towns" label="ghost towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="28239" end="28246" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753108" start="28365" end="28396" title="first transcontinental railroad" label="first transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="28436" end="28466" title="Western United States" label="the western part of the nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="28558" end="28580" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="28684" end="28691" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213702" start="28742" end="28750" title="List of train songs" label="on music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832996" start="28752" end="28755" title="Trains in art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q580776" start="28761" end="28771" title="Rail transport in fiction" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620088" start="28807" end="28820" title="List of films set on trains" label="set on trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639512" start="28822" end="28836" title="Toy train" label="Toy train sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323006" start="28888" end="28895" title="Railfan" label="Railfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q623272" start="28936" end="28976" title="Rail transport modelling" label="hobbyists who create model train layouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143750" start="29128" end="29153" title="List of railway companies" label="List of railway companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250577" start="29156" end="29187" title="Lists of named passenger trains" label="Lists of named passenger trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434495" start="29190" end="29213" title="Lists of rail accidents" label="Lists of rail accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423511" start="29216" end="29252" title="Rail transport by country" label="Overview of train systems by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262" start="29255" end="29268" title="Train ferries" label="Train ferries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30599" wikidata="Q2391450" url="?curid=30599" title="Tambo">
<text>Tambo may refer to:
==People==
* Adelaide Tambo (19292007), South African anti-apartheid activist
* Dali Tambo (born 1959), South African anti-apartheid activist, TV presenter and also son of Oliver Tambo and Adelaide Tambo
* Oliver Tambo (19171993), South African anti-apartheid activist
* Thembi Tambo, British-South African diplomat, politician and also daughter of Oliver Tambo and Adelaide Tambo

==Places==
===Australia===

==== Queensland ====

*Tambo, Queensland, a locality in Blackall-Tambo Region
*Shire of Tambo (Queensland), a former local government area

==== Victoria ====

*Tambo River (Victoria)
*County of Tambo, Victoria
*Mount Tambo, Victoria
*Shire of Tambo (Victoria)

===Peru===
* Tambo River (Peru)
* Tambo District, Huaytar
* Tambo District, La Mar

===Elsewhere===
* Pizzo Tamb, a mountain in the Swiss Alps near the Splgen Pass
* Tambo Island, in Pontevedra, Spain
* Tambo, Paraaque, in the Philippines

==Art, entertainment, and media==
===Fictional characters===
* Tambo, a character in minstrel shows who plays tambourine
* Shelly Tambo, a fictional character in the US television series &quot;Northern Exposure&quot;

==Other==
* Tambo (Incan structure), a building found along Incan roads
* Tambo (weapon), a very short staff used in martial arts

==See also==
* El Tambo (disambiguation)
*OR Tambo (disambiguation), things named after Oliver Tambo
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2391450" start="0" end="5" title="Tambo" label="Tambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q274602" start="33" end="47" title="Adelaide Tambo" label="Adelaide Tambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667402" start="101" end="111" title="Dali Tambo" label="Dali Tambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q359579" start="227" end="239" title="Oliver Tambo" label="Oliver Tambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q101576522" start="293" end="305" title="Thembi Tambo" label="Thembi Tambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391401" start="455" end="472" title="Tambo, Queensland" label="Tambo, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991439" start="511" end="538" title="Shire of Tambo (Queensland)" label="Shire of Tambo (Queensland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391422" start="593" end="615" title="Tambo River (Victoria)" label="Tambo River (Victoria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177921" start="617" end="642" title="County of Tambo, Victoria" label="County of Tambo, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924027" start="644" end="655" title="Mount Tambo" label="Mount Tambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498502" start="667" end="692" title="Shire of Tambo (Victoria)" label="Shire of Tambo (Victoria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480564" start="707" end="725" title="Tambo River (Peru)" label="Tambo River (Peru)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6319013" start="728" end="752" title="Tambo District, Huaytar" label="Tambo District, Huaytar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824584" start="755" end="777" title="Tambo District, La Mar" label="Tambo District, La Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261" start="797" end="808" title="Pizzo Tamb" label="Pizzo Tamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593238" start="863" end="875" title="Tambo Island" label="Tambo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12411" start="880" end="897" title="Pontevedra, Spain" label="Pontevedra, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q65058562" start="900" end="916" title="Tambo, Paraaque" label="Tambo, Paraaque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1010" end="1037" title="Minstrel show#Characters" label="character in minstrel shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900425" start="1061" end="1073" title="Shelly Tambo" label="Shelly Tambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520970" start="1168" end="1191" title="Tambo (Incan structure)" label="Tambo (Incan structure)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809009" start="1230" end="1244" title="Tambo (weapon)" label="Tambo (weapon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q181073" start="1302" end="1327" title="El Tambo (disambiguation)" label="El Tambo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25194164" start="1329" end="1354" title="OR Tambo (disambiguation)" label="OR Tambo (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
