<doc id="33523" wikidata="Q34296" url="?curid=33523" title="Woodrow Wilson">
<text>Thomas Woodrow Wilson (December 28, 1856February 3, 1924) was the 28th president of the United States, serving from 1913 to 1921. He was the only Democrat to serve as president during the Progressive Era when Republicans dominated the presidency and legislative branches. As president, Wilson changed the nation&#x27;s economic policies and led the United States into World War I. He was the leading architect of the League of Nations, and his stance on foreign policy came to be known as Wilsonianism.

Born in Staunton, Virginia, Wilson grew up in the Southern United States during the American Civil War and Reconstruction era. After earning a Ph.D. in history and political science from Johns Hopkins University, Wilson taught at several colleges prior to being appointed president of Princeton University, where he emerged as a prominent spokesman for progressivism in higher education. Wilson served as the governor of New Jersey from 1911 to 1913, during which he broke with party bosses and won the passage of several progressive reforms. 

In the 1912 election, Wilson defeated incumbent Republican William Howard Taft and third-party nominee Theodore Roosevelt, becoming the first Southerner to win the presidency since the 1848 election. During his first year as president, Wilson authorized the widespread imposition of segregation inside the federal bureaucracy and his opposition to women&#x27;s suffrage drew protests. His first term was largely devoted to pursuing passage of his progressive New Freedom domestic agenda. His first major priority was the Revenue Act of 1913, which began the modern income tax, and the Federal Reserve Act, which created the Federal Reserve System. At the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the U.S. declared neutrality as Wilson tried to negotiate peace between the Allied and Central Powers. 

Wilson was narrowly re-elected in the 1916 election, defeating Republican nominee Charles Evans Hughes. In April 1917, Wilson asked Congress for a declaration of war against Germany in response to its policy of unrestricted submarine warfare that sank American merchant ships. Wilson concentrated on diplomacy, issuing the &quot;Fourteen Points&quot; that the Allies and Germany accepted as a basis for post-war peace. He wanted the off-year elections of 1918 to be a referendum endorsing his policies but instead the Republicans took control of Congress. After the Allied victory in November 1918, Wilson attended the Paris Peace Conference. Wilson successfully advocated for the establishment of a multinational organization, the League of Nations, which was incorporated into the Treaty of Versailles that he signed; back home, he rejected a Republican compromise that would have allowed the Senate to ratify the Versailles Treaty and join the League.

Wilson had intended to seek a third term in office but had a stroke in October 1919 that left him incapacitated. His wife and his physician controlled Wilson, and no significant decisions were made. Meanwhile, his policies alienated German- and Irish-American Democrats and the Republicans won a landslide in the 1920 election. In February 1924, he died at age 67. Into the 21st century, historians have criticized Wilson for supporting racial segregation, although they continue to rank Wilson as an above-average president for his accomplishments in office. Conservatives in particular have criticized him for expanding the federal government, while others have praised his weakening the power of large corporations and have credited him for establishing modern liberalism.

== Early life and education ==

Thomas Woodrow Wilson was born to a family of Scotch-Irish and Scottish descent in Staunton, Virginia. He was the third of four children and the first son of Joseph Ruggles Wilson and Jessie Janet Woodrow. Wilson&#x27;s paternal grandparents had immigrated to the United States from Strabane, County Tyrone, Ireland, in 1807, and settled in Steubenville, Ohio. Wilson&#x27;s paternal grandfather James Wilson published a pro-tariff and anti-slavery newspaper, &quot;The Western Herald and Gazette&quot;. Wilson&#x27;s maternal grandfather, the Reverend Thomas Woodrow, moved from Paisley, Renfrewshire, Scotland, to Carlisle, Cumbria, England, before migrating to Chillicothe, Ohio, in the late 1830s. Joseph met Jessie while she was attending a girl&#x27;s academy in Steubenville, and the two married on June 7, 1849. Soon after the wedding, Joseph was ordained as a Presbyterian pastor and assigned to serve in Staunton. His son Woodrow was born in the Manse, a house in the Staunton First Presbyterian Church where Joseph served. Before he was two years old, the family moved to Augusta, Georgia.

Wilson&#x27;s earliest memory of his early youth was of playing in his yard and standing near the front gate of the Augusta parsonage at the age of three, when he heard a passerby announce in disgust that Abraham Lincoln had been elected and that a war was coming. Wilson was one of only two U.S. presidents to be a citizen of the Confederate States of America; the other was John Tyler, who served as the nation&#x27;s tenth president from 1841 to 1845. Wilson&#x27;s father identified with the Southern United States and was a staunch supporter of the Confederacy during the American Civil War.

Wilson&#x27;s father was one of the founders of the Presbyterian Church in the Confederate States of America, later renamed the Presbyterian Church in the United States (PCUS), following its 1861 split from the Northern Presbyterians. He became minister of the First Presbyterian Church in Augusta, and the family lived there until 1870. From 1870 to 1874, Wilson lived in Columbia, South Carolina, where his father was a theology professor at the Columbia Theological Seminary. In 1873, Wilson became a communicant member of the Columbia First Presbyterian Church; he remained a member throughout his life.

Wilson attended Davidson College in Davidson, North Carolina, in the 1873–74 school year but transferred as a freshman to the College of New Jersey, which is now Princeton University, where he studied political philosophy and history, joined the Phi Kappa Psi fraternity, and was active in the Whig literary and debating society. He was also elected secretary of the school&#x27;s football association, president of the school&#x27;s baseball association, and managing editor of the student newspaper. In the hotly contested presidential election of 1876, Wilson supported the Democratic Party and its nominee, Samuel J. Tilden.

After graduating from Princeton in 1879, Wilson attended the University of Virginia School of Law in Charlottesville, Virginia, where he was involved in the Virginia Glee Club and served as president of the Jefferson Literary and Debating Society. Poor health forced Wilson to withdraw from law school, but he continued to study law on his own while living with his parents in Wilmington, North Carolina. Wilson was admitted to the Georgia bar and made a brief attempt at establishing a law firm in Atlanta in 1882. Though he found legal history and substantive jurisprudence interesting, he abhorred the day-to-day procedural aspects of the practice of law. After less than a year, Wilson abandoned his legal practice to pursue the study of political science and history.

In late 1883, Wilson enrolled at the recently established Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore for doctoral studies in history, political science, German, and other fields. Wilson hoped to become a professor, writing that &quot;a professorship was the only feasible place for me, the only place that would afford leisure for reading and for original work, the only strictly literary berth with an income attached.&quot;

Wilson spent much of his time at Johns Hopkins University writing &quot;Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics&quot;, which grew out of a series of essays in which he examined the workings of the federal government. In 1886, Wilson was awarded a Ph.D. in history and government from Johns Hopkins University, making him the only U.S. president in the nation&#x27;s history to possess a Ph.D. In early 1885, Houghton Mifflin published Wilson&#x27;s &quot;Congressional Government&quot;, which was well received, with one critic calling it &quot;the best critical writing on the American constitution which has appeared since the &#x27;Federalist&#x27; papers.&quot;

== Marriage and family ==

In 1883, Wilson met and fell in love with Ellen Louise Axson. He proposed marriage in September 1883; she accepted, but they agreed to postpone marriage while Wilson attended graduate school. Axson graduated from Art Students League of New York, worked in portraiture, and received a medal for one of her works from the Exposition Universelle (1878) in Paris. She agreed to sacrifice further independent artistic pursuits in order to marry Wilson in 1885. Ellen learned German so she could help translate German-language political science publications relevant to Woodrow&#x27;s research.

In April 1886, the couple&#x27;s first child, Margaret, was born. Their second child, Jessie, was born in August 1887. Their third and final child, Eleanor, was born in October 1889. In 1913, Jessie married Francis Bowes Sayre Sr., who later served as High Commissioner to the Philippines. In 1914, their third child Eleanor married William Gibbs McAdoo, U.S. secretary of the treasury under Woodrow Wilson and later a U.S. senator from California.

== Academic career ==
=== Professor ===
From 1885 to 1888, Wilson taught at Bryn Mawr College, a newly established women&#x27;s college in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, outside Philadelphia. Wilson taught ancient Greek and Roman history, American history, political science, and other subjects. At the time, there were only 42 students at the college, nearly all of them too passive for his taste. M. Carey Thomas, the dean, was a staunch feminist, and Wilson clashed with her over his contract, resulting in a bitter dispute. In 1888, Wilson left Bryn Mawr College and was not given a farewell.

Wilson accepted a position at Wesleyan University, an elite undergraduate college for men in Middletown, Connecticut. He taught graduate courses in political economy and Western history, coached Wesleyan&#x27;s football team, and founded a debate team.

In February 1890, with the help of friends, Wilson was appointed Chair of Jurisprudence and Political Economy at the College of New Jersey (the name at the time of Princeton University), at an annual salary of $3,000 (). Wilson quickly earned a reputation at Princeton as a compelling speaker. In 1896, Francis Landey Patton announced that College of New Jersey was being renamed Princeton University; an ambitious program of expansion for the university accompanied the name change. In the 1896 presidential election, Wilson rejected Democratic nominee William Jennings Bryan as too far to the left and instead supported the conservative &quot;Gold Democrat&quot; nominee, John M. Palmer. Wilson&#x27;s academic reputation continued to grow throughout the 1890s, and he turned down multiple positions elsewhere, including at Johns Hopkins University and the University of Virginia.

At Princeton University, Wilson published several works of history and political science and was a regular contributor to &quot;Political Science Quarterly&quot;. Wilson&#x27;s textbook, &quot;The State&quot;, was widely used in American college courses until the 1920s. In &quot;The State&quot;, Wilson wrote that governments could legitimately promote the general welfare &quot;by forbidding child labor, by supervising the sanitary conditions of factories, by limiting the employment of women in occupations hurtful to their health, by instituting official tests of the purity or the quality of goods sold, by limiting the hours of labor in certain trades, [and] by a hundred and one limitations of the power of unscrupulous or heartless men to out-do the scrupulous and merciful in trade or industry.&quot; He also wrote that charity efforts should be removed from the private domain and &quot;made the imperative legal duty of the whole&quot;, a position which, according to historian Robert M. Saunders, seemed to indicate that Wilson &quot;was laying the groundwork for the modern welfare state.&quot; His third book, &quot;Division and Reunion&quot; (1893), became a standard university textbook for teaching mid- and late-19th century U.S. history. Wilson had a considerable reputation as a historian and was an early member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters. He was also an elected member of the American Philosophical Society in 1897.

=== President of Princeton University ===
 
In June 1902, Princeton trustees promoted Professor Wilson to president, replacing Patton, whom the trustees perceived to be an inefficient administrator. Wilson aspired, as he told alumni, &quot;to transform thoughtless boys performing tasks into thinking men.&quot; He tried to raise admission standards and to replace the &quot;gentleman&#x27;s C&quot; with serious study. Wilson instituted academic departments and a system of core requirements to emphasize the development of expertise. Students were to meet in groups of six under the guidance of teaching assistants known as preceptors. To fund these new programs, Wilson undertook an ambitious and successful fundraising campaign, convincing alumni such as Moses Taylor Pyne and philanthropists such as Andrew Carnegie to donate to the school. Wilson appointed the first Jew and the first Roman Catholic to the faculty, and helped liberate the board from domination by conservative Presbyterians. He also worked to keep African Americans out of the school, even as other Ivy League schools were accepting small numbers of black people.

Philosophy professor John Grier Hibben had known Wilson since they were undergraduates together. They became close friends. Indeed, when Wilson became president of Princeton in 1902 Hibben was his chief advisor. In 1912 Hibben stunned Wilson by taking the lead against Wilson&#x27;s pet reform plan. They were permanently estranged, and Wilson was decisively defeated. In 1912, two years after Wilson left Princeton, Hibben became president of Princeton.

Wilson&#x27;s efforts to reform Princeton earned him national fame, but they also took a toll on his health. In 1906, Wilson awoke to find himself blind in the left eye, the result of a blood clot and hypertension. Modern medical opinion surmises Wilson had had a stroke; he later was diagnosed, as his father had been, with hardening of the arteries. He began to exhibit his father&#x27;s traits of impatience and intolerance, which would on occasion lead to errors of judgment.

In 1906, while vacationing in Bermuda, Wilson met Mary Hulbert Peck, a socialite. According to biographer August Heckscher II, Wilson&#x27;s friendship with Peck became the topic of frank discussion between Wilson and his wife, although Wilson historians have not conclusively established there was an affair. Wilson also sent very personal letters to her, which were later used against him by his adversaries.

Having reorganized Princeton University&#x27;s curriculum and established the preceptorial system, Wilson next attempted to curtail the influence of social elites at Princeton by abolishing the upper-class eating clubs. He proposed moving the students into colleges, also known as quadrangles, but Wilson&#x27;s plan was met with fierce opposition from Princeton alumni. In October 1907, due to the intensity of alumni opposition, Princeton&#x27;s board of trustees instructed Wilson to withdraw his plan for relocating student dormitories. Late in his tenure, Wilson had a confrontation with Andrew Fleming West, dean of Princeton University&#x27;s graduate school and his ally, ex-President Grover Cleveland, who was a Princeton trustee. Wilson wanted to integrate a proposed graduate school building into the core of the campus, but West preferred a more distant campus site. In 1909, Princeton&#x27;s board accepted a gift made to the graduate school campaign subject to the graduate school being located off campus.

Wilson became disenchanted with his job as Princeton University president due to the resistance to his recommendations, and he began considering a run for political office. Prior to the 1908 Democratic National Convention, Wilson dropped hints to some influential players in the Democratic Party of his interest in the ticket. While he had no real expectations of being placed on it, Wilson left instructions that he should not be offered the vice presidential nomination. Party regulars considered his ideas politically and geographically detached and fanciful, but the seeds of interest had been sown. In 1956, McGeorge Bundy described Wilson&#x27;s contribution to Princeton: &quot;Wilson was right in his conviction that Princeton must be more than a wonderfully pleasant and decent home for nice young men; it has been more ever since his time.&quot;

== Governor of New Jersey (1911–1913) ==

By January 1910, Wilson had drawn the attention of James Smith Jr. and George Brinton McClellan Harvey, two leaders of New Jersey&#x27;s Democratic Party, as a potential candidate in the upcoming gubernatorial election. Having lost the last five gubernatorial elections, New Jersey Democratic leaders decided to throw their support behind Wilson, an untested and unconventional candidate. Party leaders believed that Wilson&#x27;s academic reputation made him the ideal spokesman against trusts and corruption, but they also hoped his inexperience in governing would make him easy to influence. Wilson agreed to accept the nomination if &quot;it came to me unsought, unanimously, and without pledges to anybody about anything.&quot;

At the state party convention, the bosses marshaled their forces and won the nomination for Wilson. On October 20, Wilson submitted his letter of resignation to Princeton University. Wilson&#x27;s campaign focused on his promise to be independent of party bosses. He quickly shed his professorial style for more emboldened speechmaking and presented himself as a full-fledged progressive. Though Republican William Howard Taft had carried New Jersey in the 1908 presidential election by more than 82,000 votes, Wilson soundly defeated Republican gubernatorial nominee Vivian M. Lewis by a margin of more than 65,000 votes. Democrats also took control of the general assembly in the 1910 elections, though the state senate remained in Republican hands. After winning the election, Wilson appointed Joseph Patrick Tumulty as his private secretary, a position he held throughout Wilson&#x27;s political career.

Wilson began formulating his reformist agenda, intending to ignore the demands of his party machinery. Smith asked Wilson to endorse his bid for the U.S. Senate, but Wilson refused and instead endorsed Smith&#x27;s opponent James Edgar Martine, who had won the Democratic primary. Martine&#x27;s victory in the Senate election helped Wilson position himself as an independent force in the New Jersey Democratic Party. By the time Wilson took office, New Jersey had gained a reputation for public corruption; the state was known as the &quot;Mother of Trusts&quot; because it allowed companies like Standard Oil to escape the antitrust laws of other states. Wilson and his allies quickly won passage of the Geran bill, which undercut the power of the political bosses by requiring primaries for all elective offices and party officials. A corrupt practices law and a workmen&#x27;s compensation statute that Wilson supported won passage shortly thereafter. For his success in passing these laws during the first months of his gubernatorial term, Wilson won national and bipartisan recognition as a reformer and a leader of the Progressive movement.

Republicans took control of the state assembly in early 1912, and Wilson spent much of the rest of his tenure vetoing bills. He nonetheless won passage of various reform laws
 including ones that restricted labor by women and children and increased standards for factory working conditions. A new State Board of Education was set up &quot;with the power to conduct inspections and enforce standards, regulate districts&#x27; borrowing authority, and require special classes for students with handicaps.&quot; Before leaving office Wilson oversaw the establishment of free dental clinics and enacted a &quot;comprehensive and scientific&quot; poor law. Trained nursing was standardized, while contract labor in all reformatories and prisons was abolished and an indeterminate sentence act passed. A law was introduced that compelled all railroad companies &quot;to pay their employees twice monthly&quot;, while regulation of the working hours, health, safety, employment, and age of people employed in mercantile establishments was carried out. Shortly before leaving office, Wilson signed a series of antitrust laws known as the &quot;Seven Sisters&quot;, as well as another law that removed the power to select juries from local sheriffs.

== Presidential election of 1912 ==
=== Democratic nomination ===

Wilson became a prominent 1912 presidential contender immediately upon his election as Governor of New Jersey in 1910, and his clashes with state party bosses enhanced his reputation with the rising Progressive movement. In addition to progressives, Wilson enjoyed the support of Princeton alumni such as Cyrus McCormick and Southerners such as Walter Hines Page, who believed that Wilson&#x27;s status as a transplanted Southerner gave him broad appeal. Though Wilson&#x27;s shift to the left won the admiration of many, it also created enemies such as George Brinton McClellan Harvey, a former Wilson supporter who had close ties to Wall Street. In July 1911, Wilson brought William Gibbs McAdoo and &quot;Colonel&quot; Edward M. House in to manage the campaign. Prior to the 1912 Democratic National Convention, Wilson made a special effort to win the approval of three-time Democratic presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan, whose followers had largely dominated the Democratic Party since the 1896 presidential election.

Speaker of the House Champ Clark of Missouri was viewed by many as the front-runner for the nomination, while House Majority Leader Oscar Underwood of Alabama also loomed as a challenger. Clark found support among the Bryan wing of the party, while Underwood appealed to the conservative Bourbon Democrats, especially in the South. In the 1912 Democratic Party presidential primaries, Clark won several of the early contests, but Wilson finished strong with victories in Texas, the Northeast, and the Midwest. On the first presidential ballot of the Democratic convention, Clark won a plurality of delegates; his support continued to grow after the New York Tammany Hall machine swung behind him on the tenth ballot. Tammany&#x27;s support backfired for Clark, as Bryan announced that he would not support any candidate that had Tammany&#x27;s backing, and Clark began losing delegates on subsequent ballots. Wilson gained the support of Roger Charles Sullivan and Thomas Taggart by promising the vice presidency to Governor Thomas R. Marshall of Indiana. and several Southern delegations shifted their support from Underwood to Wilson. Wilson finally won two-thirds of the vote on the convention&#x27;s 46th ballot, and Marshall became Wilson&#x27;s running mate.

=== General election ===

In the 1912 general election, Wilson faced two major opponents: one-term Republican incumbent William Howard Taft, and former Republican President Theodore Roosevelt, who ran a third party campaign as the &quot;Bull Moose&quot; Party nominee. The fourth candidate was Eugene V. Debs of the Socialist Party. Roosevelt had broken with his former party at the 1912 Republican National Convention after Taft narrowly won re-nomination, and the split in the Republican Party made Democrats hopeful that they could win the presidency for the first time since the 1892 presidential election.

Roosevelt emerged as Wilson&#x27;s main challenger, and Wilson and Roosevelt largely campaigned against each other despite sharing similarly progressive platforms that called for an interventionist central government. Wilson directed campaign finance chairman Henry Morgenthau not to accept contributions from corporations and to prioritize smaller donations from the widest possible quarters of the public. During the election campaign, Wilson asserted that it was the task of government &quot;to make those adjustments of life which will put every man in a position to claim his normal rights as a living, human being.&quot; With the help of legal scholar Louis Brandeis, he developed his New Freedom platform, focusing especially on breaking up trusts and lowering tariff rates. Brandeis and Wilson rejected Roosevelt&#x27;s proposal to establish a powerful bureaucracy charged with regulating large corporations, instead favoring the break-up of large corporations in order to create a level economic playing field.

Wilson engaged in a spirited campaign, criss-crossing the country to deliver numerous speeches. Ultimately, he took 42 percent of the popular vote and 435 of the 531 electoral votes. Roosevelt won most of the remaining electoral votes and 27.4 percent of the popular vote, one of the strongest third party performances in U.S. history. Taft won 23.2 percent of the popular vote but just 8 electoral votes, while Debs won 6 percent of the popular vote. In the concurrent congressional elections, Democrats retained control of the House and won a majority in the Senate. Wilson&#x27;s victory made him the first Southerner to win a presidential election since the Civil War, the first Democratic president since Grover Cleveland left office in 1897, and the first and only president to hold a Ph.D.

== Presidency (1913–1921) ==

After the election, Wilson chose William Jennings Bryan as Secretary of State, and Bryan offered advice on the remaining members of Wilson&#x27;s cabinet. William Gibbs McAdoo, a prominent Wilson supporter who married Wilson&#x27;s daughter in 1914, became Secretary of the Treasury, and James Clark McReynolds, who had successfully prosecuted several prominent antitrust cases, was chosen as Attorney General. Publisher Josephus Daniels, a party loyalist and prominent white supremacist from North Carolina, was chosen to be Secretary of the Navy, while young New York attorney Franklin D. Roosevelt became Assistant Secretary of the Navy. Wilson&#x27;s chief of staff (&quot;secretary&quot;) was Joseph Patrick Tumulty, who acted as a political buffer and intermediary with the press. The most important foreign policy adviser and confidant was &quot;Colonel&quot; Edward M. House; Berg writes that, &quot;in access and influence, [House] outranked everybody in Wilson&#x27;s Cabinet.&quot;

=== New Freedom domestic agenda ===
Wilson introduced a comprehensive program of domestic legislation at the outset of his administration, something no president had ever done before. He announced four major domestic priorities: the conservation of natural resources, banking reform, tariff reduction, and better access to raw materials for farmers by breaking up Western mining trusts. Wilson introduced these proposals in April 1913 in a speech delivered to a joint session of Congress, becoming the first president since John Adams to address Congress in person. Wilson&#x27;s first two years in office largely focused on his domestic agenda. With trouble with Mexico and the outbreak of World War I in 1914, foreign affairs increasingly dominated his presidency.

==== Tariff and tax legislation ====
Democrats had long seen high tariff rates as equivalent to unfair taxes on consumers, and tariff reduction was their first priority. He argued that the system of high tariffs &quot;cuts us off from our proper part in the commerce of the world, violates the just principles of taxation, and makes the government a facile instrument in the hands of private interests.&quot; By late May 1913, House Majority Leader Oscar Underwood had passed a bill in the House that cut the average tariff rate by 10 percent and imposed a tax on personal income above $4,000. Underwood&#x27;s bill represented the largest downward revision of the tariff since the Civil War. It aggressively cut rates for raw materials, goods deemed to be &quot;necessities&quot;, and products produced domestically by trusts, but it retained higher tariff rates for luxury goods.

Nevertheless, the passage of the tariff bill in the Senate was a challenge. Some Southern and Western Democrats wanted the continued protection of their wool and sugar industries, and Democrats had a narrower majority in the upper house. Wilson met extensively with Democratic senators and appealed directly to the people through the press. After weeks of hearings and debate, Wilson and Secretary of State Bryan managed to unite Senate Democrats behind the bill. The Senate voted 44 to 37 in favor of the bill, with only one Democrat voting against it and only one Republican voting for it. Wilson signed the Revenue Act of 1913 (called the Underwood Tariff) into law on October 3, 1913. The Revenue Act of 1913 reduced tariffs and replaced the lost revenue with a federal income tax of one percent on incomes above $3,000, affecting the richest three percent of the population. The policies of the Wilson administration had a durable impact on the composition of government revenue, which now primarily came from taxation rather than tariffs.

==== Federal Reserve System ====
Wilson did not wait to complete the Revenue Act of 1913 before proceeding to the next item on his agenda—banking. By the time Wilson took office, countries like Britain and Germany had established government-run central banks, but the United States had not had a central bank since the Bank War of the 1830s. In the aftermath of the nationwide financial crisis in 1907, there was general agreement to create some sort of central banking system to provide a more elastic currency and to coordinate responses to financial panics. Wilson sought a middle ground between progressives such as Bryan and conservative Republicans like Nelson Aldrich, who, as chairman of the National Monetary Commission, had put forward a plan for a central bank that would give private financial interests a large degree of control over the monetary system. Wilson declared that the banking system must be &quot;public not private, [and] must be vested in the government itself so that the banks must be the instruments, not the masters, of business.&quot;

Democrats crafted a compromise plan in which private banks would control twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks, but a controlling interest in the system was placed in a central board filled with presidential appointees. Wilson convinced Democrats on the left that the new plan met their demands. Finally the Senate voted 54–34 to approve the Federal Reserve Act. The new system began operations in 1915, and it played a key role in financing the Allied and American war efforts in World War I.

==== Antitrust legislation ====
Having passed major legislation lowering the tariff and reforming the banking structure, Wilson next sought antitrust legislation to enhance the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890. The Sherman Antitrust Act barred any &quot;contract, combination ... or conspiracy, in restraint of trade&quot;, but had proved ineffective in preventing the rise of large business combinations known as trusts. An elite group of businessmen dominated the boards of major banks and railroads, and they used their power to prevent competition by new companies. With Wilson&#x27;s support, Congressman Henry Clayton, Jr. introduced a bill that would ban several anti-competitive practices such as discriminatory pricing, tying, exclusive dealing, and interlocking directorates.

As the difficulty of banning all anti-competitive practices via legislation became clear, Wilson came to back legislation that would create a new agency, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), to investigate antitrust violations and enforce antitrust laws independently of the Justice Department. With bipartisan support, Congress passed the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, which incorporated Wilson&#x27;s ideas regarding the FTC. One month after signing the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, Wilson signed the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, which built on the Sherman Act by defining and banning several anti-competitive practices.

==== Labor and agriculture ====
Wilson thought a child labor law would probably be unconstitutional but reversed himself in 1916 with a close election approaching. In 1916, after intense campaigns by the National Child Labor Committee (NCLC) and the National Consumers League, the Congress passed the Keating–Owen Act, making it illegal to ship goods in interstate commerce if they were made in factories employing children under specified ages. Southern Democrats were opposed but did not filibuster. Wilson endorsed the bill at the last minute under pressure from party leaders who stressed how popular the idea was, especially among the emerging class of women voters. He told Democratic Congressmen they needed to pass this law and also a workman&#x27;s compensation law to satisfy the national progressive movement and to win the 1916 election against a reunited GOP. It was the first federal child labor law. However, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the law in &quot;Hammer v. Dagenhart&quot; (1918). Congress then passed a law taxing businesses that used child labor, but that was struck down by the Supreme Court in &quot;Bailey v. Drexel Furniture&quot; (1923). Child labor was finally ended in the 1930s. He approved the goal of upgrading the harsh working conditions for merchant sailors and signed LaFollette&#x27;s Seamen&#x27;s Act of 1915. Wilson commissioned members of the Fraternal Order of Eagles to study old age pension laws overseas to determine whether such laws could be adopted in the United States. Pensions for civil servants employed by the federal government were introduced during Wilson&#x27;s final year in office.

Wilson called on the Labor Department to mediate conflicts between labor and management. In 1914, Wilson dispatched soldiers to help bring an end to the Colorado Coalfield War, one of the deadliest labor disputes in American history. In 1916 he pushed Congress to enact the eight-hour work day for railroad workers, which ended a major strike. It was &quot;the boldest intervention in labor relations that any president had yet attempted.&quot;

Wilson disliked the excessive government involvement in the Federal Farm Loan Act, which created twelve regional banks empowered to provide low-interest loans to farmers. Nevertheless, he needed the farm vote to survive the upcoming 1916 election, so he signed it.

==== Territories and immigration ====

Wilson embraced the long-standing Democratic policy against owning colonies, and he worked for the gradual autonomy and ultimate independence of the Philippines, which had been acquired in 1898. Continuing the policy of his predecessors, Wilson increased self-governance on the islands by granting Filipinos greater control over the Philippine Legislature. The Jones Act of 1916 committed the United States to the eventual independence of the Philippines, and granted Filipinos further autonomy with the establishment of a Filipino Senate and House of Representatives, replacing the American-run Philippine Commission and Filipino-run Philippine Assembly, respectively. In 1916, Wilson purchased by treaty the Danish West Indies, renamed as the United States Virgin Islands.

Immigration from Europe declined significantly once World War I began and Wilson paid little attention to the issue during his presidency. However, he looked favorably upon the &quot;new immigrants&quot; from southern and eastern Europe, and twice vetoed laws passed by Congress intended to restrict their entry, though the later veto was overridden.

==== Judicial appointments ====
Wilson nominated three men to the United States Supreme Court, all of whom were confirmed by the U.S. Senate. In 1914, Wilson nominated sitting attorney general James Clark McReynolds. Despite his credentials as an ardent trust buster, McReynolds became a staple of the court&#x27;s conservative bloc until his retirement in 1941. According to Berg, Wilson considered appointing McReynolds one of his biggest mistakes in office. In 1916, Wilson nominated Louis Brandeis to the Court, setting off a major debate in the Senate over Brandeis&#x27;s progressive ideology and his religion; Brandeis was the first Jewish nominee to the Supreme Court. Ultimately, Wilson was able to convince Senate Democrats to vote to confirm Brandeis, who served on the court until 1939. In contrast to McReynolds, Brandeis became one of the court&#x27;s leading progressive voices. When a second vacancy arose in 1916, Wilson appointed progressive lawyer John Hessin Clarke. Clarke was confirmed by the Senate and served on the Court until retiring in 1922.

=== First-term foreign policy ===
==== Latin America ====
Wilson sought to move away from the foreign policy of his predecessors, which he viewed as imperialistic, and he rejected Taft&#x27;s Dollar Diplomacy. Nonetheless, he frequently intervened in Latin America, saying in 1913, &quot;I am going to teach the South American republics to elect good men.&quot; The 1914 Bryan–Chamorro Treaty converted Nicaragua into a &quot;de facto&quot; protectorate, and the U.S. stationed soldiers there throughout Wilson&#x27;s presidency. The Wilson administration sent troops to occupy the Dominican Republic and intervene in Haiti, and Wilson also authorized military interventions in Cuba, Panama, and Honduras.

Wilson took office during the Mexican Revolution, which had begun in 1911 after liberals overthrew the military dictatorship of Porfirio Díaz. Shortly before Wilson took office, conservatives retook power through a coup led by Victoriano Huerta. Wilson rejected the legitimacy of Huerta&#x27;s &quot;government of butchers&quot; and demanded Mexico hold democratic elections. After Huerta arrested U.S. Navy personnel who had accidentally landed in a restricted zone near the northern port town of Tampico, Wilson dispatched the Navy to occupy the Mexican city of Veracruz. A strong backlash against the American intervention among Mexicans of all political affiliations convinced Wilson to abandon his plans to expand the U.S. military intervention, but the intervention nonetheless helped convince Huerta to flee from the country. A group led by Venustiano Carranza established control over a significant proportion of Mexico, and Wilson recognized Carranza&#x27;s government in October 1915.

Carranza continued to face various opponents within Mexico, including Pancho Villa, whom Wilson had earlier described as &quot;a sort of Robin Hood.&quot; In early 1916, Pancho Villa raided the village of Columbus, New Mexico, killing or wounding dozens of Americans and causing an enormous nationwide American demand for his punishment. Wilson ordered General John J. Pershing and 4,000 troops across the border to capture Villa. By April, Pershing&#x27;s forces had broken up and dispersed Villa&#x27;s bands, but Villa remained on the loose and Pershing continued his pursuit deep into Mexico. Carranza then pivoted against the Americans and accused them of a punitive invasion, leading to several incidents that nearly led to war. Tensions subsided after Mexico agreed to release several American prisoners, and bilateral negotiations began under the auspices of the Mexican-American Joint High Commission. Eager to withdraw from Mexico due to tensions in Europe, Wilson ordered Pershing to withdraw, and the last American soldiers left in February 1917.

==== Neutrality in World War I ====

World War I broke out in July 1914, pitting the Central Powers (Germany, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire, and later Bulgaria) against the Allied Powers (Britain, France, Russia, Serbia, and several other countries). The war fell into a long stalemate with very high casualties on the Western Front in France. Both sides rejected offers by Wilson and the House to mediate an end to the conflict. From 1914 until early 1917, Wilson&#x27;s primary foreign policy objectives were to keep the United States out of the war in Europe and to broker a peace agreement. He insisted that all U.S. government actions be neutral, stating that Americans &quot;must be impartial in thought as well as in action, must put a curb upon our sentiments as well as upon every transaction that might be construed as a preference of one party to the struggle before another.&quot; As a neutral power, the U.S. insisted on its right to trade with both sides. However the powerful British Royal Navy imposed a blockade of Germany. To appease Washington, London agreed to continue purchasing certain major American commodities such as cotton at pre-war prices, and in the event an American merchant vessel was caught with contraband, the Royal Navy was under orders to buy the entire cargo and release the vessel. Wilson passively accepted this situation.

In response to the British blockade, Germany launched a submarine campaign against merchant vessels in the seas surrounding the British Isles. In early 1915, the Germans sank three American ships; Wilson took the view, based on some reasonable evidence, that these incidents were accidental, and a settlement of claims could be postponed until the end of the war. In May 1915, a German submarine torpedoed the British ocean liner RMS &quot;Lusitania&quot;, killing 1,198 passengers, including 128 American citizens. Wilson publicly responded by saying, &quot;there is such a thing as a man being too proud to fight. There is such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force that it is right&quot;. Wilson demanded that the German government &quot;take immediate steps to prevent the recurrence&quot; of incidents like the sinking of the &quot;Lusitania&quot;. In response, Bryan, who believed that Wilson had placed the defense of American trade rights above neutrality, resigned from the Cabinet. In March 1916, the SS &quot;Sussex&quot;, an unarmed ferry under the French flag, was torpedoed in the English Channel and four Americans were counted among the dead. Wilson extracted from Germany a pledge to constrain submarine warfare to the rules of cruiser warfare, which represented a major diplomatic concession.

Interventionists, led by Theodore Roosevelt, wanted war with Germany and attacked Wilson&#x27;s refusal to build up the army in anticipation of war. After the sinking of the &quot;Lusitania&quot; and the resignation of Bryan, Wilson publicly committed himself to what became known as the &quot;preparedness movement&quot;, and began to build up the army and the navy. In June 1916, Congress passed the National Defense Act of 1916, which established the Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps and expanded the National Guard. Later in the year, Congress passed the Naval Act of 1916, which provided for a major expansion of the navy.

=== Second marriage ===

The health of Ellen Wilson declined after her husband entered office, and doctors diagnosed her with Bright&#x27;s disease in July 1914. She died on August 6, 1914. President Wilson was deeply affected by the loss, falling into depression. On March 18, 1915, Wilson met Edith Bolling Galt at a White House tea. Galt was a widow and jeweler who was also from the South. After several meetings, Wilson fell in love with her, and he proposed marriage to her in May 1915. Galt initially rebuffed him, but Wilson was undeterred and continued the courtship. Edith gradually warmed to the relationship, and they became engaged in September 1915. They were married on December 18, 1915. Woodrow Wilson joined John Tyler and Grover Cleveland as the only presidents to marry while in office.

=== Presidential election of 1916 ===

Wilson was renominated at the 1916 Democratic National Convention without opposition. In an effort to win progressive voters, Wilson called for legislation providing for an eight-hour day and six-day workweek, health and safety measures, the prohibition of child labor, and safeguards for female workers. He also favored a minimum wage for all work performed by and for the federal government. The Democrats also campaigned on the slogan &quot;He Kept Us Out of War&quot;, and warned that a Republican victory would mean war with Germany. Hoping to reunify the progressive and conservative wings of the party, the 1916 Republican National Convention nominated Supreme Court justice Charles Evans Hughes for president; as a jurist, he had been completely out of politics by 1912. Though Republicans attacked Wilson&#x27;s foreign policy on various grounds, domestic affairs generally dominated the campaign. Republicans campaigned against Wilson&#x27;s New Freedom policies, especially tariff reduction, the new income taxes, and the Adamson Act, which they derided as &quot;class legislation&quot;.

The election was close and the outcome was in doubt with Hughes ahead in the East, and Wilson in the South and West. The decision came down to California. On November 10, California certified that Wilson had won the state by 3,806 votes, giving him a majority of the electoral vote. Nationally, Wilson won 277 electoral votes and 49.2 percent of the popular vote, while Hughes won 254 electoral votes and 46.1 percent of the popular vote. Wilson was able to win by picking up many votes that had gone to Roosevelt or Debs in 1912. He swept the Solid South and won all but one Western state, while Hughes won most of the Northeastern and Midwestern states. Wilson&#x27;s re-election made him the first Democrat since Andrew Jackson (in 1832) to win two consecutive terms. The Democrats kept control of Congress.

===Entering World War I===
In January 1917, the German Empire initiated a new policy of unrestricted submarine warfare against ships in the seas around the British Isles. German leaders knew that the policy would likely provoke U.S. entrance into the war, but they hoped to defeat the Allied Powers before the U.S. could fully mobilize. In late February, the U.S. public learned of the Zimmermann Telegram, a secret diplomatic communication in which Germany sought to convince Mexico to join it in a war against the United States. After a series of attacks on American ships, Wilson held a Cabinet meeting on March 20; all Cabinet members agreed that the time had come for the United States to enter the war. The Cabinet members believed that Germany was engaged in a commercial war against the United States, and that the United States had to respond with a formal declaration of war.

On April 2, 1917, Wilson addressed the U.S. Congress, asking for a declaration of war against Germany, saying that Germany was engaged in &quot;nothing less than war against the government and people of the United States.&quot; He requested a military draft to raise the army, increased taxes to pay for military expenses, loans to Allied governments, and increased industrial and agricultural production. He stated, &quot;we have no selfish ends to serve. We desire no conquest, no dominion... no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make. We are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind. We shall be satisfied when those rights have been made as secure as the faith and freedom of the nations can make them.&quot; The declaration of war by the United States against Germany passed Congress with strong bipartisan majorities on April 6, 1917. The United States later declared war against Austria-Hungary in December 1917.

With the U.S. entrance into the war, Wilson and Secretary of War Newton D. Baker launched an expansion of the army, with the goal of creating a 300,000-member Regular Army, a 440,000-member National Guard, and a 500,000-member conscripted force known as the &quot;National Army.&quot; Despite some resistance to conscription and to the commitment of American soldiers abroad, large majorities of both houses of Congress voted to impose conscription with the Selective Service Act of 1917. Seeking to avoid the draft riots of the Civil War, the bill established local draft boards that were charged with determining who should be drafted. By the end of the war, nearly 3 million men had been drafted. The navy also saw tremendous expansion, and Allied shipping losses dropped substantially due to U.S. contributions and a new emphasis on the convoy system.
==== Fourteen Points ====

Wilson sought the establishment of &quot;an organized common peace&quot; that would help prevent future conflicts. In this goal, he was opposed not just by the Central Powers, but also the other Allied Powers, who, to various degrees, sought to win concessions and to impose a punitive peace agreement on the Central Powers. On January 8, 1918, Wilson delivered a speech, known as the Fourteen Points, wherein he articulated his administration&#x27;s long term war objectives. Wilson called for the establishment of an association of nations to guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of all nations—a League of Nations. Other points included the evacuation of occupied territory, the establishment of an independent Poland, and self-determination for the peoples of Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire.

==== Course of the war ====

Under the command of General Pershing, the American Expeditionary Forces first arrived in France in mid-1917. Wilson and Pershing rejected the British and French proposal that American soldiers integrate into existing Allied units, giving the United States more freedom of action but requiring for the creation of new organizations and supply chains. Russia exited the war after signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918, allowing Germany to shift soldiers from the Eastern Front of the war. Hoping to break Allied lines before American soldiers could arrive in full force, the Germans launched the Spring Offensive on the Western Front. Both sides suffered hundreds of thousands of casualties as the Germans forced back the British and French, but Germany was unable to capture the French capital of Paris. There were only 175,000 American soldiers in Europe at the end of 1917, but by mid-1918 10,000 Americans were arriving in Europe per day. With American forces having joined in the fight, the Allies defeated Germany in the Battle of Belleau Wood and the Battle of Château-Thierry. Beginning in August, the Allies launched the Hundred Days Offensive, pushing back the exhausted German army. Meanwhile, French and British leaders convinced Wilson to send a few thousand American soldiers to join the Allied intervention in Russia, which was in the midst of a civil war between the Communist Bolsheviks and the White movement.

By the end of September 1918, the German leadership no longer believed it could win the war, and Kaiser Wilhelm II appointed a new government led by Prince Maximilian of Baden. Baden immediately sought an armistice with Wilson, with the Fourteen Points to serve as the basis of the German surrender. House procured agreement to the armistice from France and Britain, but only after threatening to conclude a unilateral armistice without them. Germany and the Allied Powers brought an end to the fighting with the signing of the Armistice of 11 November 1918. Austria-Hungary had signed the Armistice of Villa Giusti eight days earlier, while the Ottoman Empire had signed the Armistice of Mudros in October. By the end of the war, 116,000 American servicemen had died, and another 200,000 had been wounded.

==== Home front ====

With the American entrance into World War I in April 1917, Wilson became a war-time president. The War Industries Board, headed by Bernard Baruch, was established to set U.S. war manufacturing policies and goals. Future President Herbert Hoover led the Food Administration; the Federal Fuel Administration, run by Harry Augustus Garfield, introduced daylight saving time and rationed fuel supplies; William McAdoo was in charge of war bond efforts; Vance C. McCormick headed the War Trade Board. These men, known collectively as the &quot;war cabinet&quot;, met weekly with Wilson. Because he was heavily focused on foreign policy during World War I, Wilson delegated a large degree of authority over the home front to his subordinates. In the midst of the war, the federal budget soared from $1 billion in fiscal year 1916 to $19 billion in fiscal year 1919. In addition to spending on its own military build-up, Wall Street in 1914–1916 and the Treasury in 1917–1918 provided large loans to the Allied countries, thus financing the war effort of Britain and France.

Seeking to avoid the high levels of inflation that had accompanied the heavy borrowing of the American Civil War, the Wilson administration raised taxes during the war. The War Revenue Act of 1917 and the Revenue Act of 1918 raised the top tax rate to 77 percent, greatly increased the number of Americans paying the income tax, and levied an excess profits tax on businesses and individuals. Despite these tax acts, the United States was forced to borrow heavily to finance the war effort. Treasury Secretary McAdoo authorized the issuing of low-interest war bonds and, to attract investors, made interest on the bonds tax-free. The bonds proved so popular among investors that many borrowed money in order to buy more bonds. The purchase of bonds, along with other war-time pressures, resulted in rising inflation, though this inflation was partly matched by rising wages and profits.

To shape public opinion, Wilson in 1917 established the first modern propaganda office, the Committee on Public Information (CPI), headed by George Creel. Wilson called on voters in the 1918 off-year elections to elect Democrats as an endorsement of his policies. However the Republicans won over alienated German-Americans and took control. Wilson refused to coordinate or compromise with the new leaders of House and Senate—Senator Henry Cabot Lodge became his nemesis. In November 1919, Wilson&#x27;s attorney general, A. Mitchell Palmer, began to target anarchists, Industrial Workers of the World members, and other antiwar groups in what became known as the Palmer Raids. Thousands were arrested for incitement to violence, espionage, or sedition. Wilson by that point was incapacitated and was not told what was happening.

=== Aftermath of World War I ===

==== Paris Peace Conference ====
 
After the signing of the armistice, Wilson traveled to Europe to lead the American delegation to the Paris Peace Conference, thereby becoming the first incumbent president to travel to Europe. Although Republicans now controlled Congress, Wilson shut them out. Senate Republicans and even some Senate Democrats complained about their lack of representation in the delegation. It consisted of Wilson, Colonel House, Secretary of State Robert Lansing, General Tasker H. Bliss, and diplomat Henry White, who was the only Republican, and he was not an active partisan. Save for a two-week return to the United States, Wilson remained in Europe for six months, where he focused on reaching a peace treaty to formally end the war. Wilson, British Prime Minister David Lloyd George, French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau, and Italian Prime Minister Vittorio Emanuele Orlando made up the &quot;Big Four&quot;, the Allied leaders with the most influence at the Paris Peace Conference. Wilson had an illness during the conference, and some experts believe the Spanish flu was the cause.

Unlike other Allied leaders, Wilson did not seek territorial gains or material concessions from the Central Powers. His chief goal was the establishment of the League of Nations, which he saw as the &quot;keystone of the whole programme&quot;. Wilson himself presided over the committee that drafted the Covenant of the League of Nations. The covenant bound members to respect freedom of religion, treat racial minorities fairly, and peacefully settle disputes through organizations like the Permanent Court of International Justice. Article X of the League Covenant required all nations to defend League members against external aggression. Japan proposed that the conference endorse a Racial Equality Proposal; Wilson was indifferent to the issue, but acceded to strong opposition from Britain&#x27;s dominions such as Australia and South Africa. The Covenant of the League of Nations was incorporated into the conference&#x27;s Treaty of Versailles, which ended the war with Germany, and into other peace treaties.

Aside from the establishment the League of Nations and solidifying a lasting world peace, Wilson&#x27;s other main goal at the Paris Peace Conference was that self-determination be the primary basis used for drawing new international borders. However, in pursuit of his League of Nations, Wilson conceded several points to the other powers present at the conference. Germany was required to permanently cede territory, pay war reparations, relinquish all of her overseas colonies and dependencies and submit to military occupation in the Rhineland. Additionally, a clause in the treaty specifically named Germany as responsible for the war. Wilson agreed to allowing the Allied European powers and Japan to essentially expand their empires by establishing &quot;de facto&quot; colonies in the Middle East, Africa, and Asia out the former German and Ottoman Empires; these territorial awards to the victorious countries were thinly disguised as &quot;League of Nations mandates&quot;. The Japanese acquisition of German interests in the Shandong Peninsula of China proved especially unpopular, as it undercut Wilson&#x27;s promise of self-government. Wilson&#x27;s hopes for achieving self-determination saw some success when the conference recognized multiple new and independent states created in Eastern Europe, including Albania, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Yugoslavia.

The conference finished negotiations in May 1919, at which point the new leaders of republican Germany viewed the treaty for the first time. Some German leaders favored repudiating the peace due to the harshness of the terms, though ultimately Germany signed the treaty on June 28, 1919. Wilson was unable to convince the other Allied powers, France in particular, to temper the harshness of the settlement being leveled at the defeated Central Powers, especially Germany. For his efforts towards creating a lasting world peace, Wilson was awarded the 1919 Nobel Peace Prize.

==== Ratification debate and defeat====

Ratification of the Treaty of Versailles required the support of two-thirds of the Senate, a difficult proposition given that Republicans held a narrow majority in the Senate after the 1918 U.S. elections. Republicans were outraged by Wilson&#x27;s failure to discuss the war or its aftermath with them, and an intensely partisan battle developed in the Senate. Republican Senator Henry Cabot Lodge supported a version of the treaty that required Wilson to compromise. Wilson refused. Some Republicans, including former President Taft and former Secretary of State Elihu Root, favored ratification of the treaty with some modifications, and their public support gave Wilson some chance of winning the treaty&#x27;s ratification.

The debate over the treaty centered around a debate over the American role in the world community in the post-war era, and senators fell into three main groups. The first group, consisting of most Democrats, favored the treaty. Fourteen senators, mostly Republicans, were known as the &quot;irreconcilables&quot; as they completely opposed U.S. entrance into the League of Nations. Some of these irreconcilables opposed the treaty for its failure to emphasize decolonization and disarmament, while others feared surrendering American freedom of action to an international organization. The remaining group of senators, known as &quot;reservationists&quot;, accepted the idea of the League but sought varying degrees of change to ensure the protection of American sovereignty and the right of Congress to decide on going to war.

Article X of the League Covenant, which sought to create a system of collective security by requiring League members to protect one another against external aggression, seemed to force the U.S. to join in any war the League decided upon. Wilson consistently refused to compromise, partly due to concerns about having to re-open negotiations with the other treaty signatories. When Lodge was on the verge of building a two-thirds majority to ratify the Treaty with ten reservations, Wilson forced his supporters to vote Nay on March 19, 1920, thereby closing the issue. Cooper says that &quot;nearly every League advocate&quot; went along with Lodge, but their efforts &quot;failed solely because Wilson admittedly rejected all reservations proposed in the Senate.&quot; Thomas A. Bailey calls Wilson&#x27;s action &quot;the supreme act of infanticide&quot;. He adds: &quot;The treaty was slain in the house of its friends rather than in the house of its enemies. In the final analysis it was not the two-thirds rule, or the &#x27;irreconcilables,&#x27; or Lodge, or the &#x27;strong&#x27; and &#x27;mild&#x27; reservationists, but Wilson and his docile following who delivered the fatal stab.&quot;

==== Health collapses====
To bolster public support for ratification, Wilson barnstormed the Western states, but he returned to the White House in late September due to health problems. On October 2, 1919, Wilson suffered a serious stroke, leaving him paralyzed on his left side, and with only partial vision in the right eye. He was confined to bed for weeks and sequestered from everyone except his wife and his physician, Cary Grayson. Bert E. Park, a neurosurgeon who examined Wilson&#x27;s medical records after his death, writes that Wilson&#x27;s illness affected his personality in various ways, making him prone to &quot;disorders of emotion, impaired impulse control, and defective judgment.&quot; Anxious to help the president recover, Tumulty, Grayson, and the First Lady determined what documents the president read and who was allowed to communicate with him. For her influence in the administration, some have described Edith Wilson as &quot;the first female President of the United States.&quot; Link states that by November 1919, Wilson&#x27;s &quot;recovery was only partial at best. His mind remained relatively clear; but he was physically enfeebled, and the disease had wrecked his emotional constitution and aggravated all his more unfortunate personal traits.

Throughout late 1919, Wilson&#x27;s inner circle concealed the severity of his health issues. By February 1920, the president&#x27;s true condition was publicly known. Many expressed qualms about Wilson&#x27;s fitness for the presidency at a time when the League fight was reaching a climax, and domestic issues such as strikes, unemployment, inflation and the threat of Communism were ablaze. In mid-March 1920, Lodge and his Republicans formed a coalition with the pro-treaty Democrats to pass a treaty with reservations, but Wilson rejected this compromise and enough Democrats followed his lead to defeat ratification. No one close to Wilson was willing to certify, as required by the Constitution, his &quot;inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office.&quot; Though some members of Congress encouraged Vice President Marshall to assert his claim to the presidency, Marshall never attempted to replace Wilson. Wilson&#x27;s lengthy period of incapacity while serving as president was nearly unprecedented; of the previous presidents, only James Garfield had been in a similar situation, but Garfield retained greater control of his mental faculties and faced relatively few pressing issues.

==== Demobilization ====
When the war ended the Wilson Administration dismantled the wartime boards and regulatory agencies. Demobilization was chaotic and at times violent; four million soldiers were sent home with little money and few benefits. In 1919, strikes in major industries broke out, disrupting the economy. The country experienced further turbulence as a series of race riots broke out in the summer of 1919. In 1920, the economy plunged into a severe economic depression, unemployment rose to 12 percent, and the price of agricultural products sharply declined.

====Red Scare and Palmer Raids====

Following the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia and similar revolutionary attempts in Germany and Hungary, many Americans feared the possibility of terrorism in the United States. Such concerns were inflamed by the bombings in April 1919 when anarchists mailed 38 bombs to prominent Americans; one person was killed but most packages were intercepted. Nine more mail bombs were sent in June, injuring several people. Fresh fears combined with a patriotic national mood sparking the &quot;First Red Scare&quot; in 1919. Attorney General Palmer from November 1919 to January 1920 launched the Palmer Raids to suppress radical organizations. Over 10,000 people were arrested and 556 aliens were deported, including Emma Goldman. Palmer&#x27;s activities met resistance from the courts and some senior administration officials. No one told Wilson what Palmer was doing. Later in 1920, the Wall Street bombing on September 16 killed 40 and injured hundreds in the deadliest terrorist attack on American soil up to that point. Anarchists took credit and promised more violence; they escaped capture.

==== Prohibition and women&#x27;s suffrage ====
Prohibition developed as an unstoppable reform during World War I, but the Wilson administration played only a minor role. The Eighteenth Amendment passed Congress and was ratified by the states in 1919. In October 1919, Wilson vetoed the Volstead Act, legislation designed to enforce Prohibition, but his veto was overridden by Congress.

Wilson opposed women&#x27;s suffrage in 1911 because he believed women lacked the public experience needed to be good voters. The actual evidence of how women voters behaved in the western states changed his mind, and he came to feel they could indeed be good voters. He did not speak publicly on the issue except to echo the Democratic Party position that suffrage was a state matter, primarily because of strong opposition in the white South to black voting rights.

In a 1918 speech before Congress, Wilson for the first time backed a national right to vote: &quot;We have made partners of the women in this war...Shall we admit them only to a partnership of suffering and sacrifice and toil and not to a partnership of privilege and right?&quot; The House passed a constitutional amendment providing for women&#x27;s suffrage nationwide, but this stalled in the Senate. Wilson continually pressured the Senate to vote for the amendment, telling senators that its ratification was vital to winning the war. The Senate finally approved it in June 1919, and the requisite number of states ratified the Nineteenth Amendment in August 1920.

==== 1920 election ====
Despite his medical incapacity, Wilson wanted to run for a third term. While the 1920 Democratic National Convention strongly endorsed Wilson&#x27;s policies, Democratic leaders refused, nominating instead a ticket consisting of Governor James M. Cox and Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt. The Republicans centered their campaign around opposition to Wilson&#x27;s policies, with Senator Warren G. Harding promising a &quot;return to normalcy&quot;. Wilson largely stayed out of the campaign, although he endorsed Cox and continued to advocate for U.S. membership in the League of Nations. Harding won the election in a landslide, capturing over 60% of the popular vote and winning every state outside of the South. Wilson met with Harding for tea on his last day in office, March 3, 1921. Due to his health, Wilson was unable to attend the inauguration.

On December 10, 1920, Wilson was awarded the 1919 Nobel Peace Prize &quot;for his role as founder of the League of Nations&quot;. Wilson became the second sitting United States president after Theodore Roosevelt to become a Nobel Peace Laureate.

== Final years and death (1921–1924) ==
After the end of his second term in 1921, Wilson and his wife moved from the White House to a townhouse in the Kalorama section of Washington, D.C. He continued to follow politics as President Harding and the Republican Congress repudiated membership in the League of Nations, cut taxes, and raised tariffs. In 1921, Wilson opened a law practice with former secretary of state Bainbridge Colby. Wilson showed up the first day but never returned, and the practice was closed by the end of 1922. Wilson tried writing, and he produced a few short essays after enormous effort; they &quot;marked a sad finish to a formerly great literary career.&quot; He declined to write memoirs, but frequently met with Ray Stannard Baker, who wrote a three-volume biography of Wilson that was published in 1922. In August 1923, Wilson attended the funeral of his successor, Warren Harding. On November 10, 1923, Wilson made his last national address, delivering a short Armistice Day radio speech from the library of his home.
Wilson&#x27;s health did not markedly improve after leaving office, declining rapidly in January 1924. He died on February 3, 1924, at the age of 67. The president and first lady, Calvin and Grace Coolidge, attended the funeral as did former first lady Florence Harding. Former first lady Helen Herron Taft represented her husband, Chief Justice and former president William Howard Taft, who was too ill to attend the service. Also among the 2,000 guests invited were 11 senators, many members of the House of Representatives, and several foreign dignitaries. Wilson was interred in Washington National Cathedral, being the only president whose final resting place lies within the nation&#x27;s capital.

== Race relations ==
Wilson was born and raised in the U.S. South by parents who were committed supporters of both slavery and the Confederacy. Academically, Wilson was an apologist for slavery and the Redeemers, and one of the foremost promoters of the Lost Cause mythology. 
Wilson was the first Southerner elected president since Zachary Taylor in 1848 and the only former subject of the Confederacy. Wilson&#x27;s election was celebrated by southern segregationists. At Princeton, Wilson actively discouraged the admission of African-Americans as students. Several historians have spotlighted consistent examples in the public record of Wilson&#x27;s overtly racist policies and the inclusion of segregationists in his Cabinet. Other scholars say Wilson defended segregation as &quot;a rational, scientific policy&quot; in private and describe him as a man who &quot;loved to tell racist &#x27;darky&#x27; jokes about black Americans.&quot;

During Wilson&#x27;s presidency, D. W. Griffith&#x27;s pro-Ku Klux Klan film &quot;The Birth of a Nation&quot; (1915) was the first motion picture to be screened in the White House. Though he was not initially critical of the movie, Wilson distanced himself from it as public backlash mounted and eventually released a statement condemning the film&#x27;s message while denying he had been aware of it prior to the screening.

=== Segregating the federal bureaucracy ===
By the 1910s, African Americans had become effectively shut out of elected office. Obtaining an executive appointment to a position within the federal bureaucracy was usually the only option for African-American statesmen. According to Berg, Wilson continued to appoint African-Americans to positions that had traditionally been filled by black people, overcoming opposition from many Southern senators. Oswald Garrison Villard, who later became an opponent of his, initially thought that Wilson was not a bigot and supported progress for black people, and he was frustrated by Southern opposition in the Senate, to which Wilson capitulated. In a conversation with Wilson, journalist John Palmer Gavit came to the realization that opposition to those views &quot;would certainly precipitate a conflict which would put a complete stop to any legislative program.&quot;

Since the end of Reconstruction, both parties recognized certain appointments as unofficially reserved for qualified African-Americans. Wilson appointed a total of nine African-Americans to prominent positions in the federal bureaucracy, eight of whom were Republican carry-overs. For comparison, William Howard Taft was met with disdain and outrage from Republicans of both races for appointing thirty-one black officeholders, a record low for a Republican president. Upon taking office, Wilson fired all but two of the seventeen black supervisors in the federal bureaucracy appointed by Taft. Since 1863, the U.S. mission to Haiti and Santo Domingo was almost always led by an African American diplomat regardless of what party the sitting president belonged to; Wilson ended this half-century-old tradition but continued to appoint Black diplomats, such as George Washington Buckner, as well as Joseph L. Johnson, to head the mission to Liberia. Since the end of Reconstruction, the federal bureaucracy had been possibly the only career path where African-Americans could experience some measure of equality, and was the lifeblood and foundation of the Black middle class.

Wilson&#x27;s administration escalated the discriminatory hiring policies and segregation of government offices that had begun under Theodore Roosevelt and continued under Taft. In Wilson&#x27;s first month in office, Postmaster General Albert S. Burleson urged the president to establish segregated government offices. Wilson did not adopt Burleson&#x27;s proposal but allowed Cabinet secretaries discretion to segregate their respective departments. By the end of 1913, many departments, including the Navy, Treasury, and Post Office, had segregated work spaces, restrooms, and cafeterias. Many agencies used segregation as a pretext to adopt a whites-only employment policy, claiming they lacked facilities for black workers. In these instances, African-Americans employed prior to the Wilson administration were either offered early retirement, transferred, or simply fired. At the suggestion of Oklahoma Senator Thomas Gore, Wilson nominated Adam E. Patterson, a Black Democrat from Muskogee, Oklahoma, for the position of Register of the Treasury in July 1913; Patterson withdrew his name from consideration following opposition from Southern Democratic senators James K. Vardaman and Benjamin Tillman. Wilson proceeded to nominate Gabe E. Parker, who was of mixed European and Choctaw descent, for the position instead, and did not nominate any other Black people for federal office afterwards.

Racial discrimination in federal hiring increased further when after 1914, the United States Civil Service Commission instituted a new policy requiring job applicants to submit a personal photo with their application. The alleged impetus behind this policy was to guard against applicant fraud; however, only 14 cases of impersonation/attempted impersonation in the application process were uncovered the year prior. As a federal enclave, Washington, D.C., had long offered African Americans greater opportunities for employment and less glaring discrimination. In 1919, Black veterans returning home to D.C. were shocked to discover Jim Crow laws had set in; many could not go back to the jobs they held prior to the war or even enter the same building they used to work in due to the color of their skin. Booker T. Washington described the situation: &quot;I had never seen the colored people so discouraged and bitter as they are at the present time.&quot;

=== African Americans in the armed forces ===
While segregation had been present in the Army prior to Wilson, its severity increased significantly under his administration. During Wilson&#x27;s first term, the Army and Navy refused to commission new black officers. Black officers already serving experienced increased discrimination and were often forced out or discharged on dubious grounds. Following the entry of the U.S. into World War I, the War Department drafted hundreds of thousands of black people into the Army, and draftees were paid equally regardless of race. Commissioning of African-American officers resumed but units remained segregated and most all-black units were led by white officers.

Unlike the Army, the U.S. Navy was never formally segregated. Following Wilson&#x27;s appointment of Josephus Daniels as Secretary of the Navy, a system of Jim Crow was swiftly implemented; with ships, training facilities, restrooms, and cafeterias all becoming segregated. While Daniels significantly expanded opportunities for advancement and training available to white sailors, by the time the U.S. entered World War I, African-American sailors had been relegated almost entirely to mess and custodial duties, often assigned to act as servants for white officers.

=== Response to racial violence ===

In response to the demand for industrial labor, the Great Migration of African Americans out of the South surged in 1917 and 1918. This migration sparked race riots, including the East St. Louis riots of 1917. In response to these riots, but only after much public outcry, Wilson asked Attorney General Thomas Watt Gregory if the federal government could intervene to &quot;check these disgraceful outrages&quot;. On the advice of Gregory, Wilson did not take direct action against the riots. In 1918, Wilson spoke out against lynching in the United States, stating: &quot;I say plainly that every American who takes part in the action of mob or gives it any sort of continence is no true son of this great democracy but its betrayer, and ... [discredits] her by that single disloyalty to her standards of law and of rights.&quot;

In 1919, another series of race riots occurred in Chicago, Omaha, and two dozen other major cities in the North. The federal government did not become involved, just as it had not become involved previously.

== Legacy ==
=== Historical reputation ===
Wilson is generally ranked by historians and political scientists as an above average president. In the view of some historians, Wilson, more than any of his predecessors, took steps towards the creation of a strong federal government that would protect ordinary citizens against the overwhelming power of large corporations. He is generally regarded as a key figure in the establishment of modern American liberalism, and a strong influence on future presidents such as Franklin D. Roosevelt and Lyndon B. Johnson. Cooper argues that in terms of impact and ambition, only the New Deal and the Great Society rival the domestic accomplishments of Wilson&#x27;s presidency. Many of Wilson&#x27;s accomplishments, including the Federal Reserve, the Federal Trade Commission, the graduated income tax, and labor laws, continued to influence the United States long after Wilson&#x27;s death.

Many conservatives have attacked Wilson for his role in expanding the federal government. In 2018, conservative columnist George Will wrote in &quot;The Washington Post&quot; that Theodore Roosevelt and Wilson were the &quot;progenitors of today&#x27;s imperial presidency&quot;. Wilson&#x27;s idealistic foreign policy, which came to be known as Wilsonianism, also cast a long shadow over American foreign policy, and Wilson&#x27;s League of Nations influenced the development of the United Nations. Saladin Ambar writes that Wilson was &quot;the first statesman of world stature to speak out not only against European imperialism but against the newer form of economic domination sometimes described as &#x27;informal imperialism.

Notwithstanding his accomplishments in office, Wilson has received criticism for his record on race relations and civil liberties, for his interventions in Latin America, and for his failure to win ratification of the Treaty of Versailles. Despite his Southern roots and record at Princeton, Wilson became the first Democrat to receive widespread support from the African American community in a presidential election. Wilson&#x27;s African-American supporters, many of whom had crossed party lines to vote for him in 1912, found themselves bitterly disappointed by the Wilson presidency, his decision to allow the imposition of Jim Crow within the federal bureaucracy in particular.

Ross Kennedy writes that Wilson&#x27;s support of segregation complied with predominant public opinion. A. Scott Berg argues Wilson accepted segregation as part of a policy to &quot;promote racial progress... by shocking the social system as little as possible.&quot; The ultimate result of this policy was unprecedented levels of segregation within the federal bureaucracy and far fewer opportunities for employment and promotion being open to African-Americans than before. Historian Kendrick Clements argues &quot;Wilson had none of the crude, vicious racism of James K. Vardaman or Benjamin R. Tillman, but he was insensitive to African-American feelings and aspirations.&quot; A 2021 study in the &quot;Quarterly Journal of Economics&quot; found that Wilson&#x27;s segregation of the civil service increased the black-white earnings gap by 3.4–6.9 percentage points, as existing black civil servants were driven to lower-paid positions. Black civil servants who were exposed to Wilson&#x27;s segregationist policies experienced a relative decline in home ownership rates, with suggestive evidence of lasting adverse effects for the descendants of those black civil servants. In the wake of the 2015 Charleston church shooting, some individuals demanded the removal of Wilson&#x27;s name from institutions affiliated with Princeton due to his stance on race.

=== Memorials ===
The Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library is located in Staunton, Virginia. The Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home in Augusta, Georgia, and the Woodrow Wilson House in Washington, D.C., are National Historic Landmarks. The Thomas Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home in Columbia, South Carolina is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Shadow Lawn, the Summer White House for Wilson during his term in office, became part of Monmouth University in 1956, and was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1985. Prospect House in Princeton, New Jersey, Wilson&#x27;s residence as president of Princeton University, has been named a National Historic Landmark. Wilson&#x27;s presidential papers and his personal library are housed in the Library of Congress.

The Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C., is named for Wilson, and the Princeton School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University was named for Wilson until 2020 when Princeton&#x27;s board of trustees voted to remove Wilson&#x27;s name from the school. The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation is a non-profit that provides grants for teaching fellowships. The Woodrow Wilson Foundation was established to honor Wilson&#x27;s legacy but was terminated in 1993. One of Princeton University&#x27;s six residential colleges was originally named Wilson College. Numerous schools, including several high schools, bear Wilson&#x27;s name. Several streets, including the Rambla Presidente Wilson in Montevideo, Uruguay, have been named for Wilson. The USS &quot;Woodrow Wilson&quot;, a &quot;Lafayette&quot;-class submarine, was named for Wilson. Other things named for Wilson include the Woodrow Wilson Bridge between Prince George&#x27;s County, Maryland and Virginia, and the Palais Wilson, which serves as the temporary headquarters of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva until 2023 at the end of leasing. Monuments to Wilson include the Woodrow Wilson Monument in Prague.

=== Popular culture ===
In 1944, 20th Century Fox released &quot;Wilson&quot;, a biopic about Wilson starring Alexander Knox and directed by Henry King, considered an &quot;idealistic&quot; portrayal of Wilson. The movie was a personal passion project of studio president and producer Darryl F. Zanuck, who was a deep admirer of Wilson. The movie was praised by film critics and Wilson supporters, and scored ten Academy Awards nominations, winning five. Despite its popularity amongst elites, &quot;Wilson&quot; was a box-office bomb, incurring an almost $2 million loss for the studio. The movie&#x27;s failure is said to have had a deep and long lasting impact on Zanuck and no attempt has been made by any major studio since to create a motion picture based on the life of Wilson.

== Works ==
* &quot;Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics.&quot; Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, 1885.
* &quot;The State: Elements of Historical and Practical Politics.&quot; Boston: D.C. Heath, 1889.
* &quot;Division and Reunion, 1829–1889.&quot; New York, London, Longmans, Green, and Co., 1893.
* An old master, and other political essays&quot;An Old Master and Other Political Essays.&quot;] New York: Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons, 1893.
* &quot;Mere Literature and Other Essays.&quot; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1896.
* &quot;George Washington.&quot; New York: Harper &amp; Brothers, 1897.
* &quot;A History of the American People.&quot; In five volumes. New York: Harper &amp; Brothers, 1901–02. 
* &quot;Constitutional Government in the United States.&quot; New York: Columbia University Press, 1908.
* &quot;The Free Life: A Baccalaureate Address.&quot; New York: Thomas Y. Crowell &amp; Co., 1908.
* &quot;The New Freedom: A Call for the Emancipation of the Energies of a Generous People.&quot; New York: Doubleday, Page &amp; Co., 1913. 
* &quot;The Road Away from Revolution.&quot; Boston: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1923; reprint of short magazine article.
* &quot;The Public Papers of Woodrow Wilson.&quot; Ray Stannard Baker and William E. Dodd (eds.) In six volumes. New York: Harper &amp; Brothers, 1925–27.
* &quot;Study of public administration&quot; (Washington: Public Affairs Press, 1955)
* &quot;A Crossroads of Freedom: The 1912 Campaign Speeches of Woodrow Wilson.&quot; John Wells Davidson (ed.) New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1956.online
* &quot;The Papers of Woodrow Wilson.&quot; Arthur S. Link (ed.) In 69 volumes. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1967–1994.

== See also ==

* Diplomatic history of World War I
* Electoral history of Woodrow Wilson
* List of presidents of the United States
* List of presidents of the United States by previous experience
* Progressive Era
* Woodrow Wilson and race
* Woodrow Wilson Awards

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Coben, Stanley. &quot;A. Mitchell Palmer: Politician&quot; (Columbia UP, 1963) online
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
** 
** 
* 
* Ober, William B. &quot;Woodrow Wilson: A Medical and Psychological Biography.&quot; &quot;Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine&quot; 59.4 (1983): 410+ online.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Wright, Esmond. &quot;The Foreign Policy of Woodrow Wilson: A Re-Assessment. Part 1: Woodrow Wilson and the First World War&quot; &quot;History Today&quot;. (Mar 1960) 10#3 pp. 149–157.
** Wright, Esmond. &quot;The Foreign Policy of Woodrow Wilson: A Re-Assessment. Part 2: Wilson and the Dream of Reason&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (Apr 1960) 19#4 pp. 223–231.
== Further reading ==


=== For students ===
* Archer, Jules. &quot;World citizen: Woodrow Wilson&quot; (1967) online, for secondary schools
* Frith, Margaret. &quot;Who was Woodrow Wilson?&quot; (2015) online. for middle schools

=== Historiography ===
* Ambrosius, Lloyd. &quot;Wilsonianism: Woodrow Wilson and his legacy in American foreign relations&quot; (Springer, 2002). 
* Cooper, John Milton, ed. &quot;Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson: Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace&quot; (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2008) 
* Cooper, John Milton. &quot;Making A Case for Wilson&quot;, in &quot;Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson&quot; (2008) ch 1. 
* 
* 
* Saunders, Robert M. &quot;In Search of Woodrow Wilson: Beliefs and Behavior&quot; (1998) 
* 

== External links ==
=== Official ===
* About Woodrow Wilson – Wilson Center
* Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library &amp; Museum
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="0" end="21" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Thomas Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="71" end="101" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="146" end="154" title="History of the Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="188" end="203" title="Progressive Era" label="Progressive Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="250" end="270" title="United States Congress" label="legislative branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="368" end="379" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="417" end="434" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182760" start="489" end="501" title="Wilsonianism" label="Wilsonianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q502250" start="512" end="530" title="Staunton, Virginia" label="Staunton, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105839964" start="539" end="546" title="early life of Woodrow Wilson" label="grew up"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="554" end="576" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="588" end="606" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="611" end="629" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction era"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="647" end="652" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="691" end="715" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="789" end="809" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q834933" start="857" end="890" title="progressivism in higher education" label="progressivism in higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112728" start="913" end="935" title="governor of New Jersey" label="governor of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="1026" end="1037" title="Progressivism in the United States" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q699289" start="1056" end="1069" title="1912 United States presidential election" label="1912 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="1097" end="1107" title="History of the Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="1108" end="1127" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="1152" end="1170" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q698769" start="1234" end="1247" title="1848 United States presidential election" label="1848 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q105753546" start="1318" end="1343" title="Woodrow Wilson and race" label="imposition of segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753602" start="1508" end="1519" title="The New Freedom" label="New Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317966" start="1570" end="1589" title="Revenue Act of 1913" label="Revenue Act of 1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308197" start="1614" end="1624" title="Income tax in the United States" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982567" start="1634" end="1653" title="Federal Reserve Act" label="Federal Reserve Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="1673" end="1695" title="Federal Reserve System" label="Federal Reserve System"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1704" end="1727" title="outbreak of World War I" label="outbreak of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="1813" end="1819" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="1824" end="1838" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q699318" start="1880" end="1893" title="1916 United States presidential election" label="1916 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q313252" start="1924" end="1944" title="Charles Evans Hughes" label="Charles Evans Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="2171" end="2186" title="Fourteen Points" label="Fourteen Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="2408" end="2422" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="Allied victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="2461" end="2483" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="2574" end="2591" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="2625" end="2645" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073554" start="2698" end="2708" title="Irreconcilables" label="compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q699343" start="3111" end="3124" title="1920 United States presidential election" label="1920 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="3235" end="3253" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="3281" end="3285" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="3358" end="3371" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="3555" end="3572" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="modern liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="3653" end="3665" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scotch-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="3670" end="3686" title="Scottish Americans" label="Scottish descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286693" start="3765" end="3786" title="Joseph Ruggles Wilson" label="Joseph Ruggles Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027659" start="3890" end="3898" title="Strabane" label="Strabane"/>
<link wikidata="Q986432" start="3948" end="3966" title="Steubenville, Ohio" label="Steubenville, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20719880" start="4003" end="4015" title="James Wilson (journalist)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="4032" end="4038" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="4043" end="4055" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="anti-slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995218" start="4073" end="4103" title="The Western Herald and Gazette" label="The Western Herald and Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q211870" start="4187" end="4208" title="Paisley, Renfrewshire" label="Paisley, Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192896" start="4223" end="4240" title="Carlisle, Cumbria" label="Carlisle, Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q988739" start="4271" end="4288" title="Chillicothe, Ohio" label="Chillicothe, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="4476" end="4488" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033218" start="4559" end="4568" title="The Manse (Woodrow Wilson)" label="the Manse"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="4914" end="4929" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="4934" end="4946" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="been elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="5040" end="5069" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="5085" end="5095" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824576" start="5101" end="5144" title="Presidency of John Tyler" label="served as the nation&amp;#x27;s tenth president"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="5205" end="5227" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268181" start="5359" end="5415" title="Presbyterian Church in the Confederate States of America" label="Presbyterian Church in the Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268181" start="5435" end="5475" title="Presbyterian Church in the United States" label="Presbyterian Church in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453536" start="5568" end="5593" title="First Presbyterian Church (Augusta, Georgia)" label="First Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q38453" start="5680" end="5704" title="Columbia, South Carolina" label="Columbia, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149859" start="5755" end="5784" title="Columbia Theological Seminary" label="Columbia Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453553" start="5837" end="5871" title="Columbia First Presbyterian Church" label="Columbia First Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902978" start="5932" end="5948" title="Davidson College" label="Davidson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026925" start="5952" end="5976" title="Davidson, North Carolina" label="Davidson, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="6078" end="6098" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="6117" end="6137" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="6142" end="6149" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378723" start="6162" end="6175" title="Phi Kappa Psi" label="Phi Kappa Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745375" start="6210" end="6244" title="Whig literary and debating society" label="Whig literary and debating society"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="6297" end="6305" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="6350" end="6358" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q72251" start="6441" end="6470" title="1876 United States presidential election" label="presidential election of 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="6493" end="6509" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q281566" start="6527" end="6543" title="Samuel J. Tilden" label="Samuel J. Tilden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896545" start="6607" end="6643" title="University of Virginia School of Law" label="University of Virginia School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="6647" end="6672" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934281" start="6703" end="6721" title="Virginia Glee Club" label="Virginia Glee Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175528" start="6753" end="6792" title="Jefferson Literary and Debating Society" label="Jefferson Literary and Debating Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="6923" end="6949" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603080" start="6978" end="6989" title="Georgia bar" label="Georgia bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="7033" end="7041" title="law firm" label="law firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="7045" end="7052" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="7406" end="7415" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="7468" end="7474" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="8165" end="8181" title="Houghton Mifflin Harcourt" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="8335" end="8356" title="Constitution of the United States" label="American constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q858036" start="8386" end="8415" title="Federalist Papers" label="&amp;#x27;Federalist&amp;#x27; papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q234283" start="8493" end="8511" title="Ellen Louise Axson" label="Ellen Louise Axson"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="8664" end="8695" title="Art Students League of New York" label="Art Students League of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165690" start="8771" end="8800" title="Exposition Universelle (1878)" label="Exposition Universelle (1878)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="8921" end="8927" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631166" start="9087" end="9095" title="Margaret Woodrow Wilson" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187865" start="9127" end="9133" title="Jessie Woodrow Wilson Sayre" label="Jessie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354414" start="9189" end="9196" title="Eleanor Wilson McAdoo" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921952" start="9248" end="9271" title="Francis Bowes Sayre Sr." label="Francis Bowes Sayre Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2483184" start="9293" end="9329" title="High Commissioner to the Philippines" label="High Commissioner to the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q741058" start="9374" end="9394" title="William Gibbs McAdoo" label="William Gibbs McAdoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="9396" end="9426" title="U.S. Secretary of the Treasury" label="U.S. secretary of the treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787981" start="9460" end="9488" title="U.S. Senator from California" label="U.S. senator from California"/>
<link wikidata="Q995265" start="9567" end="9584" title="Bryn Mawr College" label="Bryn Mawr College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031137" start="9606" end="9626" title="Women&amp;#x27;s colleges in the United States" label="women&amp;#x27;s college"/>
<link wikidata="Q995267" start="9630" end="9653" title="Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania" label="Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="9663" end="9675" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295174" start="9884" end="9899" title="M. Carey Thomas" label="M. Carey Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49167" start="10113" end="10132" title="Wesleyan University" label="Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49192" start="10176" end="10199" title="Middletown, Connecticut" label="Middletown, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137175" start="10253" end="10268" title="Western history" label="Western history"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="10294" end="10302" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481675" start="10640" end="10661" title="Francis Landey Patton" label="Francis Landey Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="10828" end="10854" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="10891" end="10913" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10594775" start="10982" end="10995" title="Gold Democrat" label="Gold Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q880367" start="11011" end="11025" title="John M. Palmer (politician)" label="John M. Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="11196" end="11218" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210236" start="11349" end="11376" title="Political Science Quarterly" label="Political Science Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="12562" end="12598" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="12637" end="12667" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q499143" start="13304" end="13314" title="Preceptor in education" label="preceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915957" start="13437" end="13454" title="Moses Taylor Pyne" label="Moses Taylor Pyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="13483" end="13498" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q49113" start="13751" end="13761" title="Ivy League" label="Ivy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236332" start="13838" end="13855" title="John Grier Hibben" label="John Grier Hibben"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252367" start="14598" end="14623" title="hardening of the arteries" label="hardening of the arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="14784" end="14791" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656390" start="14860" end="14879" title="August Heckscher II" label="August Heckscher II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278332" start="15372" end="15383" title="eating club" label="eating club"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600153" start="15759" end="15778" title="Andrew Fleming West" label="Andrew Fleming West"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="15859" end="15875" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558844" start="16374" end="16409" title="1908 Democratic National Convention" label="1908 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575845" start="16801" end="16815" title="McGeorge Bundy" label="McGeorge Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143301" start="17138" end="17153" title="James Smith Jr." label="James Smith Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5537255" start="17158" end="17189" title="George Brinton McClellan Harvey" label="George Brinton McClellan Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980731" start="17206" end="17240" title="New Jersey Democratic State Committee" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24456661" start="17283" end="17305" title="1910 New Jersey gubernatorial election" label="gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133938" start="17575" end="17581" title="trust (business)" label="trusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="18197" end="18208" title="Progressivism in the United States" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q72835" start="18278" end="18304" title="1908 United States presidential election" label="1908 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937739" start="18389" end="18404" title="Vivian M. Lewis" label="Vivian M. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455914" start="18479" end="18495" title="New Jersey General Assembly" label="general assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357027" start="18503" end="18517" title="1910 United States elections" label="1910 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480298" start="18530" end="18542" title="New Jersey Senate" label="state senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286125" start="18618" end="18640" title="Joseph Patrick Tumulty" label="Joseph Patrick Tumulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978145" start="18954" end="18973" title="James Edgar Martine" label="James Edgar Martine"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="19328" end="19340" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277149" start="19355" end="19369" title="United States antitrust law" label="antitrust laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315147" start="21092" end="21098" title="juries in the United States" label="juries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112728" start="21275" end="21297" title="Governor of New Jersey" label="Governor of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q719357" start="21493" end="21508" title="Cyrus McCormick" label="Cyrus McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428445" start="21533" end="21550" title="Walter Hines Page" label="Walter Hines Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537255" start="21742" end="21773" title="George Brinton McClellan Harvey" label="George Brinton McClellan Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="21823" end="21834" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q741058" start="21865" end="21885" title="William Gibbs McAdoo" label="William Gibbs McAdoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q704368" start="21910" end="21925" title="Edward M. House" label="Edward M. House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559480" start="21966" end="22001" title="1912 Democratic National Convention" label="1912 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="22191" end="22217" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q465651" start="22241" end="22252" title="Champ Clark" label="Champ Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q454609" start="22352" end="22367" title="Oscar Underwood" label="Oscar Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q895181" start="22508" end="22524" title="Bourbon Democrat" label="Bourbon Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23037862" start="22559" end="22603" title="1912 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1912 Democratic Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="22878" end="22890" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357970" start="23158" end="23180" title="Roger Charles Sullivan" label="Roger Charles Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805476" start="23185" end="23199" title="Thomas Taggart" label="Thomas Taggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q299001" start="23245" end="23263" title="Thomas R. Marshall" label="Thomas R. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="23659" end="23677" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579199" start="23689" end="23700" title="third party (United States)" label="third party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363538" start="23717" end="23745" title="Progressive Party (United States, 1912)" label="&amp;quot;Bull Moose&amp;quot; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q334993" start="23780" end="23794" title="Eugene V. Debs" label="Eugene V. Debs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353232" start="23802" end="23817" title="Socialist Party of America" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559522" start="23869" end="23904" title="1912 Republican National Convention" label="1912 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q72472" start="24069" end="24095" title="1892 United States presidential election" label="1892 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47946" start="24358" end="24374" title="Henry Morgenthau, Sr." label="Henry Morgenthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q520840" start="24756" end="24770" title="Louis Brandeis" label="Louis Brandeis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753602" start="24789" end="24800" title="The New Freedom" label="New Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686042" start="24866" end="24872" title="tariffs in United States history" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="24959" end="24970" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="25285" end="25300" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="electoral votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643322" start="25403" end="25437" title="List of third party performances in United States elections" label="strongest third party performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357028" start="25589" end="25612" title="1912 United States elections" label="congressional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="25648" end="25653" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="25680" end="25686" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q724204" start="26235" end="26257" title="James Clark McReynolds" label="James Clark McReynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093714" start="26368" end="26384" title="Josephus Daniels" label="Josephus Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="26526" end="26547" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286125" start="26645" end="26667" title="Joseph Patrick Tumulty" label="Joseph Patrick Tumulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q704368" start="26814" end="26829" title="Edward M. House" label="Edward M. House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="27174" end="27186" title="Conservation movement" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686042" start="27225" end="27231" title="tariffs in United States history" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="27465" end="27475" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q454609" start="28158" end="28173" title="Oscar Underwood" label="Oscar Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317966" start="29202" end="29221" title="Revenue Act of 1913" label="Revenue Act of 1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="29883" end="29895" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855994" start="29957" end="29965" title="Bank War" label="Bank War"/>
<link wikidata="Q844449" start="30004" end="30039" title="Panic of 1907" label="nationwide financial crisis in 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q927573" start="30298" end="30312" title="Nelson Aldrich" label="Nelson Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873169" start="30338" end="30366" title="National Monetary Commission" label="National Monetary Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481787" start="30795" end="30815" title="Federal Reserve Bank" label="Federal Reserve Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982567" start="31048" end="31067" title="Federal Reserve Act" label="Federal Reserve Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="31378" end="31399" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133938" start="31612" end="31617" title="Trust (business)" label="trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606664" start="31808" end="31826" title="Henry De Lamar Clayton Jr." label="Henry Clayton, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q835678" start="31903" end="31925" title="Price discrimination" label="discriminatory pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q973710" start="31927" end="31932" title="Tying (commerce)" label="tying"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419692" start="31934" end="31951" title="exclusive dealing" label="exclusive dealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047158" start="31957" end="31981" title="interlocking directorate" label="interlocking directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="32143" end="32167" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440467" start="32324" end="32360" title="Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914" label="Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q972653" start="32504" end="32533" title="Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914" label="Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971463" start="32831" end="32861" title="National Child Labor Committee" label="National Child Labor Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971831" start="32877" end="32902" title="National Consumers League" label="National Consumers League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382334" start="32928" end="32944" title="Keating–Owen Act" label="Keating–Owen Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="33555" end="33573" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645676" start="33603" end="33622" title="Hammer v. Dagenhart" label="Hammer v. Dagenhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848400" start="33760" end="33786" title="Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co." label="Bailey v. Drexel Furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440703" start="33958" end="33975" title="Seamen&amp;#x27;s Act" label="Seamen&amp;#x27;s Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493810" start="34020" end="34045" title="Fraternal Order of Eagles" label="Fraternal Order of Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148759" start="34431" end="34453" title="Colorado Coalfield War" label="Colorado Coalfield War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130386731" start="34552" end="34571" title="Eight-hour day" label="eight-hour work day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440221" start="34784" end="34805" title="Federal Farm Loan Act" label="Federal Farm Loan Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="35178" end="35189" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="35327" end="35336" title="Filipinos" label="Filipinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975536" start="35390" end="35407" title="Jones Act of 1916" label="Jones Act of 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418426" start="35561" end="35567" title="Philippine Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q678545" start="35572" end="35596" title="House of Representatives of the Philippines" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253627" start="35625" end="35646" title="Philippine Commission" label="Philippine Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q595883" start="35664" end="35683" title="Philippine Assembly" label="Philippine Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837318" start="35715" end="35734" title="Treaty of the Danish West Indies" label="purchased by treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q829655" start="35739" end="35757" title="Danish West Indies" label="Danish West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="35774" end="35802" title="United States Virgin Islands" label="United States Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="36223" end="36250" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q724204" start="36350" end="36372" title="James Clark McReynolds" label="James Clark McReynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q113642164" start="36634" end="36671" title="Louis Brandeis Supreme Court nomination" label="nominated Louis Brandeis to the Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="36797" end="36803" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700452" start="37124" end="37142" title="John Hessin Clarke" label="John Hessin Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395797" start="37420" end="37436" title="Dollar Diplomacy" label="Dollar Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="37479" end="37492" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="37540" end="37553" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983294" start="37599" end="37620" title="Bryan–Chamorro Treaty" label="Bryan–Chamorro Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="37631" end="37640" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304042" start="37696" end="37714" title="United States occupation of Nicaragua" label="stationed soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744619" start="37784" end="37805" title="United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916–24)" label="sent troops to occupy"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="37810" end="37828" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298759" start="37833" end="37842" title="United States occupation of Haiti" label="intervene"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="37846" end="37851" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="37906" end="37910" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="37912" end="37918" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="37924" end="37932" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="37965" end="37983" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="38063" end="38076" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q299168" start="38162" end="38179" title="Victoriano Huerta" label="Victoriano Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q273014" start="38433" end="38440" title="Tampico" label="Tampico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316711" start="38449" end="38478" title="United States occupation of Veracruz" label="dispatched the Navy to occupy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="38499" end="38507" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="38783" end="38802" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="39001" end="39013" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112742" start="39136" end="39156" title="Columbus, New Mexico" label="Columbus, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="39292" end="39308" title="John J. Pershing" label="John J. Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="40028" end="40039" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="40076" end="40090" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="40101" end="40116" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="40122" end="40136" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="40148" end="40156" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="40170" end="40183" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="40194" end="40200" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="40202" end="40208" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="40210" end="40216" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="40316" end="40329" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906848" start="41017" end="41036" title="Blockade of Germany (1914–1919)" label="blockade of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316150" start="41419" end="41437" title="U-boat Campaign (World War I)" label="submarine campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q187425" start="41793" end="41818" title="RMS Lusitania" label="RMS &amp;quot;Lusitania&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383687" start="42421" end="42442" title="SS Sussex" label="SS &amp;quot;Sussex&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240647" start="43016" end="43037" title="Preparedness Movement" label="preparedness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336869" start="43124" end="43152" title="National Defense Act of 1916" label="National Defense Act of 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="43176" end="43213" title="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="43231" end="43245" title="United States National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141809" start="43286" end="43303" title="Naval Act of 1916" label="Naval Act of 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246646" start="43482" end="43503" title="Bright&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Bright&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q255169" start="43651" end="43669" title="Edith Bolling Galt" label="Edith Bolling Galt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="44082" end="44092" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560205" start="44233" end="44268" title="1916 Democratic National Convention" label="1916 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152619" start="44817" end="44852" title="1916 Republican National Convention" label="1916 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q313252" start="44885" end="44905" title="Charles Evans Hughes" label="Charles Evans Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680500" start="45236" end="45247" title="Adamson Act" label="Adamson Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538559" start="45847" end="45858" title="Solid South" label="Solid South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="46019" end="46033" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="46163" end="46176" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119089" start="46203" end="46233" title="unrestricted submarine warfare" label="unrestricted submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q154091" start="46501" end="46520" title="Zimmermann Telegram" label="Zimmermann Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="47041" end="47054" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249472" start="47751" end="47790" title="declaration of war by the United States" label="declaration of war by the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892405" start="47791" end="47806" title="1917 United States declaration of war on Germany" label="against Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q25830895" start="47899" end="47911" title="United States declaration of war on Austria-Hungary" label="declared war"/>
<link wikidata="Q926206" start="48020" end="48035" title="Newton D. Baker" label="Newton D. Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992216" start="48114" end="48126" title="Regular Army (United States)" label="Regular Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q689764" start="48145" end="48159" title="Army National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q258758" start="48219" end="48232" title="Army of the United States" label="National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954727" start="48413" end="48442" title="Selective Service Act of 1917" label="Selective Service Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166678" start="48796" end="48809" title="Convoys in World War I" label="convoy system"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="49453" end="49470" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="49568" end="49574" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="49580" end="49598" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q464176" start="49731" end="49760" title="American Expeditionary Forces" label="American Expeditionary Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="50079" end="50102" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="50162" end="50175" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q750567" start="50295" end="50311" title="German spring offensive" label="Spring Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="50319" end="50332" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="50497" end="50502" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474180" start="50726" end="50748" title="Battle of Belleau Wood" label="Battle of Belleau Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172504" start="50757" end="50782" title="Battle of Château-Thierry (1918)" label="Battle of Château-Thierry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130507" start="50829" end="50851" title="Hundred Days Offensive" label="Hundred Days Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001082" start="51001" end="51020" title="Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War" label="Allied intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="51060" end="51069" title="Russian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="51092" end="51102" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="51111" end="51125" title="White movement" label="White movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="51232" end="51242" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q76908" start="51277" end="51303" title="Prince Maximilian of Baden" label="Prince Maximilian of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q704368" start="51428" end="51433" title="Edward M. House" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="51656" end="51685" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="Armistice of 11 November 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q701518" start="51718" end="51743" title="Armistice of Villa Giusti" label="Armistice of Villa Giusti"/>
<link wikidata="Q328499" start="51804" end="51823" title="Armistice of Mudros" label="Armistice of Mudros"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966797" start="52057" end="52077" title="War Industries Board" label="War Industries Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q181662" start="52089" end="52103" title="Bernard Baruch" label="Bernard Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="52188" end="52202" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453796" start="52211" end="52230" title="United States Food Administration" label="Food Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440227" start="52236" end="52263" title="Federal Fuel Administration" label="Federal Fuel Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q591629" start="52272" end="52295" title="Harry Augustus Garfield" label="Harry Augustus Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q36669" start="52308" end="52328" title="daylight saving time" label="daylight saving time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914018" start="52407" end="52425" title="Vance C. McCormick" label="Vance C. McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="52765" end="52776" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="53121" end="53139" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968530" start="53200" end="53223" title="War Revenue Act of 1917" label="War Revenue Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111792" start="53232" end="53251" title="Revenue Act of 1918" label="Revenue Act of 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419534" start="53370" end="53388" title="excess profits tax" label="excess profits tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115731" start="54007" end="54038" title="Committee on Public Information" label="Committee on Public Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741378" start="54056" end="54068" title="George Creel" label="George Creel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357038" start="54097" end="54124" title="1918 United States elections" label="the 1918 off-year elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="54222" end="54238" title="German-Americans" label="German-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q174037" start="54349" end="54366" title="Henry Cabot Lodge" label="Henry Cabot Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354363" start="54437" end="54455" title="A. Mitchell Palmer" label="A. Mitchell Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046722" start="54485" end="54516" title="Industrial Workers of the World" label="Industrial Workers of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759544" start="54579" end="54591" title="Palmer Raids" label="Palmer Raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q361366" start="55249" end="55263" title="Robert Lansing" label="Robert Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121097" start="55273" end="55288" title="Tasker H. Bliss" label="Tasker H. Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133152" start="55303" end="55314" title="Henry White (diplomat)" label="Henry White"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="55571" end="55589" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="55613" end="55631" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Georges Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q297793" start="55660" end="55685" title="Vittorio Emanuele Orlando" label="Vittorio Emanuele Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813255" start="55704" end="55712" title="The Big Four (World War I)" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="55868" end="55879" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769635" start="56200" end="56233" title="Covenant of the League of Nations" label="Covenant of the League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="56273" end="56292" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q838946" start="56388" end="56428" title="Permanent Court of International Justice" label="Permanent Court of International Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q900714" start="56583" end="56607" title="Racial Equality Proposal" label="Racial Equality Proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="56699" end="56707" title="dominion" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="56717" end="56726" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="56731" end="56743" title="Union of South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="56827" end="56847" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q828519" start="57426" end="57462" title="Allied occupation of the Rhineland" label="military occupation in the Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247294" start="57480" end="57486" title="Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles" label="clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="57865" end="57891" title="League of Nations mandates" label="League of Nations mandates"/>
<link wikidata="Q858306" start="57951" end="57969" title="Shandong Peninsula" label="Shandong Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984056" start="57997" end="58006" title="Shandong Problem" label="unpopular"/>
<link wikidata="Q187035" start="58239" end="58246" title="Principality of Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q140359" start="58248" end="58262" title="First Czechoslovak Republic" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="58264" end="58270" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="58276" end="58286" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="58373" end="58391" title="republican Germany" label="republican Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="58846" end="58863" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357038" start="59092" end="59111" title="1918 U.S. elections" label="1918 U.S. elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q174037" start="59288" end="59305" title="Henry Cabot Lodge" label="Henry Cabot Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q220619" start="59472" end="59482" title="Elihu Root" label="Elihu Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073554" start="59928" end="59943" title="irreconcilables" label="irreconcilables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237584" start="60535" end="60554" title="collective security" label="collective security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786843" start="61236" end="61252" title="Thomas A. Bailey" label="Thomas A. Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046237" start="62091" end="62103" title="Cary Grayson" label="Cary Grayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34597" start="64013" end="64027" title="James Garfield" label="James Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981049" start="64533" end="64553" title="Red Summer of 1919" label="series of race riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260911" start="64623" end="64649" title="Depression of 1920–21" label="severe economic depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="64792" end="64812" title="October Revolution" label="Bolshevik Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="64816" end="64822" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="64861" end="64868" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="64873" end="64880" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064874" start="64990" end="64998" title="1919 United States anarchist bombings" label="bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092510" start="65263" end="65278" title="First Red Scare" label="First Red Scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759544" start="65366" end="65378" title="Palmer Raids" label="Palmer Raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q79969" start="65487" end="65499" title="Emma Goldman" label="Emma Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q891873" start="65660" end="65679" title="Wall Street bombing" label="Wall Street bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="65918" end="65929" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824579" start="65993" end="66014" title="Presidency of Woodrow Wilson" label="Wilson administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q156784" start="66045" end="66065" title="Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613068" start="66157" end="66169" title="Volstead Act" label="Volstead Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246745" start="66273" end="66294" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United States" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="67361" end="67381" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Nineteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560828" start="67504" end="67539" title="1920 Democratic National Convention" label="1920 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q440117" start="67661" end="67673" title="James M. Cox" label="James M. Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317346" start="67867" end="67885" title="return to normalcy" label="return to normalcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538559" start="68137" end="68157" title="solid South" label="outside of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638966" start="68280" end="68296" title="Inauguration of Warren G. Harding" label="the inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18678418" start="68447" end="68485" title="List of heads of state and government Nobel laureates" label="second sitting United States president"/>
<link wikidata="Q643610" start="68523" end="68543" title="Nobel Peace Laureates" label="Nobel Peace Laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="68663" end="68674" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q84516418" start="68697" end="68705" title="Sheridan-Kalorama Historic District" label="Kalorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="68717" end="68733" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q708024" start="68963" end="68979" title="Bainbridge Colby" label="Bainbridge Colby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133979" start="69288" end="69306" title="Ray Stannard Baker" label="Ray Stannard Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597183" start="69539" end="69552" title="Armistice Day" label="Armistice Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="69776" end="69782" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234287" start="69787" end="69801" title="Grace Coolidge" label="Grace Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q233634" start="69849" end="69865" title="Florence Harding" label="Florence Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q255115" start="69885" end="69902" title="Helen Herron Taft" label="Helen Herron Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="69963" end="69982" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="70179" end="70208" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="70432" end="70443" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q607648" start="70503" end="70512" title="Redeemers" label="Redeemers"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="70555" end="70565" title="Lost Cause" label="Lost Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11896" start="70634" end="70648" title="Zachary Taylor" label="Zachary Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q698769" start="70652" end="70656" title="1848 United States presidential election" label="1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="70746" end="70770" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="southern segregationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q51123" start="71280" end="71294" title="D. W. Griffith" label="D. W. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="71306" end="71318" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220394" start="71330" end="71351" title="The Birth of a Nation" label="The Birth of a Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="71416" end="71427" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="71732" end="71748" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054348" start="72122" end="72145" title="Oswald Garrison Villard" label="Oswald Garrison Villard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545937" start="73447" end="73472" title="George Washington Buckner" label="George Washington Buckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q78280024" start="73485" end="73502" title="Joseph L. Johnson" label="Joseph L. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="73527" end="73534" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q724135" start="74001" end="74019" title="Albert S. Burleson" label="Albert S. Burleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q729137" start="74681" end="74692" title="Thomas Gore" label="Thomas Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q524233" start="74752" end="74770" title="Muskogee, Oklahoma" label="Muskogee, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309366" start="74792" end="74816" title="Register of the Treasury" label="Register of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q747375" start="74933" end="74950" title="James K. Vardaman" label="James K. Vardaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q736903" start="74955" end="74971" title="Benjamin Tillman" label="Benjamin Tillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q107213156" start="75002" end="75016" title="Gabe E. Parker" label="Gabe E. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="75048" end="75055" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889614" start="75246" end="75284" title="United States Civil Service Commission" label="United States Civil Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="75801" end="75814" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q319871" start="75974" end="75994" title="Booker T. Washington" label="Booker T. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093714" start="76939" end="76955" title="Josephus Daniels" label="Josephus Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="76959" end="76980" title="Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="77496" end="77511" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784082" start="77598" end="77608" title="Mass racial violence in the United States" label="race riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329420" start="77624" end="77644" title="East St. Louis riots" label="East St. Louis riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q351938" start="77747" end="77766" title="Thomas Watt Gregory" label="Thomas Watt Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="77971" end="78000" title="lynching in the United States" label="lynching in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981049" start="78293" end="78313" title="Red Summer of 1919" label="series of race riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091648" start="78326" end="78333" title="Chicago Race Riot of 1919" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846324" start="78335" end="78340" title="Omaha Race Riot of 1919" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="78548" end="78593" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="ranked by historians and political scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="78919" end="78945" title="modern American liberalism" label="modern American liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="78999" end="79020" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="79025" end="79042" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="79105" end="79113" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191264" start="79122" end="79135" title="Great Society" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="79421" end="79434" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="79486" end="79504" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270178" start="79538" end="79549" title="George Will" label="George Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="79565" end="79584" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479847" start="79669" end="79688" title="imperial presidency" label="imperial presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182760" start="79763" end="79775" title="Wilsonianism" label="Wilsonianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q744448" start="79806" end="79829" title="American foreign policy" label="American foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="79901" end="79915" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q113829379" start="79917" end="79930" title="Saladin Ambar" label="Saladin Ambar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="80036" end="80047" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15496884" start="80939" end="80952" title="A. Scott Berg" label="A. Scott Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q109862524" start="81321" end="81338" title="Kendrick Clements" label="Kendrick Clements"/>
<link wikidata="Q747375" start="81400" end="81417" title="James K. Vardaman" label="James K. Vardaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q736903" start="81421" end="81440" title="Benjamin R. Tillman" label="Benjamin R. Tillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066504" start="81543" end="81573" title="Quarterly Journal of Economics" label="Quarterly Journal of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20154675" start="82039" end="82065" title="Charleston church shooting" label="Charleston church shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033218" start="82221" end="82256" title="Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library" label="Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033191" start="82295" end="82322" title="Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home" label="Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q181962" start="82326" end="82342" title="Augusta, Georgia" label="Augusta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903482" start="82352" end="82372" title="Woodrow Wilson House (Washington, D.C.)" label="Woodrow Wilson House"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="82376" end="82392" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="82398" end="82424" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795294" start="82431" end="82465" title="Thomas Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home" label="Thomas Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q38453" start="82469" end="82493" title="Columbia, South Carolina" label="Columbia, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="82511" end="82547" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460542" start="82549" end="82560" title="Shadow Lawn (New Jersey)" label="Shadow Lawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q185726" start="82566" end="82584" title="Summer White House" label="Summer White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q922647" start="82638" end="82657" title="Monmouth University" label="Monmouth University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250771" start="82722" end="82736" title="Prospect House (Princeton, New Jersey)" label="Prospect House"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="82740" end="82761" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="82947" end="82966" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q872975" start="82973" end="83021" title="Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars" label="Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349578" start="83072" end="83124" title="Princeton School of Public and International Affairs" label="Princeton School of Public and International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033214" start="83277" end="83322" title="Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation" label="Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033196" start="83390" end="83415" title="Woodrow Wilson Foundation" label="Woodrow Wilson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023016" start="83571" end="83585" title="Wilson College, Princeton University" label="Wilson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033195" start="83623" end="83635" title="Woodrow Wilson High School (disambiguation)" label="high schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q989939" start="83693" end="83717" title="Rambla Presidente Wilson" label="Rambla Presidente Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="83721" end="83731" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138608" start="83774" end="83804" title="USS Woodrow Wilson (SSBN-624)" label="USS &amp;quot;Woodrow Wilson&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800152" start="83808" end="83845" title="Lafayette-class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Lafayette&amp;quot;-class submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q664332" start="83911" end="83932" title="Woodrow Wilson Bridge" label="Woodrow Wilson Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807" start="83941" end="83978" title="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="83983" end="83991" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333715" start="84001" end="84014" title="Palais Wilson" label="Palais Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q656812" start="84066" end="84129" title="Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights" label="Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="84133" end="84139" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q21150771" start="84206" end="84229" title="Woodrow Wilson Monument" label="Woodrow Wilson Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="84233" end="84239" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="84275" end="84291" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q606928" start="84307" end="84313" title="Wilson (1944 film)" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="84323" end="84329" title="biopic" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q545858" start="84352" end="84366" title="Alexander Knox" label="Alexander Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q269505" start="84383" end="84393" title="Henry King (director)" label="Henry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q364342" start="84527" end="84543" title="Darryl F. Zanuck" label="Darryl F. Zanuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="84655" end="84669" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="84761" end="84776" title="box-office bomb" label="box-office bomb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85642" end="85674" title="A History of the American People (Five volume series)" label="A History of the American People"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902076" start="86418" end="86438" title="Public Affairs Press" label="Public Affairs Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324643" start="86760" end="86793" title="Diplomatic history of World War I" label="Diplomatic history of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q106131163" start="86796" end="86831" title="Electoral history of Woodrow Wilson" label="Electoral history of Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="86834" end="86873" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="List of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594910" start="86876" end="86938" title="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience" label="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="86941" end="86956" title="Progressive Era" label="Progressive Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q105753546" start="86959" end="86982" title="Woodrow Wilson and race" label="Woodrow Wilson and race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893109" start="86985" end="87006" title="Woodrow Wilson Awards" label="Woodrow Wilson Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245751" start="88138" end="88157" title="John M. Cooper (historian)" label="Cooper, John Milton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33531" wikidata="Q880659" url="?curid=33531" title="William Allen (governor)">
<text>William Allen (December 18 or 27, 1803 – July 11, 1879) was an American lawyer and politician who served as a Democratic Representative, Senator and 31st governor of Ohio.

==Early life and family==
Allen was born in Edenton, North Carolina. His father was Nathanial Allen (1755–1805). His mother was Fanny Coulston, an enslaved woman who was either owned by his father or had been his mistress. Upon the death of his mother, he and his brother Frances Allen William moved to Lynchburg, Virginia. In 1819, he moved to live with his sister in Chillicothe, Ohio.

His father made the following arrangements in his will. 
&quot;I give and devise that part of lot # 5 in the new plan of the town of Edenton joining the lots wheron I now dwell and as far as the same is at present under fence with all the improvements thereon to Fanny Coulston her heirs and assigns forever. I also give and bequeath unto the said Fanny Coulston her heirs and assigns such part of my household and kitchen furniture as my executors hereinafter named, shall judge reasonable and necessary, due regard being paid to the situation of my estate and the interest of her children. I give and bequeath unto my three natural sons, Francis, Bonaparte, and William begotten on the body of the said Fanny Coulston, all my wearing apparel, including whatever remains or that left to me by my deceased Uncle Joseph Hewes , Esquire, to be equally divided among them share and share alike. Before the signing and the execution of the above Will, I do hereby declare it to be my further will and desire that the aforesaid Fanny Caulston shall have the use and labor of my negro woman named Penny for and during the term of three years.&quot;

Allen and his sister Mary Granberry Allen lived in Chillicothe together. His sister married Reverend Pleasant Thurman, and their son, Allen G. Thurman, followed in his uncle&#x27;s footsteps, becoming a lawyer and politician.

Allen attended Chillicothe Academy before studying law with Colonel Edward King. He was admitted to the bar in Ohio at age 21. He began his career as a politician in the Democratic Party at a young age.

==Career==
Allen served as United States Representative from Ohio from 1833 to 1835, losing his bid for re-election.

=== Senate ===
He served as United States Senator from Ohio from 1837 to 1849, losing a bid for a third term in 1848.

While in the Senate, Allen was one of a group of Western Democrat expansionists who asserted that the U.S. had a valid claim to the entire Oregon Country, which was an issue during the 1844 U.S. presidential election. He suggested that the United States should be prepared to go to war with the United Kingdom to annex the entire Oregon Country up to Russian-owned Alaska at latitude 54°40′N. This position ultimately produced the slogan &quot;Fifty-Four Forty or Fight!,&quot; coined in 1846 by opponents of such a policy (not, as popularly believed, a slogan in the 1844 Presidential campaign). Allen supported &quot;popular sovereignty&quot; and the presidential candidacy of fellow-Democrat Lewis Cass in 1848.

In 1849, Allen retired to his farm, &quot;Fruit Hill&quot;, which had belonged to his father-in-law, and fellow Ohio Governor, Duncan McArthur, near Chillicothe, Ohio. Allen identified himself as a &quot;Peace Democrat&quot; by opposing the American Civil War.

=== Governorship ===
Allen did not return to public service for nearly a quarter century until he served as governor of Ohio from 1874 to 1876. He unsuccessfully sought a second two-year term in an 1875 election.

Allen was noted for his loud voice. A friend asked Senator Benjamin Tappan if a fellow Ohioan was still in Washington. Tappan replied, &quot;No, he left yesterday and is probably by this time in Cumberland, Maryland, but if you will go to Bill Allen and tell him to raise that window and call him, he will come back.&quot;

==Death and burial ==
At the close of his administration, he retired to private life at Fruit Hill, where he died in 1879. Allen is buried at Grandview Cemetery, Chillicothe.

==Legacy==
Allen County, Kansas, is named for William Allen.

In 1887, Ohio donated a statue of Allen to the National Statuary Hall Collection, which was exhibited in the National Statuary Hall of the U.S. Capitol. The statue was sculpted by Charles H. Niehaus. In 2010, the Ohio Historical Society held a statewide poll on the suitability of Allen as a distinguished representative of the state. The poll found that many Ohioans objected to Allen. On August 26, the Ohio National Statuary Committee voted to replace Allen&#x27;s statue with a statue of Ohio-born inventor Thomas Edison. The Ohio General Assembly agreed to replace the statue in part because &quot;Allen’s pro-slavery position and outspoken criticism of President Abraham Lincoln during the Civil War make him a poor representative for Ohio in the U.S. Capitol.&quot; However, lack of funding for the Edison statue delayed replacement of the Allen statue. The Edison statue was completed in spring 2015, and was installed on September 20, 2016. The statue of Allen was relocated to the Ross County Heritage Center in Chillicothe.

==References==
==External links==

* National Statuary Hall Collection: William Allen at &quot;Architect of the Capitol&quot;
* 


== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q880659" start="0" end="13" title="William Allen (governor)" label="William Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="110" end="120" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="121" end="135" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="137" end="144" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q878581" start="154" end="170" title="governor of Ohio" label="governor of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028258" start="217" end="240" title="Edenton, North Carolina" label="Edenton, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q844012" start="476" end="495" title="Lynchburg, Virginia" label="Lynchburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q988739" start="542" end="559" title="Chillicothe, Ohio" label="Chillicothe, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850376" start="1840" end="1856" title="Allen G. Thurman" label="Allen G. Thurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343942" start="1993" end="2012" title="Edward King (Ohio politician)" label="Colonel Edward King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683819" start="2021" end="2040" title="Admission to the bar in the United States" label="admitted to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="2164" end="2192" title="United States Representative" label="United States Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="2198" end="2202" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2283" end="2304" title="United States Senator" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031250" start="2440" end="2453" title="expansionism" label="expansionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="2513" end="2527" title="Oregon boundary dispute" label="Oregon Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q698731" start="2559" end="2590" title="U.S. presidential election, 1844" label="1844 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="2669" end="2683" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="2725" end="2745" title="Russian America" label="Russian-owned Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="2749" end="2765" title="Parallel 54°40′ north" label="latitude 54°40′N"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="2818" end="2844" title="Fifty-Four Forty or Fight!" label="Fifty-Four Forty or Fight!"/>
<link wikidata="Q503119" start="3069" end="3079" title="Lewis Cass" label="Lewis Cass"/>
<link wikidata="Q698769" start="3083" end="3087" title="1848 United States presidential election" label="1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q888413" start="3217" end="3232" title="Duncan McArthur" label="Duncan McArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q988739" start="3239" end="3256" title="Chillicothe, Ohio" label="Chillicothe, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q510690" start="3294" end="3308" title="Peace Democrat" label="Peace Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098643" start="3318" end="3326" title="Opposition to the American Civil War" label="opposing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3331" end="3349" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q878581" start="3460" end="3476" title="governor of Ohio" label="governor of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q817709" start="3625" end="3640" title="Benjamin Tappan" label="Benjamin Tappan"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="3761" end="3781" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595568" start="4032" end="4063" title="Grandview Cemetery, Chillicothe" label="Grandview Cemetery, Chillicothe"/>
<link wikidata="Q376562" start="4077" end="4097" title="Allen County, Kansas" label="Allen County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637686" start="4152" end="4167" title="Statue of William Allen" label="statue of Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134223" start="4175" end="4208" title="National Statuary Hall Collection" label="National Statuary Hall Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q993553" start="4237" end="4259" title="National Statuary Hall" label="National Statuary Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="4267" end="4279" title="United States Capitol" label="U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803315" start="4308" end="4326" title="Charles H. Niehaus" label="Charles H. Niehaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349886" start="4341" end="4364" title="Ohio Historical Society" label="Ohio Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="4639" end="4652" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080820" start="4658" end="4679" title="Ohio General Assembly" label="Ohio General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="4797" end="4812" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4824" end="4833" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q635012" start="5259" end="5283" title="Architect of the Capitol" label="Architect of the Capitol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33536" wikidata="Q294931" url="?curid=33536" title="William Randolph Hearst">
<text>William Randolph Hearst Sr. (; April 29, 1863 – August 14, 1951) was an American newspaper publisher and politician who developed the nation&#x27;s largest newspaper chain and media company, Hearst Communications. His flamboyant methods of yellow journalism in violation of ethics and standards influenced the nation&#x27;s popular media by emphasizing sensationalism and human-interest stories. Hearst entered the publishing business in 1887 with Mitchell Trubitt after being given control of &quot;The San Francisco Examiner&quot; by his wealthy father, Senator George Hearst.

After moving to New York City, Hearst acquired the &quot;New York Journal&quot; and fought a bitter circulation war with Joseph Pulitzer&#x27;s &quot;New York World&quot;. Hearst sold papers by printing giant headlines over lurid stories featuring crime, corruption, sex, and innuendos. Hearst acquired more newspapers and created a chain that numbered nearly 30 papers in major American cities at its peak. He later expanded to magazines, creating the largest newspaper and magazine business in the world. Hearst controlled the editorial positions and coverage of political news in all his papers and magazines, and thereby often published his personal views. He sensationalized Spanish atrocities in Cuba while calling for war in 1898 against Spain. Historians, however, reject his subsequent claims to have started the war with Spain as overly extravagant.

He was twice elected as a Democrat to the U.S. House of Representatives. He ran unsuccessfully for President of the United States in 1904, Mayor of New York City in 1905 and 1909, and Governor of New York in 1906. During his political career, he espoused views generally associated with the left wing of the Progressive Movement, claiming to speak on behalf of the working class.

After 1918 and the end of World War I, Hearst gradually began adopting more conservative views and started promoting an isolationist foreign policy to avoid any more entanglement in what he regarded as corrupt European affairs. He was at once a militant nationalist, a staunch anti-communist after the Russian Revolution, and deeply suspicious of the League of Nations and of the British, French, Japanese, and Russians. Following Hitler&#x27;s rise to power, Hearst became a supporter of the Nazi Party, ordering his journalists to publish favorable coverage of Nazi Germany, and allowing leading Nazis to publish articles in his newspapers. He was a leading supporter of Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932–1934, but then broke with FDR and became his most prominent enemy on the right. Hearst&#x27;s publication reached a peak circulation of 20 million readers a day in the mid-1930s. He poorly managed finances and was so deeply in debt during the Great Depression that most of his assets had to be liquidated in the late 1930s. Hearst managed to keep his newspapers and magazines.

His life story was the main inspiration for Charles Foster Kane, the lead character in Orson Welles&#x27; film &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; (1941). His Hearst Castle, constructed on a hill overlooking the Pacific Ocean near San Simeon, has been preserved as a State Historical Monument and is designated as a National Historic Landmark.

==Early life and education==
Hearst was born in San Francisco to George Hearst on April 29, 1863, a millionaire mining engineer, owner of gold and other mines through his corporation, and his much younger wife Phoebe Apperson Hearst, from a small town in Missouri. The elder Hearst later entered politics. He served as a U.S. Senator, first appointed for a brief period in 1886 and was then elected later that year. He served from 1887 to his death in 1891.

His paternal great-grandfather was John Hearst of Ulster Protestant origin. John Hearst, with his wife and six children, migrated to America from Ballybay, County Monaghan, Ireland, as part of the Cahans Exodus in 1766. The family settled in the Province of South Carolina. Their immigration there was spurred in part by the colonial government&#x27;s policy that encouraged the immigration of Irish Protestants, many of Scots origin. The names &quot;John Hearse&quot; and &quot;John Hearse Jr.&quot; appear on the council records of October 26, 1766, being credited with meriting of land on the Long Canes in what became Abbeville District, based upon to heads of household and for each dependent of a Protestant immigrant; the &quot;Hearse&quot; spelling of the family name was never used afterward by the family members themselves, nor any family of any size. Hearst&#x27;s mother, née Phoebe Elizabeth Apperson, was also of Scots-Irish ancestry; her family came from Galway. She was appointed as the first woman Regent of University of California, Berkeley, donated funds to establish libraries at several universities, funded many anthropological expeditions, and founded the Phoebe A. Hearst Museum of Anthropology.

Hearst attended preparatory school at St. Paul&#x27;s School in Concord, New Hampshire. He gained admission to Harvard College, and began attending in 1885. While there, he was a member of Delta Kappa Epsilon, the A.D. Club, a Harvard Final club, the Hasty Pudding Theatricals, and the &quot;Harvard Lampoon&quot; prior to being expelled. His antics at Harvard ranged from sponsoring massive beer parties on Harvard Square to sending pudding pots used as chamber pots to his professors with their images depicted within the bowls.

== Publishing business ==

Searching for an occupation, in 1887 Hearst took over management of his father&#x27;s newspaper, the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot;, which his father had acquired in 1880 as repayment for a gambling debt. Giving his paper the motto &quot;Monarch of the Dailies&quot;, Hearst acquired the most advanced equipment and the most prominent writers of the time, including Ambrose Bierce, Mark Twain, Jack London, and political cartoonist Homer Davenport. A self-proclaimed populist, Hearst reported accounts of municipal and financial corruption, often attacking companies in which his own family held an interest. Within a few years, his paper dominated the San Francisco market.

== &quot;New York Morning Journal&quot; ==
Early in his career at the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot;, Hearst envisioned running a large newspaper chain and &quot;always knew that his dream of a nation-spanning, multi-paper news operation was impossible without a triumph in New York&quot;. In 1895, with the financial support of his widowed mother (his father had died in 1891), Hearst bought the then failing &quot;New York Morning Journal&quot;, hiring writers such as Stephen Crane and Julian Hawthorne and entering into a head-to-head circulation war with Joseph Pulitzer, owner and publisher of the &quot;New York World&quot;. Hearst &quot;stole&quot; cartoonist Richard F. Outcault along with all of Pulitzer&#x27;s Sunday staff. Another prominent hire was James J. Montague, who came from the &quot;Portland Oregonian&quot; and started his well-known &quot;More Truth Than Poetry&quot; column at the Hearst-owned &quot;New York Evening Journal&quot;.

When Hearst purchased the &quot;penny paper&quot;, so called because its copies sold for a penny apiece, the &quot;Journal&quot; was competing with New York&#x27;s 16 other major dailies. It had a strong focus on Democratic Party politics. Hearst imported his best managers from the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot; and &quot;quickly established himself as the most attractive employer&quot; among New York newspapers. He was seen as generous, paid more than his competitors, and gave credit to his writers with page-one bylines. Further, he was unfailingly polite, unassuming, &quot;impeccably calm&quot;, and indulgent of &quot;prima donnas, eccentrics, bohemians, drunks, or reprobates so long as they had useful talents&quot; according to historian Kenneth Whyte.

Hearst&#x27;s activist approach to journalism can be summarized by the motto, &quot;While others Talk, the &quot;Journal&quot; Acts.&quot;

=== Yellow journalism and rivalry with the &quot;New York World&quot; ===
The &quot;New York Journal&quot; and its chief rival, the &quot;New York World&quot;, mastered a style of popular journalism that came to be derided as &quot;yellow journalism&quot;, so named after Outcault&#x27;s Yellow Kid comic. Pulitzer&#x27;s &quot;World&quot; had pushed the boundaries of mass appeal for newspapers through bold headlines, aggressive news gathering, generous use of cartoons and illustrations, populist politics, progressive crusades, an exuberant public spirit and dramatic crime and human-interest stories. Hearst&#x27;s &quot;Journal&quot; used the same recipe for success, forcing Pulitzer to drop the price of the &quot;World&quot; from two cents to a penny. Soon the two papers were locked in a fierce, often spiteful competition for readers in which both papers spent large sums of money and saw huge gains in circulation.

Within a few months of purchasing the &quot;Journal&quot;, Hearst hired away Pulitzer&#x27;s three top editors: Sunday editor Morrill Goddard, who greatly expanded the scope and appeal of the American Sunday newspaper; Solomon Carvalho; and a young Arthur Brisbane, who became managing editor of the Hearst newspaper empire and a well-known columnist. Contrary to popular assumption, they were not lured away by higher pay—rather, each man had grown tired of the office environment that Pulitzer encouraged.

While Hearst&#x27;s many critics attribute the &quot;Journal&quot;″s incredible success to cheap sensationalism, Kenneth Whyte noted in &quot;The Uncrowned King: The Sensational Rise of William Randolph Hearst&quot;: &quot;Rather than racing to the bottom, he [Hearst] drove the &quot;Journal&quot; and the penny press upmarket. The &quot;Journal&quot; was a demanding, sophisticated paper by contemporary standards.&quot; Though yellow journalism would be much maligned, Whyte said, &quot;All good yellow journalists ... sought the human in every story and edited without fear of emotion or drama. They wore their feelings on their pages, believing it was an honest and wholesome way to communicate with readers&quot;, but, as Whyte pointed out: &quot;This appeal to feelings is not an end in itself... [they believed] our emotions tend to ignite our intellects: a story catering to a reader&#x27;s feelings is more likely than a dry treatise to stimulate thought.&quot;

The two papers finally declared a truce in late 1898, after both lost vast amounts of money covering the Spanish–American War. Hearst probably lost several million dollars in his first three years as publisher of the &quot;Journal&quot; (figures are impossible to verify), but the paper began turning a profit after it ended its fight with the &quot;World&quot;.

Under Hearst, the &quot;Journal&quot; remained loyal to the populist or left wing of the Democratic Party. It was the only major publication in the East to support William Jennings Bryan in 1896. Its coverage of that election was probably the most important of any newspaper in the country, attacking relentlessly the unprecedented role of money in the Republican campaign and the dominating role played by William McKinley&#x27;s political and financial manager, Mark Hanna, the first national party &#x27;boss&#x27; in American history. A year after taking over the paper, Hearst could boast that sales of the &quot;Journal&quot;″s post-election issue (including the evening and German-language editions) topped 1.5 million, a record &quot;unparalleled in the history of the world.&quot;

The &quot;Journal&quot;″s political coverage, however, was not entirely one-sided. Kenneth Whyte says that most editors of the time &quot;believed their papers should speak with one voice on political matters&quot;; by contrast, in New York, Hearst &quot;helped to usher in the multi-perspective approach we identify with the modern op-ed page&quot;. At first he supported the Russian Revolution of 1917 but later he turned against it. Hearst fought hard against Wilsonian internationalism, the League of Nations, and the World Court, thereby appealing to an isolationist audience.

== Spanish–American War ==

The &quot;Morning Journal&quot;″s daily circulation routinely climbed above the one million mark after the sinking of the and U.S. entry into the Spanish–American War, a war that some called &quot;the &quot;Journal&quot;″s War&quot;, due to the paper&#x27;s immense influence in provoking American outrage against Spain. Much of the coverage leading up to the war, beginning with the outbreak of the Cuban Revolution in 1895, was tainted by rumor, propaganda, and sensationalism, with the &quot;yellow&quot; papers regarded as the worst offenders. The &quot;Journal&quot; and other New York newspapers were so one-sided and full of errors in their reporting that coverage of the Cuban crisis and the ensuing Spanish–American War is often cited as one of the most significant milestones in the rise of yellow journalism&#x27;s hold over the mainstream media. Huge headlines in the &quot;Journal&quot; assigned blame for the &quot;Maine&quot;″s destruction on sabotage, which was based on no evidence. This reporting stoked outrage and indignation against Spain among the paper&#x27;s readers in New York.

The &quot;Journal&quot;″s crusade against Spanish rule in Cuba was not due to mere jingoism, although &quot;the democratic ideals and humanitarianism that inspired their coverage are largely lost to history,&quot; as are their &quot;heroic efforts to find the truth on the island under unusually difficult circumstances.&quot; The &quot;Journal&quot;″s journalistic activism in support of the Cuban rebels, rather, was centered around Hearst&#x27;s political and business ambitions.

Perhaps the best known myth in American journalism is the claim, without any contemporary evidence, that the illustrator Frederic Remington, sent by Hearst to Cuba to cover the Cuban War of Independence, cabled Hearst to tell him all was quiet in Cuba. Hearst, in this canard, is said to have responded, &quot;Please remain. You furnish the pictures and I&#x27;ll furnish the war.&quot;

Hearst was personally dedicated to the cause of the Cuban rebels, and the &quot;Journal&quot; did some of the most important and courageous reporting on the conflict—as well as some of the most sensationalized. Their stories on the Cuban rebellion and Spain&#x27;s atrocities on the island—many of which turned out to be untrue—were motivated primarily by Hearst&#x27;s outrage at Spain&#x27;s brutal policies on the island. These had resulted in the deaths of hundreds of thousands of innocent Cubans. The most well-known story involved the imprisonment and escape of Cuban prisoner Evangelina Cisneros.

While Hearst and the yellow press did not directly cause America&#x27;s war with Spain, they inflamed public opinion in New York City to a fever pitch. New York&#x27;s elites read other papers, such as the &quot;Times&quot; and &quot;Sun&quot;, which were far more restrained. The &quot;Journal&quot; and the &quot;World&quot; were local papers oriented to a very large working class audience in New York City. They were not among the top ten sources of news in papers in other cities, and their stories did not make a splash outside New York City. Outrage across the country came from evidence of what Spain was doing in Cuba, a major influence in the decision by Congress to declare war. According to a 21st-century historian, war was declared by Congress because public opinion was sickened by the bloodshed, and because leaders like McKinley realized that Spain had lost control of Cuba. These factors weighed more on the president&#x27;s mind than the melodramas in the &quot;New York Journal&quot;.

Hearst sailed to Cuba with a small army of &quot;Journal&quot; reporters to cover the Spanish–American War; they brought along portable printing equipment, which was used to print a single-edition newspaper in Cuba after the fighting had ended. Two of the &quot;Journal&quot;″s correspondents, James Creelman and Edward Marshall, were wounded in the fighting. A leader of the Cuban rebels, Gen. Calixto García, gave Hearst a Cuban flag that had been riddled with bullets as a gift, in appreciation of Hearst&#x27;s major role in Cuba&#x27;s liberation.

== Expansion ==
In part to aid in his political ambitions, Hearst opened newspapers in other cities, among them Chicago, Los Angeles and Boston. In 1915, he founded International Film Service, an animation studio designed to exploit the popularity of the comic strips he controlled. The creation of his Chicago paper was requested by the Democratic National Committee. Hearst used this as an excuse for his mother Phoebe Hearst to transfer him the necessary start-up funds. By the mid-1920s he had a nationwide string of 28 newspapers, among them the &quot;Los Angeles Examiner&quot;, the &quot;Boston American&quot;, the &quot;Atlanta Georgian&quot;, the &quot;Chicago Examiner&quot;, the &quot;Detroit Times&quot;, the &quot;Seattle Post-Intelligencer&quot;, the &quot;Washington Times-Herald&quot;, the &quot;Washington Herald&quot;, and his flagship, the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot;.

Hearst also diversified his publishing interests into book publishing and magazines. Several of the latter are still in circulation, including such periodicals as &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot;, &quot;Good Housekeeping&quot;, &quot;Town and Country&quot;, and &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;.

In 1924, Hearst opened the &quot;New York Daily Mirror&quot;, a racy tabloid frankly imitating the &quot;New York Daily News&quot;. Among his other holdings were two news services, Universal News and International News Service, or INS, the latter of which he founded in 1909. He also owned INS companion radio station WINS in New York; King Features Syndicate, which still owns the copyrights of a number of popular comics characters; a film company, Cosmopolitan Productions; extensive New York City real estate; and thousands of acres of land in California and Mexico, along with timber and mining interests inherited from his father.

Hearst promoted writers and cartoonists despite the lack of any apparent demand for them by his readers. The press critic A. J. Liebling reminds us how many of Hearst&#x27;s stars would not have been deemed employable elsewhere. One Hearst favorite, George Herriman, was the inventor of the dizzy comic strip &quot;Krazy Kat&quot;. Not especially popular with either readers or editors when it was first published, in the 21st century it is considered a classic, a belief once held only by Hearst himself.

In 1929, he became one of the sponsors of the first round-the-world voyage in an airship, the LZ 127 &quot;Graf Zeppelin&quot; from Germany. His sponsorship was conditional on the trip starting at Lakehurst Naval Air Station, New Jersey. The ship&#x27;s captain, Dr. Hugo Eckener, first flew the &quot;Graf Zeppelin&quot; across the Atlantic from Germany to pick up Hearst&#x27;s photographer and at least three Hearst correspondents. One of them, Grace Marguerite Hay Drummond-Hay, by that flight became the first woman to travel around the world by air.

The Hearst news empire reached a revenue peak about 1928, but the economic collapse of the Great Depression in the United States and the vast over-extension of his empire cost him control of his holdings. It is unlikely that the newspapers ever paid their own way; mining, ranching and forestry provided whatever dividends the Hearst Corporation paid out. When the collapse came, all Hearst properties were hit hard, but none more so than the papers. Hearst&#x27;s conservative politics, increasingly at odds with those of his readers, worsened matters for the once great Hearst media chain. Having been refused the right to sell another round of bonds to unsuspecting investors, the shaky empire tottered. Unable to service its existing debts, Hearst Corporation faced a court-mandated reorganization in 1937.

From that point, Hearst was reduced to being an employee, subject to the directives of an outside manager. Newspapers and other properties were liquidated, the film company shut down; there was even a well-publicized sale of art and antiquities. While World War II restored circulation and advertising revenues, his great days were over. The Hearst Corporation continues to this day as a large, privately held media conglomerate based in New York City.

== Political engagement ==
Hearst won two elections to Congress, then lost a series of elections. He narrowly failed in attempts to become mayor of New York City in both 1905 and 1909 and governor of New York in 1906, nominally remaining a Democrat while also creating the Independence Party. He was defeated for the governorship by Charles Evans Hughes. Hearst&#x27;s unsuccessful campaigns for office after his tenure in the House of Representatives earned him the unflattering but short-lived nickname of &quot;William &#x27;Also-Randolph&#x27; Hearst&quot;, which was coined by Wallace Irwin.

Hearst was on the left wing of the Progressive Movement, speaking on behalf of the working class (who bought his papers) and denouncing the rich and powerful (who disdained his editorials). With the support of Tammany Hall (the regular Democratic organization in Manhattan), Hearst was elected to Congress from New York in 1902 and 1904. He made a major effort to win the 1904 Democratic nomination for president, losing to conservative Alton B. Parker. Breaking with Tammany in 1907, Hearst ran for mayor of New York City under a third party of his own creation, the Municipal Ownership League. Tammany Hall exerted its utmost to defeat him.

An opponent of the British Empire, Hearst opposed American involvement in the First World War and attacked the formation of the League of Nations. His newspapers abstained from endorsing any candidate in 1920 and 1924. Hearst&#x27;s last bid for office came in 1922, when he was backed by Tammany Hall leaders for the U.S. Senate nomination in New York. Al Smith vetoed this, earning the lasting enmity of Hearst. Although Hearst shared Smith&#x27;s opposition to Prohibition, he swung his papers behind Herbert Hoover in the 1928 presidential election.

=== Move to the right and break with Franklin D. Roosevelt ===
During the 1920s Hearst was a Jeffersonian democrat. He warned citizens against the dangers of big government and against unchecked federal power that could infringe on individual rights. When unemployment was near 25 percent, it appeared that Hoover would lose his bid for reelection in 1932, so Hearst sought to block the nomination of Franklin D. Roosevelt as the Democratic challenger. While continuing to oppose Smith, he promoted the rival candidacy of Speaker of the House, John Nance Garner, a Texan &quot;whose guiding motto is ‘America First&#x27;&quot; and who, in his own words, saw &quot;the gravest possible menace&quot; facing the country as &quot;the constantly increasing tendency toward socialism and communism&quot;.

At the Democratic Party Convention in 1932, with control of delegations from his own state of California and from Garner&#x27;s home state of Texas, Hearst had enough influence to ensure that the triumphant Roosevelt picked Garner as his running mate. In the anticipation that Roosevelt would turn out to be, in his words, &quot;properly conservative&quot;, Hearst supported his election. But the rapprochement with Roosevelt did not last the year. The New Deal&#x27;s program of unemployment relief, in Hearst&#x27;s view, was &quot;more communistic than the communist&quot; and &quot;un-American to the core&quot;. More and more often, Hearst newspapers supported business over organized labor and condemned higher income tax legislation.

Hearst broke with FDR in spring 1935 when the president vetoed the Patman Bonus Bill for veterans and tried to enter the World Court. His papers carried the publisher&#x27;s rambling, vitriolic, all-capital-letters editorials, but he no longer employed the energetic reporters, editors, and columnists who might have made a serious attack. He reached 20 million readers in the mid-1930s. They included much of the working class which Roosevelt had attracted by three-to-one margins in the 1936 election. The Hearst papers—like most major chains—had supported the Republican Alf Landon that year.

While campaigning against Roosevelt&#x27;s policy of developing formal diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, in 1935 Hearst ordered his editors to reprint eyewitness accounts of the Ukrainian famine (the Holodomor, which occurred in 1932–1933). These had been supplied in 1933 by Welsh freelance journalist Gareth Jones, and by the disillusioned American Communist Fred Beal. &quot;The New York Times&quot;, content with what it has since conceded was &quot;tendentious&quot; reporting of Soviet achievements, printed the blanket denials of its Pulitzer Prize-winning Moscow correspondent Walter Duranty. Duranty, who was widely credited with facilitating the rapprochement with Moscow, dismissed the Hearst-circulated reports of man-made starvation as a politically motivated &quot;scare story&quot;.

In the articles, written by Thomas Walker, to better serve Hearst&#x27;s editorial line against Roosevelt&#x27;s Soviet policy the famine was &quot;updated&quot;: the impression was created of the famine continuing into 1934. In response, Louis Fischer wrote an article in &quot;The Nation&quot; accusing Walker of &quot;pure invention&quot; because Fischer had been to Ukraine in 1934 and claimed that he had not seen famine. He framed the story as an attempt by Hearst to &quot;spoil Soviet-American relations&quot; as part of &quot;an anti-red campaign&quot;.

=== Position regarding Germany ===
According to Rodney Carlisle, &quot;Hearst condemned the domestic practices of Nazism, but he believed that German demands for boundary revision were legitimate. While he was not pro-Nazi, he accepted more German positions and propaganda than did some other editors and publishers.&quot;

With &quot;AMERICA FIRST&quot; emblazoned on his newspaper masthead, Hearst celebrated the &quot;great achievement&quot; of the new Nazi regime in Germany—a lesson to all &quot;liberty-loving people.&quot; In 1934, after checking with Jewish leaders, Hearst visited Berlin to interview Adolf Hitler. When Hitler asked why he was so misunderstood by the American press, Hearst retorted: &quot;Because Americans believe in democracy, and are averse to dictatorship.&quot; William Randolph Hearst instructed his reporters in Germany to give positive coverage of the Nazis, and fired journalists who refused to write stories favourable of German fascism. Hearst&#x27;s papers ran columns without rebuttal by Nazi leader Hermann Göring, Alfred Rosenberg, and Hitler himself, as well as Mussolini and other dictators in Europe and Latin America. After the systematic massive Nazi attacks on Jews known as Kristallnacht (November 9–10, 1938), the Hearst press, like all major American newspapers, blamed Hitler and the Nazis: &quot;The entire civilized world is shocked and shamed by Germany&#x27;s brutal oppression of the Jewish people,&quot; read an editorial in all Hearst papers. &quot;You [Hitler] are making the flag of National Socialism a symbol of national savagery,&quot; read an editorial written by Hearst.

During 1934, Japan / U.S. relations were unstable. In an attempt to remedy this, Prince Tokugawa Iesato travelled throughout the United States on a goodwill visit. During his visit, Prince Iesato and his delegation met with William Randolph Hearst with the hope of improving relations between the two nations.

== Personal life ==
=== Millicent Willson ===

In 1903, 40-year-old Hearst married Millicent Veronica Willson (1882–1974), a 21-year-old chorus girl, in New York City. The couple had five sons: George Randolph Hearst, born on April 23, 1904; William Randolph Hearst Jr., born on January 27, 1908; John Randolph Hearst, born September 26, 1909; and twins Randolph Apperson Hearst and David Whitmire (né Elbert Willson) Hearst, born on December 2, 1915.

Millicent separated from Hearst in the mid-1920s after tiring of his longtime affair with Marion Davies, but the couple remained legally married until Hearst&#x27;s death. As a leading philanthropist, Millicent built an independent life for herself in New York City. She was active in society and in 1921 founded the Free Milk Fund for Babies. For decades, the fund provided New York&#x27;s poverty-stricken families with free milk for children.

=== Marion Davies ===

Conceding an end to his political hopes, Hearst became involved in an affair with the film actress and comedian Marion Davies (1897–1961), former mistress of his friend Paul Block. From about 1919, he lived openly with her in California.

After the death of Patricia Lake (1919/1923–1993), who had been presented as Davies&#x27;s &quot;niece,&quot; her family confirmed that she was Davies and Hearst&#x27;s daughter. She had acknowledged this before her death.

=== California properties ===
George Hearst invested some of his fortune from the Comstock Lode in land. In 1865 he purchased about , part of Rancho Piedra Blanca stretching from Simeon Bay and reached to Ragged Point. He paid the original grantee Jose de Jesus Pico USD$1 an acre, about twice the current market price. Hearst continued to buy parcels whenever they became available, including Rancho San Simeon.

In 1865, Hearst bought all of Rancho Santa Rosa totaling except one section of that Estrada lived on. However, as was common with claims before the Public Land Commission, Estrada&#x27;s legal claim was costly and took many years to resolve. Estrada mortgaged the ranch to Domingo Pujol, a Spanish-born San Francisco lawyer, who represented him. Estrada was unable to pay the loan and Pujol foreclosed on it. Estrada did not have the title to the land. Hearst sued, but ended up with only of Estrada&#x27;s holdings.

Rancho Milpitas was a land grant given in 1838 by California governor Juan Bautista Alvarado to Ygnacio Pastor. The grant encompassed present-day Jolon and land to the west. When Pastor obtained title from the Public Land Commission in 1875, Faxon Atherton immediately purchased the land. By 1880, the James Brown Cattle Company owned and operated Rancho Milpitas and neighboring Rancho Los Ojitos.

In 1923, Newhall Land sold Rancho San Miguelito de Trinidad and Rancho El Piojo to William Randolph Hearst. In 1925, Hearst&#x27;s Piedmont Land and Cattle Company bought Rancho Milpitas and Rancho Los Ojitos (Little Springs) from the James Brown Cattle Company. Hearst gradually bought adjoining land until he owned about .

=== Fort Hunter Liggett ===
On December 12, 1940, Hearst sold , including the Rancho Milpitas, to the United States government. Neighboring landowners sold another to create the Hunter Liggett Military Reservation troop training base for the War Department. The US Army used a ranch house and guest lodge named The Hacienda as housing for the base commander, for visiting officers, and for the officers&#x27; club.

=== Little Sur River ===
In 1916, the Eberhard and Kron Tanning Company of Santa Cruz purchased land from the homesteaders along the Little Sur River. They harvested tanbark oak and brought the bark out on mules and crude wooden sleds known as &quot;go-devils&quot; to Notleys Landing at the mouth of Palo Colorado Canyon, where it was loaded via cable onto ships anchored offshore. Hearst was interested in preserving the uncut, abundant redwood forest, and on November 18, 1921, he purchased the land from the tanning company for about $50,000. On July 23, 1948, the Monterey Bay Area Council of the Boy Scouts of America purchased the property, originally , from the Hearst Sunical Land and Packing Company for $20,000. On September 9, 1948, Albert M. Lester of Carmel obtained a grant for the council of $20,000 from Hearst through the Hearst Foundation of New York City, offsetting the cost of the purchase.

=== Hearst Castle ===

Beginning in 1919, Hearst began to build Hearst Castle, which he never completed, on the ranch he had acquired near San Simeon. He furnished the mansion with art, antiques, and entire historic rooms purchased and brought from great houses in Europe. He established an Arabian horse breeding operation on the grounds.

=== Northern California forest land ===
Hearst also owned property on the McCloud River in Siskiyou County, in far northern California, called Wyntoon. The buildings at Wyntoon were designed by architect Julia Morgan, who also designed Hearst Castle and worked in collaboration with William J. Dodd on a number of other projects.

=== Beverly Hills mansion ===
In 1947, Hearst paid $120,000 for an H-shaped Beverly Hills mansion, (located at 1011 N. Beverly Dr.), on 3.7 acres three blocks from Sunset Boulevard. The Beverly House, as it has come to be known, has some cinematic connections. According to &quot;Hearst Over Hollywood&quot;, John and Jacqueline Kennedy stayed at the house for part of their honeymoon. The house appeared in the film &quot;The Godfather&quot; (1972).

In the early 1890s, Hearst began building a mansion on the hills overlooking Pleasanton, California, on land purchased by his father a decade earlier. Hearst&#x27;s mother took over the project, hired Julia Morgan to finish it as her home, and named it Hacienda del Pozo de Verona. After her death, it was acquired by Castlewood Country Club, which used it as their clubhouse from 1925 to 1969, when it was destroyed in a major fire.

=== Art collection ===
Hearst was renowned for his extensive collection of international art that spanned centuries. Most notable in his collection were his Greek vases, Spanish and Italian furniture, Oriental carpets, Renaissance vestments, an extensive library with many books signed by their authors, and paintings and statues. In addition to collecting pieces of fine art, he also gathered manuscripts, rare books, and autographs. His guests included varied celebrities and politicians, who stayed in rooms furnished with pieces of antique furniture and decorated with artwork by famous artists.

Beginning in 1937, Hearst began selling some of his art collection to help relieve the debt burden he had suffered from the Depression. The first year he sold items for a total of $11 million. In 1941 he put about 20,000 items up for sale; these were evidence of his wide and varied tastes. Included in the sale items were paintings by van Dyke, crosiers, chalices, Charles Dickens&#x27;s sideboard, pulpits, stained glass, arms and armor, George Washington&#x27;s waistcoat, and Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s Bible. When Hearst Castle was donated to the State of California, it was still sufficiently furnished for the whole house to be considered and operated as a museum.

=== St Donat&#x27;s Castle ===
After seeing photographs in &quot;Country Life&quot; magazine of St. Donat&#x27;s Castle in the Vale of Glamorgan, Wales, Hearst bought and renovated it in 1925 as a gift to his mistress Marion Davies. The Castle was restored by Hearst, who spent a fortune buying entire rooms from other castles and palaces across the UK and Europe. The Great Hall was bought from the Bradenstoke Priory in Wiltshire and reconstructed brick by brick in its current site at St. Donat&#x27;s. From the Bradenstoke Priory, he also bought and removed the guest house, Prior&#x27;s lodging, and great tithe barn; of these, some of the materials became the St. Donat&#x27;s banqueting hall, complete with a sixteenth-century French chimney-piece and windows; also used were a fireplace dated to c. 1514 and a fourteenth-century roof, which became part of the Bradenstoke Hall, despite this use being questioned in Parliament. Hearst built 34 green and white marble bathrooms for the many guest suites in the castle and completed a series of terraced gardens which survive intact today. Hearst and Davies spent much of their time entertaining, and held a number of lavish parties attended by guests including Charlie Chaplin, Douglas Fairbanks, Winston Churchill, and a young John F. Kennedy. When Hearst died, the castle was purchased by Antonin Besse II and donated to Atlantic College, an international boarding school founded by Kurt Hahn in 1962, which still uses it.

=== Interest in aviation ===
Hearst was particularly interested in the newly emerging technologies relating to aviation and had his first experience of flight in January 1910, in Los Angeles. Louis Paulhan, a French aviator, took him for an air trip on his Farman biplane. Hearst also sponsored &quot;Old Glory&quot; as well as the Hearst Transcontinental Prize.

=== Financial disaster ===
Hearst&#x27;s crusade against Roosevelt and the New Deal, combined with union strikes and boycotts of his properties, undermined the financial strength of his empire. Circulation of his major publications declined in the mid-1930s, while rivals such as the New York &quot;Daily News&quot; were flourishing. He refused to take effective cost-cutting measures, and instead increased his very expensive art purchases. His friend Joseph P. Kennedy offered to buy the magazines, but Hearst jealously guarded his empire and refused. Instead, he sold some of his heavily mortgaged real estate. San Simeon itself was mortgaged to &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; owner Harry Chandler in 1933 for $600,000.

Finally his financial advisors realized he was tens of millions of dollars in debt, and could not pay the interest on the loans, let alone reduce the principal. The proposed bond sale failed to attract investors when Hearst&#x27;s financial crisis became widely known. Marion Davies&#x27;s stardom waned and Hearst&#x27;s movies also began to hemorrhage money. As the crisis deepened he let go of most of his household staff, sold his exotic animals to the Los Angeles Zoo and named a trustee to control his finances. He still refused to sell his beloved newspapers. At one point, to avoid outright bankruptcy, he had to accept a $1 million loan from Marion Davies, who sold all her jewelry, stocks and bonds to raise the cash for him. Davies also managed to raise him another million as a loan from &quot;Washington Herald&quot; owner Cissy Patterson. The trustee cut Hearst&#x27;s annual salary to $500,000, and stopped the annual payment of $700,000 in dividends. He had to pay rent for living in his castle at San Simeon.

Legally Hearst avoided bankruptcy although the public generally saw it as such, since appraisers went through the tapestries, paintings, furniture, silver, pottery, buildings, autographs, jewelry, and other collectibles. Items in the thousands were gathered from a five-story warehouse in New York, warehouses near San Simeon containing large amounts of Greek sculpture and ceramics, and the contents of St. Donat&#x27;s. His collections were sold off in a series of auctions and private sales in 1938–39. John D. Rockefeller, Junior, bought $100,000 of antique silver for his new museum at Colonial Williamsburg. The market for art and antiques had not recovered from the depression, so Hearst made an overall loss of hundreds of thousands of dollars. During this time, Hearst&#x27;s friend George Loorz commented sarcastically: &quot;He would like to start work on the outside pool [at San Simeon], start a new reservoir etc. but told me yesterday &#x27;I want so many things but haven&#x27;t got the money.&#x27; Poor fellow, let&#x27;s take up a collection.&quot;

He was embarrassed in early 1939 when &quot;Time&quot; magazine published a feature which revealed he was at risk of defaulting on his mortgage for San Simeon and losing it to his creditor and publishing rival, Harry Chandler. This, however, was averted, as Chandler agreed to extend the repayment.

== Final years and death ==
After the disastrous financial losses of the 1930s, the Hearst Company returned to profitability during the Second World War, when advertising revenues skyrocketed. Hearst, after spending much of the war at his estate of Wyntoon, returned to San Simeon full-time in 1945 and resumed building works. He also continued collecting, on a reduced scale. He threw himself into philanthropy by donating a great many works to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.

In 1947, Hearst left his San Simeon estate to seek medical care, which was unavailable in the remote location. He died in Beverly Hills on August 14, 1951, at the age of 88. He was interred in the Hearst family mausoleum at the Cypress Lawn Memorial Park in Colma, California, which his parents had established.

His will established two charitable trusts, the Hearst Foundation and the William Randolph Hearst Foundation. By his amended will, Marion Davies inherited 170,000 shares in the Hearst Corporation, which, combined with a trust fund of 30,000 shares that Hearst had established for her in 1950, gave her a controlling interest in the corporation. This was short-lived, as she relinquished the 170,000 shares to the Corporation on October 30, 1951, retaining her original 30,000 shares and a role as an advisor. Like their father, none of Hearst&#x27;s five sons graduated from college. They all followed their father into the media business, and Hearst&#x27;s namesake, William Randolph Jr., became a Pulitzer Prize–winning newspaper reporter.

== Criticism ==
In the 1890s, the already existing anti-Chinese and anti-Asian racism in San Francisco were further fanned by Hearst&#x27;s anti-non-European descents, which were reflected in the rhetoric and the focus in the &quot;Examiner&quot; and one of his own signed editorials. These prejudices continued to be the mainstays throughout his journalistic career to galvanize his readers’ fears. Hearst staunchly supported the Japanese-American internment during WWII and used his media power to negatively portray Japanese Americans and to garner support for the internment of Japanese-Americans.

Some media outlets have attempted to bring attention to Hearst&#x27;s involvement in the prohibition of cannabis in the United States. Hearst collaborated with Harry J. Anslinger to ban hemp due to the threat that the burgeoning hemp paper industry posed to his major investment and market share in the paper milling industry. Due to their efforts, hemp would remain illegal to grow in the US for almost a century, not being legalized until 2018.

As Martin Lee and Norman Solomon noted in their 1990 book &quot;Unreliable Sources&quot;, Hearst &quot;routinely invented sensational stories, faked interviews, ran phony pictures and distorted real events&quot;.

Hearst&#x27;s use of yellow journalism techniques in his &quot;New York Journal&quot; to whip up popular support for U.S. military adventurism in Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Philippines in 1898 was also criticized in Upton Sinclair&#x27;s 1919 book, &quot;The Brass Check: A Study of American Journalism&quot;. According to Sinclair, Hearst&#x27;s newspapers distorted world events and deliberately tried to discredit socialists. Another critic, Ferdinand Lundberg, extended the criticism in &quot;Imperial Hearst&quot; (1936), charging that Hearst papers accepted payments from abroad to slant the news. After the Second World War, a further critic, George Seldes, repeated the charges in &quot;Facts and Fascism&quot; (1947). Lundberg described Hearst as &quot;the weakest strong man and the strongest weak man in the world today... a giant with feet of clay.&quot;

== In fiction ==
=== &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; ===
The film &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; (released on May 1, 1941) is loosely based on Hearst&#x27;s life. Welles and his collaborator, screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz, created Kane as a composite character, among them Harold Fowler McCormick, Samuel Insull and Howard Hughes. Hearst, enraged at the idea of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; being a thinly disguised and very unflattering portrait of him, used his massive influence and resources to prevent the film from being released—all without even having seen it. Welles and the studio RKO Pictures resisted the pressure but Hearst and his Hollywood friends ultimately succeeded in pressuring theater chains to limit showings of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;, resulting in only moderate box-office numbers and seriously impairing Welles&#x27;s career prospects. The fight over the film was documented in the Academy Award-nominated documentary, &quot;The Battle Over Citizen Kane&quot;, and nearly 60 years later, HBO offered a fictionalized version of Hearst&#x27;s efforts in its original production &quot;RKO 281&quot; (1999), in which James Cromwell portrays Hearst. &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; has twice been ranked No. 1 on AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies: in 1998 and 2007. In 2020, David Fincher directed &quot;Mank&quot;, starring Gary Oldman as Mankiewicz, as he interacts with Hearst prior to the writing of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;&#x27;s screenplay. Charles Dance portrays Hearst in the film.

=== Other works ===
====Films====
* In the television film &quot;Rough Riders&quot; (1997), Hearst (played by George Hamilton) is depicted as traveling to Cuba with a small band of journalists, to personally cover the Spanish–American War.
* Hearst is mentioned in the Disney movie &quot;Newsies&quot; (1992), directed by Kenny Ortega, which depicts the Newsboys&#x27; Strike of 1899. Hearst is never seen onscreen but is referenced by several of the newsies in various musical numbers, and is portrayed as an antagonist engaged in a bitter circulation war with Joseph Pulitzer.
* In the HBO movie &quot;Winchell&quot; (1998), Kevin Tighe played Hearst.
* In &quot;RKO 281&quot;(1999), Hearst was played by James Cromwell.
* &quot;The Cat&#x27;s Meow&quot; (2001), a fictitious version of the death of Thomas H. Ince, takes place in November 1924, on a weekend cruise aboard Hearst&#x27;s yacht, celebrating Ince&#x27;s 44th birthday. The film&#x27;s fictionalizes Ince&#x27;s death by suggesting that Hearst shot Ince and covered it up. Hearst is portrayed by Edward Herrmann. (Ince actually became severely ill aboard Hearst&#x27;s private yacht, and the official cause of the filmmaker&#x27;s death was heart failure.)
* He was portrayed by Matthew Marsh in Agnieszka Holland&#x27;s 2019 film &quot;Mr Jones&quot;.
* He was portrayed by Charles Dance in David Fincher&#x27;s 2020 film &quot;Mank&quot;.
* He was portrayed by Pat Skipper in Damien Chazelle&#x27;s 2022 film &quot;Babylon&quot;.

====Literature====
* John Dos Passos&#x27;s novel &quot;The Big Money&quot; (1936) includes a biographical sketch of Hearst.
* Jack London&#x27;s futuristic, dystopian novel &quot;The Iron Heel&quot; (1908) refers to Hearst by name; and the plot &quot;predicts&quot; the destruction of his publishing empire (along with the Democratic Party) in 1912 by means of an oligarchy of plutocrats and industrial trusts engineering the cessation of his advertising revenue.
* In Ayn Rand&#x27;s novel &quot;The Fountainhead&quot; (1943) and its eponymous 1949 film adaptation, the character Gail Wynand, a newspaper magnate who thinks he can control public sentiment but in reality is only a servant of the masses, is inspired by and modeled after the life of Hearst.
* In John Steinbeck&#x27;s novel &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; (1939), Hearst is anonymously described as the &quot;newspaper fella near the coast&quot; who &quot;got a million acres&quot; and looks &quot;crazy an&#x27; mean&quot; in pictures (ch. 18).
* In Gore Vidal&#x27;s historic novel series, &quot;Narratives of Empire&quot;, Hearst is a major character.
* Cormac McCarthy&#x27;s novel &quot;The Crossing&quot; (1994) refers to Hearst by name and workers at his million-acre ranch in Chihuahua, La Babícora, act as antagonists in the story.
* Scott Westerfeld&#x27;s novel &quot;Goliath&quot; (2011) depicts Hearst in World War I.
* In Charlaine Harris&#x27; &quot;The Russian Cage&quot; (2021), Hearst was the ruler of the HRE (formerly west coast states of US) who permitted the tsar and his entourage to settle in the defunct Navy base at San Diego.

====Television====
* The rivalry between Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer has been documented on National Geographic Channel&#x27;s series &quot;American Genius&quot; (2015).
* In the TNT series &quot;The Alienist&quot;, in the second season played by Matt Letscher.
* In &quot;The Paper Dynasty&quot; (1964) episode of the syndicated Western television series &quot;Death Valley Days&quot;, hosted by Stanley Andrews. In the story line, Hearst (played by James Hampton) struggles to turn a profit despite increased circulation of &quot;The San Francisco Examiner&quot;, featuring James Lanphier (1920–1969) as Ambrose Bierce and Robert O. Cornthwaite as Sam Chamberlain.
* In &quot;The Odyssey&quot;, a 1979 episode of the television series &quot;Little House on the Prairie&quot;, Hearst (played by Bill Ewing) is depicted as a friendly and talented young San Francisco journalist.
* Hearst (portrayed by John Colton) appears in the season 2 episode &quot;Hollywoodland&quot; of the NBC series &quot;Timeless&quot;.

== See also ==
* The Hacienda (Milpitas Ranchhouse)
* Hearst family
* Hearst Ranch
* History of American newspapers

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
===Sources===
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* Bernhardt, Mark (2011). &quot;The Selling of Sex, Sleaze, Scuttlebutt, and Other Shocking Sensations: The Evolution of New Journalism in San Francisco, 1887–1900&quot;. &quot;American Journalism&quot; 28#4: 111–42.
* Carlisle, Rodney (1974). &quot;The Foreign Policy Views of an Isolationist Press Lord: W. R. Hearst &amp; the International Crisis, 1936–41&quot;. &quot;Journal of Contemporary History&quot; 9#3 pp. 217–27.
* 
* Goldstein, Benjamin S. A Legend Somewhat Larger than Life’: Karl H. von Wiegand and the Trajectory of Hearstian Sensationalist Journalism*&quot;. &quot;Historical Research&quot; 94, no. 265 (August 1, 2021): 629–59. .
* Kastner, Victoria, with a foreword by Stephen T. Hearst (2013). &quot;Hearst Ranch: Family, Land and Legacy&quot;. New York: H. N. Abrams. .
* Kastner, Victoria, with photographs by Victoria Garagliano (2000). &quot;Hearst Castle: The Biography of a Country House&quot;. New York: H. N. Abrams. .
* Kastner, Victoria, with photographs by Victoria Garagliano (2009). &quot;Hearst&#x27;s San Simeon: The Gardens and the Land&quot;. New York: H. N. Abrams. .
* Landers, James. &quot;Hearst&#x27;s Magazine, 1912–1914: Muckraking Sensationalist.&quot; &quot;Journalism History&quot; 38.4 (2013): 221.
* Leonard, Thomas C. (2000) &quot;Hearst, William Randolph&quot;. &quot;American National Biography Online&quot;. Access date: May 12, 2016.
* 
* Olmsted, Kathryn S. (2022). &quot;The Newspaper Axis: Six Press Barons Who Enabled Hitler&quot;. Yale University Press. Sample.
** Online review.
* 
* 
* Thomas, Evan (2010). &quot;The War Lovers: Roosevelt, Lodge, Hearst, and the Rush to Empire, 1898&quot;.
* Winkler, John K. (1928). &quot;W.R. Hearst: An American Phenomenon&quot;. Jonathan Cape.

== External links ==

* Hearst the Collector at LACMA

* The William Randolph Hearst Art Archive at Long Island University
* Guide to the William Randolph Hearst Papers at The Bancroft Library
* Hearstcastle.org: Hearst Castle at San Simeon


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="0" end="27" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="191" end="212" title="Hearst Communications" label="Hearst Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q231443" start="240" end="257" title="yellow journalism" label="yellow journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261318" start="274" end="294" title="Journalism ethics and standards" label="ethics and standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q427532" start="353" end="367" title="sensationalism" label="sensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q361306" start="372" end="394" title="human-interest story" label="human-interest stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="500" end="526" title="The San Francisco Examiner" label="The San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q561826" start="564" end="577" title="George Hearst" label="George Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984695" start="637" end="653" title="New York Journal" label="New York Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q173417" start="701" end="716" title="Joseph Pulitzer" label="Joseph Pulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066835" start="730" end="744" title="New York World" label="New York World"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="1305" end="1330" title="Spanish–American War" label="war in 1898 against Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="1467" end="1475" title="History of the United States Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1483" end="1512" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1540" end="1570" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q699252" start="1574" end="1578" title="1904 United States presidential election" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="1580" end="1602" title="Mayor of New York City" label="Mayor of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q122766948" start="1606" end="1610" title="1905 New York City mayoral election" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1615" end="1619" title="New York City mayoral elections#1897 to 1913" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="1625" end="1645" title="Governor of New York" label="Governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970867" start="1649" end="1653" title="1906 New York state election" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="1749" end="1769" title="Progressive Movement" label="Progressive Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="1898" end="1910" title="conservative" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q309310" start="1942" end="1954" title="Isolationism" label="isolationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="2124" end="2142" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="2173" end="2190" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="2315" end="2325" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="2495" end="2516" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186800" start="2575" end="2590" title="Criticism of Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="prominent enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2768" end="2784" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959094" start="2947" end="2966" title="Charles Foster Kane" label="Charles Foster Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="2990" end="3002" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="3020" end="3032" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q378143" start="3051" end="3064" title="Hearst Castle" label="Hearst Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353689" start="3123" end="3133" title="San Simeon, California" label="San Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="3208" end="3234" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3285" end="3298" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q561826" start="3302" end="3315" title="George Hearst" label="George Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q463046" start="3447" end="3469" title="Phoebe Hearst" label="Phoebe Apperson Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="3558" end="3570" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017729" start="3746" end="3763" title="Ulster Protestant" label="Ulster Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q878530" start="3842" end="3850" title="Ballybay" label="Ballybay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513167" start="3942" end="3968" title="Province of South Carolina" label="Province of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251652" start="4090" end="4107" title="Irish Protestants" label="Irish Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="4399" end="4409" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="4667" end="4673" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="4722" end="4756" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186647" start="4877" end="4916" title="Phoebe A. Hearst Museum of Anthropology" label="Phoebe A. Hearst Museum of Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q906930" start="4957" end="4979" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s School (Concord, New Hampshire)" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q28249" start="4983" end="5005" title="Concord, New Hampshire" label="Concord, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="5030" end="5045" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q975232" start="5108" end="5127" title="Delta Kappa Epsilon" label="Delta Kappa Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647102" start="5133" end="5142" title="A.D. Club" label="A.D. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449462" start="5154" end="5164" title="Final club" label="Final club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588813" start="5170" end="5195" title="Hasty Pudding Theatricals" label="Hasty Pudding Theatricals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362081" start="5211" end="5226" title="Harvard Lampoon" label="Harvard Lampoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q873222" start="5248" end="5256" title="Expulsion (academia)" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587858" start="5327" end="5341" title="Harvard Square" label="Harvard Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q152475" start="5374" end="5385" title="chamber pot" label="chamber pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="5585" end="5607" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q191050" start="5848" end="5862" title="Ambrose Bierce" label="Ambrose Bierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="5864" end="5874" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45765" start="5876" end="5887" title="Jack London" label="Jack London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626009" start="5914" end="5929" title="Homer Davenport" label="Homer Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="5949" end="5957" title="Populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984695" start="6578" end="6602" title="New York Morning Journal" label="New York Morning Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q206534" start="6633" end="6646" title="Stephen Crane" label="Stephen Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q9016429" start="6651" end="6667" title="Julian Hawthorne" label="Julian Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q173417" start="6722" end="6737" title="Joseph Pulitzer" label="Joseph Pulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066835" start="6772" end="6786" title="New York World" label="New York World"/>
<link wikidata="Q737068" start="6830" end="6849" title="Richard F. Outcault" label="Richard F. Outcault"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136735" start="6925" end="6942" title="James J. Montague" label="James J. Montague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547338" start="6968" end="6986" title="Portland Oregonian" label="Portland Oregonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984695" start="7088" end="7112" title="New York Journal-American" label="New York Evening Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q231443" start="8264" end="8281" title="yellow journalism" label="yellow journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q892228" start="8320" end="8330" title="Yellow Kid" label="Yellow Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798085" start="9209" end="9224" title="Arthur Brisbane" label="Arthur Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="10547" end="10567" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="10970" end="10992" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11159" end="11169" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="11213" end="11229" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q509441" start="11270" end="11280" title="Mark Hanna" label="Mark Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="11974" end="11992" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182760" start="12060" end="12086" title="Wilsonianism" label="Wilsonian internationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="12092" end="12109" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q309310" start="12156" end="12168" title="isolationist" label="isolationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514908" start="12608" end="12632" title="Cuban War of Independence" label="Cuban Revolution in 1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q560787" start="13918" end="13936" title="Frederic Remington" label="Frederic Remington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514908" start="13974" end="13999" title="Cuban War of Independence" label="Cuban War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006729" start="14769" end="14788" title="Evangelina Cosio y Cisneros" label="Evangelina Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q935398" start="16192" end="16206" title="Calixto García" label="Calixto García"/>
<link wikidata="Q10303176" start="16516" end="16542" title="International Film Service" label="International Film Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107679" start="16547" end="16563" title="animation studio" label="animation studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="16689" end="16718" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q63390358" start="16908" end="16928" title="Los Angeles Examiner" label="Los Angeles Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947727" start="16946" end="16961" title="Boston American" label="Boston American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816078" start="16979" end="16995" title="Atlanta Georgian" label="Atlanta Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095396" start="17013" end="17029" title="Chicago Examiner" label="Chicago Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266027" start="17047" end="17060" title="Detroit Times" label="Detroit Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q286261" start="17078" end="17104" title="Seattle Post-Intelligencer" label="Seattle Post-Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972346" start="17122" end="17145" title="Washington Times-Herald" label="Washington Times-Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971912" start="17163" end="17180" title="Washington Herald" label="Washington Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="17216" end="17238" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q333644" start="17416" end="17428" title="Cosmopolitan (magazine)" label="Cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174941" start="17442" end="17459" title="Good Housekeeping" label="Good Housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q647071" start="17473" end="17489" title="Town &amp;amp; Country (magazine)" label="Town and Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="17507" end="17527" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13436639" start="17569" end="17590" title="New York Daily Mirror" label="New York Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="17605" end="17612" title="Tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="17641" end="17660" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153288" start="17736" end="17762" title="International News Service" label="International News Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564690" start="17854" end="17858" title="WINS (AM)" label="WINS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469675" start="17872" end="17895" title="King Features Syndicate" label="King Features Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136177" start="17987" end="18011" title="Cosmopolitan Productions" label="Cosmopolitan Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q278806" start="18296" end="18310" title="A. J. Liebling" label="A. J. Liebling"/>
<link wikidata="Q453440" start="18424" end="18439" title="George Herriman" label="George Herriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q726731" start="18489" end="18498" title="Krazy Kat" label="Krazy Kat"/>
<link wikidata="Q721226" start="18775" end="18807" title="LZ 127 Graf Zeppelin" label="LZ 127 &amp;quot;Graf Zeppelin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981695" start="18878" end="18917" title="Naval Air Engineering Station Lakehurst" label="Lakehurst Naval Air Station, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q61666" start="18944" end="18960" title="Hugo Eckener" label="Dr. Hugo Eckener"/>
<link wikidata="Q456512" start="19129" end="19162" title="Grace Marguerite Hay Drummond-Hay" label="Grace Marguerite Hay Drummond-Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="19329" end="19366" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="20392" end="20410" title="Hearst Corporation" label="Hearst Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916382" start="20460" end="20478" title="media conglomerate" label="media conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="20559" end="20567" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q122766948" start="20674" end="20678" title="1905 New York City mayoral election" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q131400068" start="20683" end="20687" title="1909 New York City mayoral election" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="20692" end="20712" title="governor of New York" label="governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970867" start="20716" end="20720" title="1906 New York gubernatorial election" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346008" start="20777" end="20795" title="Independence Party (United States)" label="Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q313252" start="20837" end="20857" title="Charles Evans Hughes" label="Charles Evans Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962825" start="21086" end="21099" title="Wallace Irwin" label="Wallace Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="21137" end="21157" title="Progressive Movement" label="Progressive Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="21312" end="21324" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q699252" start="21470" end="21514" title="1904 United States presidential election" label="the 1904 Democratic nomination for president"/>
<link wikidata="Q443866" start="21539" end="21554" title="Alton B. Parker" label="Alton B. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936256" start="21670" end="21696" title="Municipal Ownership League" label="Municipal Ownership League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="21765" end="21779" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="21874" end="21891" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="22035" end="22047" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q430714" start="22100" end="22108" title="Al Smith" label="Al Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="22210" end="22221" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="22250" end="22264" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278039" start="22394" end="22415" title="Jeffersonian democrat" label="Jeffersonian democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="22702" end="22723" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="22823" end="22843" title="Speaker of the House of Representatives of the United States" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q298991" start="22845" end="22862" title="John Nance Garner" label="John Nance Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683199" start="23917" end="23927" title="Adjusted Compensation Payment Act" label="Bonus Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q838946" start="23964" end="23975" title="Permanent Court of International Justice" label="World Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q665416" start="24417" end="24427" title="Alf Landon" label="Alf Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165058" start="24650" end="24659" title="Holodomor" label="Holodomor"/>
<link wikidata="Q741120" start="24753" end="24765" title="Gareth Jones (journalist)" label="Gareth Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="24792" end="24810" title="Communist Party USA" label="American Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q110377580" start="24811" end="24820" title="Fred Beal" label="Fred Beal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="24828" end="24846" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="24991" end="25005" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286904" start="25035" end="25049" title="Walter Duranty" label="Walter Duranty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248043" start="25488" end="25501" title="Louis Fischer" label="Louis Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="25528" end="25538" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="26269" end="26280" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="26423" end="26435" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="26853" end="26867" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q75849" start="26869" end="26885" title="Alfred Rosenberg" label="Alfred Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="27036" end="27049" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q672741" start="27539" end="27554" title="Tokugawa Iesato" label="Tokugawa Iesato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314333" start="27845" end="27871" title="Millicent Hearst" label="Millicent Veronica Willson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543710" start="27956" end="27978" title="George Randolph Hearst" label="George Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017363" start="28004" end="28031" title="William Randolph Hearst Jr." label="William Randolph Hearst Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6254217" start="28059" end="28079" title="John Randolph Hearst" label="John Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291784" start="28116" end="28140" title="Randolph Apperson Hearst" label="Randolph Apperson Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q242416" start="28305" end="28318" title="Marion Davies" label="Marion Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="28400" end="28414" title="Philanthropy" label="philanthropist"/>
<link wikidata="Q242416" start="28797" end="28810" title="Marion Davies" label="Marion Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645989" start="28854" end="28864" title="Paul Block" label="Paul Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145683" start="28943" end="28956" title="Patricia Lake" label="Patricia Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q561826" start="29178" end="29191" title="George Hearst" label="George Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122817" start="29230" end="29243" title="Comstock Lode" label="Comstock Lode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291164" start="29290" end="29310" title="Rancho Piedra Blanca" label="Rancho Piedra Blanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291290" start="29542" end="29559" title="Rancho San Simeon" label="Rancho San Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291316" start="29592" end="29609" title="Rancho Santa Rosa (Estrada)" label="Rancho Santa Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257429" start="29710" end="29732" title="California Land Act of 1851" label="Public Land Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291118" start="30080" end="30095" title="Rancho Milpitas (Pastor)" label="Rancho Milpitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187571" start="30150" end="30172" title="Juan Bautista Alvarado" label="Juan Bautista Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478196" start="30226" end="30231" title="Jolon, California" label="Jolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438863" start="30322" end="30336" title="Faxon Atherton" label="Faxon Atherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291118" start="30428" end="30443" title="Rancho Milpitas (Pastor)" label="Rancho Milpitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271755" start="30460" end="30477" title="Rancho Los Ojitos" label="Rancho Los Ojitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018089" start="30489" end="30501" title="Newhall Land and Farming Company" label="Newhall Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291278" start="30507" end="30539" title="Rancho San Miguelito de Trinidad" label="Rancho San Miguelito de Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290959" start="30544" end="30559" title="Rancho El Piojo" label="Rancho El Piojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471380" start="30984" end="31019" title="Fort Hunter Liggett" label="Hunter Liggett Military Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="31048" end="31062" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738608" start="31117" end="31129" title="The Hacienda (Milpitas Ranchhouse)" label="The Hacienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652114" start="31355" end="31371" title="Little Sur River" label="Little Sur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063087" start="31491" end="31506" title="Notleys Landing, California" label="Notleys Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q27989172" start="31523" end="31543" title="Palo Colorado Canyon, California" label="Palo Colorado Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="31892" end="31931" title="Hearst Corporation" label="Hearst Sunical Land and Packing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q378143" start="32200" end="32213" title="Hearst Castle" label="Hearst Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353689" start="32275" end="32285" title="San Simeon, California" label="San Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="32322" end="32329" title="antique" label="antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q184138" start="32427" end="32440" title="Arabian horse" label="Arabian horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800372" start="32551" end="32564" title="McCloud River" label="McCloud River"/>
<link wikidata="Q156374" start="32568" end="32583" title="Siskiyou County, California" label="Siskiyou County"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040256" start="32620" end="32627" title="Wyntoon" label="Wyntoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q601820" start="32681" end="32693" title="Julia Morgan" label="Julia Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013203" start="32760" end="32775" title="William J. Dodd" label="William J. Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q860442" start="32972" end="32988" title="Sunset Boulevard" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q116164074" start="32994" end="33007" title="Beverly Estate" label="Beverly House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="33117" end="33121" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="33126" end="33144" title="Jacqueline Kennedy" label="Jacqueline Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="33231" end="33244" title="The Godfather" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q21022173" start="33513" end="33540" title="Hacienda del Pozo de Verona" label="Hacienda del Pozo de Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q150679" start="34632" end="34640" title="Anthony van Dyck" label="van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="34662" end="34677" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762308" start="34685" end="34694" title="sideboard" label="sideboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="34736" end="34753" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="34776" end="34792" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177346" start="35025" end="35058" title="Country Life (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Country Life&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485119" start="35062" end="35085" title="St Donat&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="St. Donat&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q844784" start="35093" end="35110" title="Vale of Glamorgan" label="Vale of Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954489" start="35366" end="35384" title="Bradenstoke Priory" label="Bradenstoke Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="36183" end="36198" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104127" start="36200" end="36217" title="Douglas Fairbanks" label="Douglas Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="36219" end="36236" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="36250" end="36265" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q756361" start="36345" end="36361" title="Atlantic College" label="Atlantic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q61146" start="36407" end="36416" title="Kurt Hahn" label="Kurt Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q715184" start="36640" end="36653" title="Louis Paulhan" label="Louis Paulhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084102" start="36749" end="36758" title="Old Glory (aircraft)" label="Old Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691722" start="36780" end="36809" title="Hearst Transcontinental Prize" label="Hearst Transcontinental Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q313696" start="37265" end="37282" title="Joseph P. Kennedy" label="Joseph P. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="37467" end="37484" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667868" start="37497" end="37511" title="Harry Chandler" label="Harry Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971912" start="38341" end="38358" title="Washington Herald" label="Washington Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122270" start="38371" end="38386" title="Cissy Patterson" label="Cissy Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="39153" end="39174" title="Colonial Williamsburg" label="Colonial Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="39675" end="39679" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040256" start="40180" end="40187" title="Wyntoon" label="Wyntoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641836" start="40381" end="40413" title="Los Angeles County Museum of Art" label="Los Angeles County Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084115" start="40644" end="40670" title="Cypress Lawn Memorial Park" label="Cypress Lawn Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q854022" start="40949" end="40959" title="trust fund" label="trust fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017363" start="41397" end="41417" title="William Randolph Hearst Jr." label="William Randolph Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="41428" end="41442" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="41704" end="41712" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="41903" end="41931" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="Japanese-American internment"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="41939" end="41943" title="World War II" label="WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389574" start="42235" end="42253" title="Harry J. Anslinger" label="Harry J. Anslinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="42261" end="42265" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575415" start="42304" end="42314" title="hemp paper" label="hemp paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="42378" end="42388" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295325" start="42526" end="42536" title="Martin A. Lee" label="Martin Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772406" start="42541" end="42555" title="Norman Solomon" label="Norman Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216134" start="42952" end="42966" title="Upton Sinclair" label="Upton Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719857" start="42991" end="43006" title="The Brass Check" label="The Brass Check"/>
<link wikidata="Q4253832" start="43181" end="43199" title="Ferdinand Lundberg" label="Ferdinand Lundberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508248" start="43386" end="43399" title="George Seldes" label="George Seldes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="43669" end="43681" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q956533" start="43796" end="43816" title="Herman J. Mankiewicz" label="Herman J. Mankiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156750" start="43836" end="43855" title="composite character" label="composite character"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286520" start="43868" end="43891" title="Harold Fowler McCormick" label="Harold Fowler McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871944" start="43893" end="43906" title="Samuel Insull" label="Samuel Insull"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="43911" end="43924" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="44182" end="44194" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="44499" end="44512" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715833" start="44542" end="44570" title="The Battle Over Citizen Kane" label="The Battle Over Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="44605" end="44608" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093425" start="44699" end="44706" title="RKO 281" label="RKO 281"/>
<link wikidata="Q299483" start="44730" end="44744" title="James Cromwell" label="James Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q719345" start="44818" end="44851" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="44880" end="44893" title="David Fincher" label="David Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q73093591" start="44909" end="44913" title="Mank" label="Mank"/>
<link wikidata="Q83492" start="44930" end="44941" title="Gary Oldman" label="Gary Oldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="45015" end="45027" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q309690" start="45053" end="45066" title="Charles Dance" label="Charles Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="45140" end="45155" title="television film" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941857" start="45162" end="45174" title="Rough Riders (miniseries)" label="Rough Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q359416" start="45207" end="45222" title="George Hamilton (actor)" label="George Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="45315" end="45335" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056698" start="45385" end="45392" title="Newsies" label="Newsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q380852" start="45419" end="45431" title="Kenny Ortega" label="Kenny Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q173417" start="45659" end="45674" title="Joseph Pulitzer" label="Joseph Pulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="45685" end="45688" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023759" start="45701" end="45709" title="Winchell (film)" label="Winchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288447" start="45724" end="45735" title="Kevin Tighe" label="Kevin Tighe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093425" start="45762" end="45769" title="RKO 281" label="RKO 281"/>
<link wikidata="Q299483" start="45804" end="45818" title="James Cromwell" label="James Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q663298" start="45828" end="45847" title="The Cat&amp;#x27;s Meow" label="The Cat&amp;#x27;s Meow"/>
<link wikidata="Q942822" start="45899" end="45913" title="Thomas H. Ince" label="Thomas H. Ince"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872435" start="45986" end="45991" title="USS Oneida (SP-432)" label="yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q536437" start="46158" end="46173" title="Edward Herrmann" label="Edward Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299759" start="46341" end="46354" title="Matthew Marsh (actor)" label="Matthew Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q231019" start="46358" end="46375" title="Agnieszka Holland" label="Agnieszka Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30963297" start="46399" end="46407" title="Mr Jones (2019 film)" label="Mr Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q309690" start="46437" end="46450" title="Charles Dance" label="Charles Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="46454" end="46467" title="David Fincher" label="David Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q73093591" start="46491" end="46495" title="Mank" label="Mank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144028" start="46525" end="46536" title="Pat Skipper" label="Pat Skipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350026" start="46540" end="46555" title="Damien Chazelle" label="Damien Chazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q107119206" start="46579" end="46586" title="Babylon (2022 film)" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312407" start="46616" end="46631" title="John Dos Passos" label="John Dos Passos"/>
<link wikidata="Q971694" start="46651" end="46664" title="The Big Money (novel)" label="The Big Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q45765" start="46722" end="46733" title="Jack London" label="Jack London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465752" start="46775" end="46788" title="The Iron Heel" label="The Iron Heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="47065" end="47073" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q612688" start="47093" end="47109" title="The Fountainhead" label="The Fountainhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q633008" start="47141" end="47161" title="The Fountainhead (film)" label="1949 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q612688" start="47177" end="47188" title="Gail Wynand" label="Gail Wynand"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="47359" end="47373" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q215983" start="47393" end="47412" title="The Grapes of Wrath" label="The Grapes of Wrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="47614" end="47624" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="47632" end="47646" title="historical fiction" label="historic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870445" start="47661" end="47681" title="Narratives of Empire" label="Narratives of Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q272610" start="47720" end="47735" title="Cormac McCarthy" label="Cormac McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539874" start="47755" end="47767" title="The Crossing (McCarthy novel)" label="The Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="47847" end="47856" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q181716" start="47906" end="47922" title="Scott Westerfeld" label="Scott Westerfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580719" start="47942" end="47949" title="Goliath (Westerfeld novel)" label="Goliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q233566" start="47999" end="48015" title="Charlaine Harris" label="Charlaine Harris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48028" end="48044" title="The Russian Cage" label="The Russian Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="48308" end="48342" title="National Geographic Channel" label="National Geographic Channel&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407087" start="48356" end="48371" title="American Genius" label="American Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="48395" end="48398" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988195" start="48412" end="48424" title="The Alienist (TV series)" label="The Alienist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184704" start="48463" end="48476" title="Matt Letscher" label="Matt Letscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="48535" end="48545" title="Television syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="48546" end="48553" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230894" start="48578" end="48595" title="Death Valley Days" label="Death Valley Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496795" start="48613" end="48628" title="Stanley Andrews" label="Stanley Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680523" start="48667" end="48680" title="James Hampton (actor)" label="James Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191050" start="48822" end="48836" title="Ambrose Bierce" label="Ambrose Bierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q327714" start="48841" end="48862" title="Robert O. Cornthwaite" label="Robert O. Cornthwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q839869" start="48959" end="48986" title="Little House on the Prairie (TV series)" label="Little House on the Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908934" start="49012" end="49022" title="Bill Ewing" label="Bill Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49118" end="49129" title="Timeless (TV series)#Finale (2018)" label="John Colton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49169" end="49182" title="Timeless (TV series)#Finale (2018)" label="Hollywoodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647166" start="49213" end="49221" title="Timeless (TV series)" label="Timeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738608" start="49247" end="49281" title="The Hacienda (Milpitas Ranchhouse)" label="The Hacienda (Milpitas Ranchhouse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125146346" start="49284" end="49297" title="Hearst family" label="Hearst family"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682174" start="49300" end="49312" title="Hearst Ranch" label="Hearst Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388081" start="49315" end="49345" title="History of American newspapers" label="History of American newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783603" start="51284" end="51306" title="Long Island University" label="Long Island University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854158" start="51356" end="51376" title="The Bancroft Library" label="The Bancroft Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33537" wikidata="Q161358" url="?curid=33537" title="Wing">
<text>A wing is a type of fin that produces both lift and drag while moving through air. Wings are defined by two shape characteristics, an airfoil section and a planform. Wing efficiency is expressed as lift-to-drag ratio, which compares the benefit of lift with the air resistance of a given wing shape, as it flies. Aerodynamics is the study of wing performance in air.

Equivalent foils that move through water are found on hydrofoil power vessels and foiling sailboats that lift out of the water at speed and on submarines that use diving planes to point the boat upwards or downwards, while running submerged. Hydrodynamics is the study of foil performance in water.

==Etymology and usage==
The word &quot;wing&quot; from the Old Norse &quot;vængr&quot; for many centuries referred mainly to the foremost limbs of birds (in addition to the architectural aisle). But in recent centuries the word&#x27;s meaning has extended to include lift producing appendages of insects, bats, pterosaurs, boomerangs, some sail boats and aircraft, or the airfoil on a race car.

==Aerodynamics==

The design and analysis of the wings of aircraft is one of the principal applications of the science of aerodynamics, which is a branch of fluid mechanics. The properties of the airflow around any moving object can be found by solving the Navier-Stokes equations of fluid dynamics. Except for simple geometries, these equations are difficult to solve. Simpler explanations can be given.

For a wing to produce &quot;lift&quot;, it must be oriented at a suitable angle of attack relative to the flow of air past the wing. When this occurs, the wing deflects the airflow downwards, &quot;turning&quot; the air as it passes the wing. Since the wing exerts a force on the air to change its direction, the air must exert a force on the wing, equal in size but opposite in direction. This force arises from different air pressures that exist on the upper and lower surfaces of the wing.

Lower-than-ambient air pressure is generated on the top surface of the wing, with a higher-than ambient-pressure on the bottom of the wing. (See: airfoil) These air pressure differences can be either measured using a pressure-measuring device, or can be calculated from the airspeed] using physical principles including Bernoulli&#x27;s principle, which relates changes in air speed to changes in air pressure.

The lower air pressure on the top of the wing generates a smaller downward force on the top of the wing than the upward force generated by the higher air pressure on the bottom of the wing. This gives an upward force on the wing. This force is called the lift generated by the wing.

The different velocities of the air passing by the wing, the air pressure differences, the change in direction of the airflow, and the lift on the wing are different ways of describing how lift is produced so it is possible to calculate lift from any one of the other three. For example, the lift can be calculated from the pressure differences, or from different velocities of the air above and below the wing, or from the total momentum change of the deflected air. Fluid dynamics offers other approaches to solving these problems all which methods produce the same answer if correctly calculated. Given a particular wing and its velocity through the air, debates over which mathematical approach is the &quot;most convenient&quot; to use can be mistaken by those not familiar with the study of aerodynamics as differences of opinion about the basic principles of flight.

===Cross-sectional shape===
Wings with an asymmetrical cross-section are the norm in subsonic flight. Wings with a symmetrical cross-section can also generate lift by using a positive angle of attack to deflect air downward. Symmetrical airfoils have higher stalling speeds than cambered airfoils of the same wing area but are used in aerobatic aircraft as they provide the same flight characteristics whether the aircraft is upright or inverted. Another example comes from sailboats, where the sail is a thin sheet.

For flight speeds near the speed of sound (transonic flight), specific asymmetrical airfoil sections are used to minimize the very pronounced increase in drag associated with airflow near the speed of sound. These airfoils, called supercritical airfoils, are flat on top and curved on the bottom.

==Design features==

Aircraft wings may feature some of the following:
*A rounded leading edge cross-section
*A sharp trailing edge cross-section
*Leading-edge devices such as slats, slots, or extensions
*Trailing-edge devices such as flaps or flaperons (combination of flaps and ailerons)
*Winglets to keep wingtip vortices from increasing drag and decreasing lift
*Dihedral, or a positive wing angle to the horizontal, increases &quot;spiral stability&quot; around the roll axis, whereas &quot;anhedral&quot;, or a negative wing angle to the horizontal, decreases spiral stability.

Aircraft wings may have various devices, such as flaps or slats, that the pilot uses to modify the shape and surface area of the wing to change its operating characteristics in flight.
*Ailerons (usually near the wingtips) to roll the aircraft
*Spoilers on the upper surface to increase drag for descent and to reduce lift for more weight on wheels during braking
*Vortex generators to help prevent flow separation in transonic flow
*Wing fences to keep flow attached to the wing by stopping boundary layer separation from spreading roll direction. 
*Folding wings allow more aircraft storage in the confined space of the hangar deck of an aircraft carrier
*Variable-sweep wing or &quot;swing wings&quot; that allow outstretched wings during low-speed flight (e.g., take-off, landing and loitering) and swept back wings for high-speed flight (including supersonic flight), such as in the F-111 Aardvark, the F-14 Tomcat, the Panavia Tornado, the MiG-23, the MiG-27, the Tu-160 and the B-1B Lancer.

==Types==

* Swept Wings
* Variable Sweep Wings (Includes Oblique wings)
* Delta Wings
* elliptical wings
* trapezoidal wings

==Applications==
Besides fixed-wing aircraft, applications for wing shapes include:
*Hang gliders, which use wings ranging from fully flexible (paragliders, gliding parachutes), flexible (framed sail wings), to rigid
*Kites, which use a variety of lifting surfaces
*Flying model airplanes
*Helicopters, which use a rotating wing with a variable pitch angle to provide directional forces
*Propellers, whose blades generate lift for propulsion.
*The NASA Space Shuttle, which uses its wings only to glide during its descent to a runway. These types of aircraft are called spaceplanes.
*Some racing cars, especially Formula One cars, which use upside-down wings (or &quot;airfoils&quot;) to provide greater traction at high speeds
*Sailboats, which use sails as vertical wings with variable fullness and direction to move across water

==Flexible wings==
In 1948, Francis Rogallo invented the fully limp flexible wing. Domina Jalbert invented flexible un-sparred ram-air airfoiled thick wings.

==In nature==
Wings have evolved multiple times in history: in Pterosaurs, insects, dinosaurs (see Bird wing), mammals (see Bats), fish, reptiles and plants. Wings of pterosaurs, birds, bats, and reptiles all evolved from existing limbs, however insect wings evolved as a completely separate structure. Wings facilitated increased locomotion, dispersal, and diversification. Various species of penguins and other flighted or flightless water birds such as auks, cormorants, guillemots, shearwaters, eider and scoter ducks and diving petrels are efficient underwater swimmers, and use their wings to propel through water.
==See also==

*Flight
Natural world:
*Bird flight
*Flight feather
*Flying and gliding animals
*Insect flight
*List of soaring birds
*Samara (winged seeds of trees)
Aviation:
*Aircraft
* Blade solidity
*FanWing and Flettner airplane (experimental wing types)
*Flight dynamics (fixed-wing aircraft)
*Kite types
*Ornithopter – Flapping-wing aircraft (research prototypes, simple toys and models)
*Otto Lilienthal
*Wing configuration
*Wingsuit
Sailing:
*Sails
*Forces on sails
*Wingsail
==References==
==External links==

*How Wings Work - Holger Babinsky Physics Education 2003

*How Airplanes Fly: A Physical Description of Lift
*Demystifying the Science of Flight – Audio segment on NPR&#x27;s Talk of the Nation Science Friday
*NASA&#x27;s explanations and simulations

*Flight of the StyroHawk wing
*See How It Flies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="2" end="6" title="Wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q778612" start="20" end="23" title="fin" label="fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="43" end="47" title="Lift (force)" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="134" end="141" title="airfoil" label="airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992500" start="156" end="164" title="planform (aeronautics)" label="planform"/>
<link wikidata="Q845727" start="198" end="216" title="lift-to-drag ratio" label="lift-to-drag ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="313" end="325" title="Aerodynamics" label="Aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097964" start="379" end="384" title="Foil (fluid mechanics)" label="foils"/>
<link wikidata="Q130268556" start="422" end="445" title="Hydrofoil" label="hydrofoil power vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400388" start="450" end="467" title="Sailing hydrofoil" label="foiling sailboats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="511" end="520" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670160" start="531" end="543" title="diving plane" label="diving plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="610" end="623" title="Hydrodynamics" label="Hydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190780" start="806" end="810" title="limb (anatomy)" label="limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="815" end="819" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q276572" start="964" end="970" title="insect wing" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="973" end="976" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="979" end="988" title="pterosaur" label="pterosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q131536" start="991" end="1001" title="boomerangs" label="boomerangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025330" start="1003" end="1018" title="Wingsail" label="some sail boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="1023" end="1031" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="1053" end="1061" title="automobile racing" label="race car"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="1186" end="1198" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q172145" start="1221" end="1236" title="fluid mechanics" label="fluid mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q201321" start="1321" end="1344" title="Navier-Stokes equations" label="Navier-Stokes equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="1348" end="1362" title="fluid dynamics" label="fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q370906" start="1544" end="1559" title="angle of attack" label="angle of attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="2110" end="2117" title="airfoil" label="airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2254" end="2273" title="physics" label="physical principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q181328" start="2284" end="2310" title="Bernoulli&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Bernoulli&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="3620" end="3635" title="subsonic flight" label="subsonic flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q370906" start="3719" end="3734" title="angle of attack" label="angle of attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q752034" start="3793" end="3801" title="Stall (flight)" label="stalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021159" start="3814" end="3831" title="Camber (aerodynamics)" label="cambered airfoils"/>
<link wikidata="Q373557" start="3870" end="3879" title="aerobatic" label="aerobatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579556" start="4096" end="4112" title="transonic flight" label="transonic flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118725" start="4284" end="4305" title="supercritical airfoil" label="supercritical airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754137" start="4433" end="4445" title="leading edge" label="leading edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q975211" start="4469" end="4482" title="trailing edge" label="trailing edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534008" start="4527" end="4532" title="leading edge slats" label="slats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610612" start="4534" end="4539" title="leading edge slot" label="slots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783416" start="4544" end="4553" title="leading edge extension" label="extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="4586" end="4590" title="flap (aircraft)" label="flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q691858" start="4642" end="4650" title="Winglets" label="Winglets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972636" start="4718" end="4726" title="Dihedral (aircraft)" label="Dihedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="5122" end="5129" title="Aileron" label="Aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760097" start="5181" end="5188" title="Spoiler (aeronautics)" label="Spoiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359167" start="5301" end="5317" title="Vortex generator" label="Vortex generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545843" start="5370" end="5380" title="Wing fence" label="Wing fence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827941" start="5487" end="5499" title="Folding wing" label="Folding wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192375" start="5558" end="5569" title="hangar" label="hangar deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="5576" end="5592" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q838974" start="5594" end="5613" title="Variable-sweep wing" label="Variable-sweep wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="5739" end="5754" title="swept wing" label="swept back wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170007" start="5789" end="5806" title="supersonic flight" label="supersonic flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q270990" start="5824" end="5838" title="F-111 Aardvark" label="F-111 Aardvark"/>
<link wikidata="Q34945" start="5844" end="5855" title="F-14 Tomcat" label="F-14 Tomcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="5861" end="5876" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Panavia Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q155679" start="5882" end="5888" title="MiG-23" label="MiG-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q234069" start="5894" end="5900" title="MiG-27" label="MiG-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q191111" start="5906" end="5912" title="Tu-160" label="Tu-160"/>
<link wikidata="Q218636" start="5921" end="5932" title="B-1B Lancer" label="B-1B Lancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="5948" end="5959" title="Swept wing" label="Swept Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q838974" start="5962" end="5982" title="Variable-sweep wing" label="Variable Sweep Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806836" start="5993" end="6006" title="Oblique wing" label="Oblique wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q850097" start="6010" end="6021" title="Delta wing" label="Delta Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421701" start="6024" end="6039" title="elliptical wing" label="elliptical wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827945" start="6043" end="6060" title="Trapezoidal wing" label="trapezoidal wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="6087" end="6106" title="fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="6147" end="6158" title="Hang glider" label="Hang glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="6206" end="6216" title="paraglider" label="paraglider"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="6227" end="6236" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418148" start="6280" end="6285" title="Kite types" label="Kites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901864" start="6328" end="6349" title="Free flight (model aircraft)" label="Flying model airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="6352" end="6362" title="Helicopter" label="Helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="6450" end="6459" title="Propeller" label="Propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="6510" end="6514" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="6515" end="6528" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414565" start="6632" end="6642" title="spaceplane" label="spaceplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="6651" end="6662" title="racing cars" label="racing cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002954" start="6675" end="6690" title="Formula One car" label="Formula One car"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="6731" end="6738" title="airfoil" label="airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075310" start="6791" end="6799" title="Sailboat" label="Sailboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441723" start="6923" end="6938" title="Francis Rogallo" label="Francis Rogallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q454152" start="6978" end="6992" title="Domina Jalbert" label="Domina Jalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="7079" end="7086" title="evolution" label="evolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="7117" end="7126" title="Pterosaur" label="Pterosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q276572" start="7129" end="7136" title="Insect wing" label="insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="7138" end="7146" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15719234" start="7153" end="7162" title="Bird wing" label="Bird wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="7178" end="7181" title="Bat" label="Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q925958" start="7385" end="7395" title="Animal locomotion" label="locomotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="7448" end="7455" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q865137" start="7479" end="7489" title="flightless bird" label="flightless"/>
<link wikidata="Q28294" start="7510" end="7513" title="auk" label="auk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="7516" end="7525" title="cormorant" label="cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120530" start="7528" end="7537" title="guillemot" label="guillemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729486" start="7540" end="7550" title="shearwater" label="shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q690813" start="7553" end="7558" title="eider duck" label="eider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092053" start="7587" end="7594" title="petrels" label="petrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q206021" start="7690" end="7696" title="Flight" label="Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991038" start="7713" end="7724" title="Bird flight" label="Bird flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q392655" start="7726" end="7740" title="Flight feather" label="Flight feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917486" start="7742" end="7768" title="Flying and gliding animals" label="Flying and gliding animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425266" start="7770" end="7783" title="Insect flight" label="Insect flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639659" start="7785" end="7806" title="List of soaring birds" label="List of soaring birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q475697" start="7808" end="7814" title="Samara (fruit)" label="Samara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="7850" end="7858" title="Aircraft" label="Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005178" start="7861" end="7875" title="Blade solidity" label="Blade solidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398678" start="7877" end="7884" title="FanWing" label="FanWing"/>
<link wikidata="Q392511" start="7889" end="7906" title="Flettner airplane" label="Flettner airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q360475" start="7934" end="7971" title="Flight dynamics (fixed-wing aircraft)" label="Flight dynamics (fixed-wing aircraft)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418148" start="7973" end="7983" title="Kite types" label="Kite types"/>
<link wikidata="Q667431" start="7985" end="7996" title="Ornithopter" label="Ornithopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q57162" start="8069" end="8084" title="Otto Lilienthal" label="Otto Lilienthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992500" start="8086" end="8104" title="Wing configuration" label="Wing configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q592031" start="8106" end="8114" title="Wingsuit" label="Wingsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999" start="8125" end="8130" title="Sails" label="Sails"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049086" start="8132" end="8147" title="Forces on sails" label="Forces on sails"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025330" start="8149" end="8157" title="Wingsail" label="Wingsail"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33538" wikidata="Q23387" url="?curid=33538" title="Week">
<text>A week is a unit of time equal to seven days. It is the standard time period used for short cycles of days in most parts of the world. The days are often used to indicate common work days and rest days, as well as days of worship. Weeks are often mapped against yearly calendars. There are just over 52 weeks in a year.

Ancient cultures had different &quot;week&quot; lengths, including ten in Egypt and an eight-day week for Etruscans. The Etruscan week was adopted by the ancient Romans, but they later moved to a seven-day week, which had spread across Western Asia and the Eastern Mediterranean due to the influence of the Christian seven-day week, which is rooted in the Jewish seven-day week. In AD 321, Emperor Constantine the Great officially decreed a seven-day week in the Roman Empire, including making Sunday a public holiday. This later spread across Europe, then the rest of the world.

In English, the names of the days of the week are Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday. In many languages, including English, the days of the week are named after gods or classical planets. Saturday has kept its Roman name, while the other six days use Germanic equivalents. Such a week may be called a &quot;planetary week&quot; (i.e., a classical planetary week). Certain weeks within a year may be designated for a particular purpose, such as Golden Week in China and Japan, and National Family Week in Canada. More informally, certain groups may advocate awareness weeks, which are designed to draw attention to a certain subject or cause. The term &quot;week&quot; may also be used to refer to a sub-section of the week, such as the workweek and weekend.

Cultures vary in which days of the week are designated the first and the last, though virtually all have Saturday, Sunday or Monday as the first day. The Geneva-based ISO standards organization uses Monday as the first day of the week in its ISO week date system through the international ISO 8601 standard. Most of Europe and China consider Monday the first day of the (work) week, while North America, Israel, South Asia, and many Catholic and Protestant countries, consider Monday the first day of the week. Prior to 2000, Saturday was judged as the first day of the week in much of the Middle East and North Africa due to the Islamic influence; however, this is no longer the case. Other regions are mixed, but typically observe Monday as the first day.

The three Abrahamic religions observe different days of the week as their holy day. Jews observe their Sabbath (Shabbat) on Saturday, the seventh day, from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday, in honor of God&#x27;s creation of the world in six days and then resting on the seventh. Most Christians observe Sunday (the Lord&#x27;s Day), the first day of the week in traditional Christian calendars, in honor of the resurrection of Jesus. Muslims observe their &quot;day of congregation&quot;, known as , on Friday because it was described as a sacred day of congregational worship in the Quran.

==Name==

The English word &quot;week&quot; comes from the Old English , ultimately from a Common Germanic &#x27;, from a root &#x27; &quot;turn, move, change&quot;. The Germanic word probably had a wider meaning prior to the adoption of the Roman calendar, perhaps &quot;succession series&quot;, as suggested by Gothic translating &quot;order&quot; in Luke 1:8.

The seven-day week is named in many languages by a word derived from &quot;seven&quot;. The archaism sennight (&quot;seven-night&quot;) preserves the old Germanic practice of reckoning time by nights, as in the more common &quot;fortnight&quot; (&quot;fourteen-night&quot;). Hebdomad and hebdomadal week both derive from the Greek (, &quot;a seven&quot;). Septimana is cognate with the Romance terms derived from Latin (&quot;seven mornings&quot;).

Slavic has a formation *tъ(žь)dьnь (Croatian , Ukrainian , Czech , Polish ), from *tъ &quot;this&quot; + *dьnь &quot;day&quot;. Chinese has , as it were &quot;planetary time unit&quot;. 
An older Chinese form is , meaning &quot;week, religious ceremony.&quot;

==Definition and duration==
A week is defined as an interval of exactly seven days, so that, except when passing through daylight saving time transitions or leap seconds,
:1 week = 7 days = 168 hours = 10,080 minutes = 604,800 seconds.
With respect to the Gregorian calendar:
*1 Gregorian calendar year = 52 weeks + 1 day (2 days in a leap year)
*1 week = ≈ 22.9984% of an average Gregorian month

In a Gregorian mean year, there are 365.2425 days, and thus exactly or 52.1775 weeks (unlike the Julian year of 365.25 days or ≈ 52.1786 weeks, which cannot be represented by a finite decimal expansion). There are exactly 20,871 weeks in 400 Gregorian years, so 18 1625 was a just as was 18 2025.

Relative to the path of the Moon, a week is 23.659% of an average lunation or 94.637% of an average quarter lunation.

Historically, the system of dominical letters (letters A to G identifying the weekday of the first day of a given year) has been used to facilitate calculation of the day of week.
The day of the week can be easily calculated given a date&#x27;s Julian day number (JD, i.e. the integer value at noon UT):
Adding one to the remainder after dividing the Julian day number by seven (JD &quot;modulo&quot; 7 + 1) yields that date&#x27;s ISO 8601 day of the week. For example, the Julian day number of 18 2025 is . Calculating yields , corresponding to . In 1973, John Conway devised the Doomsday rule for mental calculation of the weekday of any date in any year.

==Days of the week==


The days of the week were named for the seven classical planets, which included the Sun and Moon. This naming system persisted alongside an &quot;ecclesiastical&quot; tradition of numbering the days in ecclesiastical Latin beginning with &quot;Dominica&quot; (the Lord&#x27;s Day) as the first day. The Greco-Roman gods associated with the classical planets were rendered in their &quot;interpretatio germanica&quot; at some point during the late Roman Empire, yielding the Germanic tradition of names based on indigenous deities.

The ordering of the weekday names is not the classical order of the planets (by distance in the planetary spheres model, which is Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn; nor, equivalently, by their apparent speed of movement in the night sky). Instead, the planetary hours systems resulted in succeeding days being named for planets that are three places apart in their traditional listing. This characteristic was apparently discussed in Plutarch in a treatise written in c. 100 CE, which is reported to have addressed the question of &quot;Why are the days named after the planets reckoned in a different order from the actual order?&quot; (the text of Plutarch&#x27;s treatise has been lost). Dio Cassius (early 3rd century) gives two explanations in a section of his &quot;Historia Romana&quot; after mentioning the Jewish practice of sanctifying the day called the day of Kronos (Saturday).

An ecclesiastical, non-astrological, system of numbering the days of the week was adopted in Late Antiquity. This model also seems to have influenced (presumably via Gothic) the designation of Wednesday as &quot;mid-week&quot; in Old High German () and Old Church Slavonic (, srěda, literally, &quot;middle day&quot;). Old Church Slavonic may have also modeled the name of Monday, (literally, &#x27;&quot;the day after Sunday&quot;), after the Latin . 

The ecclesiastical system became prevalent in Eastern Christianity, but in the Latin West it remains extant only in modern Icelandic, Galician, and Portuguese.

==History==
===Ancient Near East===
The earliest evidence of an astrological significance of a seven-day period is decree of king Sargon of Akkad around 2300 BCE. Akkadians venerated the number seven, and the key celestial bodies visible to the naked eye numbered seven (the Sun, the Moon and the five closest planets).

Gudea, the priest-king of Lagash in Sumer during the Gutian dynasty (about 2100 BCE), built a seven-room temple, which he dedicated with a seven-day festival. In the flood story of the Assyro-Babylonian Epic of Gilgamesh, the storm lasts for seven days, the dove is sent out after seven days (similarly to Genesis), and the Noah-like character of Utnapishtim leaves the ark seven days after it reaches the firm ground.

Counting from the new moon, the Babylonians celebrated the 7th, 14th, 21st and 28th of the approximately 29- or 30-day lunar month as &quot;holy days&quot;, also called &quot;evil days&quot; (meaning inauspicious for certain activities). On these days, officials were prohibited from various activities and common men were forbidden to &quot;make a wish&quot;, and at least the 28th was known as a &quot;rest day&quot;.
On each of them, offerings were made to a different god and goddess. Though similar, the later practice of associating days of the week with deities or planets is not due to the Babylonians.

===Judaism===
A continuous seven-day cycle that runs throughout history without reference to the phases of the moon was first practiced in Judaism, dated to the 6th century BCE at the latest.

There are several hypotheses concerning the origin of the biblical seven-day cycle.

Friedrich Delitzsch and others suggested that the seven-day week being approximately a quarter of a lunation is the implicit astronomical origin of the seven-day week, and indeed the Babylonian calendar used intercalary days to synchronize the last week of a month with the new moon. According to this theory, the Jewish week was adopted from the Babylonians while removing the moon-dependency.

George Aaron Barton speculated that the seven-day creation account of Genesis is connected to the Babylonian creation epic, Enûma Eliš, which is recorded on seven tablets.

In a frequently-quoted suggestion going back to the early 20th century, the Hebrew &quot;Sabbath&quot; is compared to the Sumerian &quot;sa-bat&quot; &quot;mid-rest&quot;, a term for the full moon. The Sumerian term has been reconstructed as rendered &quot;Sapattum&quot; or &quot;Sabattum&quot; in Babylonian, possibly present in the lost fifth tablet of the Enûma Eliš, tentatively reconstructed &quot;[Sa]bbath shalt thou then encounter, mid[month]ly&quot;.

However, Niels-Erik Andreasen, Jeffrey H. Tigay, and others claim that the Biblical Sabbath is mentioned as a day of rest in some of the earliest layers of the Pentateuch dated to the 9th century BCE at the latest, centuries before the Babylonian exile of Judah. They also find the resemblance between the Biblical Sabbath and the Babylonian system to be weak. Therefore, they suggest that the seven-day week may reflect an independent Israelite tradition. Tigay writes:

It is clear that among neighboring nations that were in position to have an influence over Israel – and in fact which did influence it in various matters – there is no precise parallel to the Israelite Sabbatical week. This leads to the conclusion that the Sabbatical week, which is as unique to Israel as the Sabbath from which it flows, is an independent Israelite creation.

The seven-day week seems to have been adopted, at different stages, by the Persian Empire, in Hellenistic astrology, and (via Greek transmission) in Gupta India and Tang China.
The Babylonian system was received by the Greeks in the 4th century BCE (notably via Eudoxus of Cnidus). Although some sources, such as the Encyclopædia Britannica, state that the Babylonians named the days of the week after the five planets, the sun, and the moon, many scholars disagree. Eviatar Zerubavel says, &quot;the establishment of a seven-day week based on the regular observance of the Sabbath is a distinctively Jewish contribution to civilization. The choice of the number 7 as the basis for the Jewish week might have had an Assyrian or Babylonian origin, yet it is crucial to remember that the ancient dwellers of Mesopotamia themselves did not have a seven-day week.&quot; The astrological concept of planetary hours is an innovation of Hellenistic astrology, probably first conceived in the 2nd century BCE.

The seven-day week was widely known throughout the Roman Empire by the 1st century CE, along with references to the Jewish Sabbath by Roman authors such as Seneca and Ovid. When the seven-day week came into use in Rome during the early imperial period, it did not immediately replace the older eight-day nundinal system. The nundinal system had probably fallen out of use by the time Emperor Constantine adopted the seven-day week for official use in CE 321, making the Day of the Sun () a legal holiday.

===Achaemenid period===
The Zoroastrian calendar follows the Babylonian in relating the 7th, 14th, 21st, and 28th of the 29- or 30-day lunar month to Ahura Mazda.
The forerunner of all modern Zoroastrian calendars is the system used to determine dates in the Persian Empire, adopted from the Babylonian calendar by the 4th century BCE.

Frank C. Senn in his book &quot;Christian Liturgy: Catholic and Evangelical&quot; points to data suggesting evidence of an early continuous use of a seven-day week; referring to the Jews during the Babylonian captivity in the 6th century BCE, after the destruction of the Temple of Solomon.
While the seven-day week in Judaism is tied to Creation account in the Book of Genesis in the Hebrew Bible (where God creates the heavens and the earth in six days and rests on the seventh; Genesis 1:1-2:3, in the Book of Exodus, the fourth of the Ten Commandments is to rest on the seventh day, &quot;Shabbat&quot;, which can be seen as implying a socially instituted seven-day week), it is not clear whether the Genesis narrative predates the Babylonian captivity of the Jews in the 6th century BCE. At least since the Second Temple period under Persian rule, Judaism relied on the seven-day cycle of recurring Sabbaths.

Tablets from the Achaemenid period indicate that the lunation of 29 or 30 days basically contained three seven-day weeks, and a final week of eight or nine days inclusive, breaking the continuous seven-day cycle.
The Babylonians additionally celebrated the 19th as a special &quot;evil day&quot;, the &quot;day of anger&quot;, because it was roughly the 49th day of the (preceding) month, completing a &quot;week of weeks&quot;, also with sacrifices and prohibitions.

Difficulties with Friedrich Delitzsch&#x27;s origin theory connecting Hebrew &quot;Shabbat&quot; with the Babylonian lunar cycle include reconciling the differences between an unbroken week and a lunar week, and explaining the absence of texts naming the lunar week as &quot;Shabbat&quot; in any language.

===Hellenistic and Roman era===
In Jewish sources by the time of the Septuagint, the term &quot;Sabbath&quot; () by synecdoche also came to refer to an entire seven-day week, the interval between two weekly Sabbaths. Jesus&#x27;s parable of the Pharisee and the Publican (Luke 18:12) describes the Pharisee as fasting &quot;twice in the week&quot; (). In the account of the women finding the tomb empty, they are described as coming there &quot;toward the one of the sabbaths&quot; (); translations substitute &quot;week&quot; for &quot;sabbaths&quot;.

The ancient Romans traditionally used the eight-day nundinum but, after the Julian calendar had come into effect in 45 BCE, the seven-day week came into increasing use. For a while, the week and the nundinal cycle coexisted, but by the time the week was officially adopted by Constantine in 321 CE, the nundinal cycle had fallen out of use. The association of the days of the week with the Sun, the Moon and the five planets visible to the naked eye dates to the Roman era (2nd century).

The continuous seven-day cycle of the days of the week can be traced back to the reign of Augustus; the first identifiable date cited complete with day of the week is 6 February 60 CE, identified as a &quot;Sunday&quot; (as &quot;eighth day before the ides of February, day of the Sun&quot;) in a Pompeiian graffito. According to the (contemporary) Julian calendar, 6 February 60 was, however, a Wednesday. This is explained by the existence of two conventions of naming days of the weeks based on the planetary hours system: 6 February was a &quot;Sunday&quot; based on the sunset naming convention, and a &quot;Wednesday&quot; based on the sunrise naming convention.

===Islamic concept===
According to Islamic beliefs, the seven-day a week concept started with the creation of the universe by Allah. Abu Huraira reported that Muhammad said: Allah, the Exalted and Glorious, created the clay on Saturday and He created the mountains on Sunday and He created the trees on Monday and He created the things entailing labour on Tuesday and created light on Wednesday and He caused the animals to spread on Thursday and created Adam after &#x27;Asr on Friday; the last creation at the last hour of the hours of Friday, i. e. between afternoon and night.

===Adoption in Asia===
====China and Japan====
The earliest known reference in Chinese writings to a seven-day week is attributed to Fan Ning, who lived in the late 4th century in the Jin dynasty, while diffusions from the Manichaeans are documented with the writings of the Chinese Buddhist monk Yi Jing and the Ceylonese or Central Asian Buddhist monk Bu Kong of the 7th century (Tang dynasty).

The Chinese variant of the planetary system was brought to Japan by the Japanese monk Kūkai (9th century). Surviving diaries of the Japanese statesman Fujiwara Michinaga show the seven-day system in use in Heian Period Japan as early as 1007. In Japan, the seven-day system was kept in use for astrological purposes until its promotion to a full-fledged Western-style calendrical basis during the Meiji Period (1868–1912).

====India====
The seven-day week was known in India by the 6th century, referenced in the Pañcasiddhāntikā. Shashi (2000) mentions the Garga Samhita, which he places in the 1st century BCE or CE, as a possible earlier reference to a seven-day week in India. He concludes &quot;the above references furnish a terminus ad quem (viz. 1st century) The terminus a quo cannot be stated with certainty&quot;.

===Christian Europe===
The seven-day weekly cycle has remained unbroken in Christendom, and hence in Western history, for almost two millennia, despite changes to the Coptic, Julian, and Gregorian calendars, demonstrated by the date of Easter Sunday having been traced back through numerous computistic tables to an Ethiopic copy of an early Alexandrian table beginning with the Easter of 311 CE.

A tradition of divinations arranged for the days of the week on which certain feast days occur develops in the early medieval period. There are many later variants of this, including the German and the versions of &quot;Erra Pater&quot; published in 16th- to 17th-century England, mocked in Samuel Butler&#x27;s &quot;Hudibras&quot;. South and East Slavic versions are known as &quot;koliadniki&quot; (from &quot;koliada&quot;, a loan of Latin ), with Bulgarian copies dating from the 13th century, and Serbian versions from the 14th century.

Medieval Christian traditions associated with the lucky or unlucky nature of certain days of the week survived into the modern period. This concerns primarily Friday, associated with the crucifixion of Jesus. Sunday, sometimes personified as Saint Anastasia, was itself an object of worship in Russia, a practice denounced in a sermon extant in copies going back to the 14th century.

Sunday, in the ecclesiastical numbering system also counted as the or the first day of the week; yet, at the same time, figures as the &quot;eighth day&quot;, and has occasionally been so called in Christian liturgy.

Justin Martyr wrote: &quot;the first day after the Sabbath, remaining the first of all the days, is called, however, the eighth, according to the number of all the days of the cycle, and [yet] remains the first.&quot;

A period of eight days, usually (but not always, mainly because of Christmas Day) starting and ending on a Sunday, is called an octave, particularly in Roman Catholic liturgy. In German, the phrase (literally &quot;today in eight days&quot;) can also mean one week from today (i.e. on the same weekday). The same is true of the Italian phrase (literally &quot;today eight&quot;), the French , and the Spanish .

==Numbering==

Weeks in a Gregorian calendar year can be numbered for each year. This style of numbering is often used in European and Asian countries. It is less common in the U.S. and elsewhere.

===The ISO week date system===
The system for numbering weeks is the ISO week date system, which is included in ISO 8601. This system dictates that each week begins on a Monday and is associated with the year that contains that week&#x27;s Thursday.

====Determining &quot;Week 1&quot;====
In practice week 1 (&quot;W01&quot; in ISO notation) of any year can be determined as follows:

* If 1 January falls on a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, then the week of 1 January is Week 1. Except in the case of 1 January falling on a Monday, this Week 1 includes the last day(s) of the &quot;previous&quot; year.
* If 1 January falls on a Friday, Saturday, or Sunday, then 1 January is considered to be part of the last week of the &quot;previous&quot; year. Week 1 will begin on the first Monday after 1 January.

Examples:

* Week 1 of 2015 (&quot;2015W01&quot; in ISO notation) started on Monday, 29 December 2014 and ended on Sunday, 4 January 2015, because 1 January 2015 fell on Thursday.
* Week 1 of 2021 (&quot;2021W01&quot; in ISO notation) started on Monday, 4 January 2021 and ended on Sunday, 10 January 2021, because 1 January 2021 fell on Friday.

====Week 52 and 53====
It is also possible to determine if the last week of the previous year was Week 52 or Week 53 as follows:

* If 1 January falls on a Friday, then it is part of Week 53 of the previous year (W53-5). 
* If 1 January falls on a Saturday,
** then it is part of Week 53 of the previous year if that is a leap year (W53-6),
** and part of Week 52 otherwise (W52-6), i.e. if the previous year is a common year. 
* If 1 January falls on a Sunday, then it is part of Week 52 of the previous year (W52-7).

====Schematic representation of ISO week date====
Notes
1. Numbers and letters in parentheses, ( ), apply to March − December in leap years.
2. Underlined numbers and letters belong to previous year or next year.
3. First date of the first week in the year.
4. First date of the last week in the year.

===Other week numbering systems===
In some countries, though, the numbering system is different from the ISO standard. At least six numberings are in use: 

Because the week starts on either Saturday, Sunday, or Monday in all these systems, the days in a workweek, Monday through Friday, will always have the same week number within a calendar week system. Quite often, these systems will agree on the week number for each day in a workweek:

* In years where 1 January is a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, all of the above week numbering systems will agree. 
* In years where 1 January is a Friday, ISO-8601 will be different, but the rest will agree. 
* In years where 1 January is a Saturday, ISO-8601 and the Middle Eastern system will agree, being different from Western Traditional and the Broadcast Calendar which will agree. 
* In years where 1 January is a Sunday, the Broadcast Calendar will be different, but the rest will agree.

Note that this agreement occurs only for the week number of each day in a work week, not for the day number within the week, nor the week number of the weekends.

The epi week (epidemiological week) is used to report healthcare statistics, as with COVID-19 cases:
The epidemiological week begins on Sunday and ends on Saturday. The first epidemiological week of the year ends on the first Saturday of January, provided that it falls at least four or more days into the month. Therefore, the first epidemiological week may actually begin in December of the previous year.

====Uses====
The semiconductor package date code is often a 4 digit date code YYWW where the first two digits YY are the last 2 digits of the calendar year and the last two digits WW are the two-digit week number.

The tire date code mandated by the US DOT is a 4 digit date code WWYY with two digits of the week number WW followed by the last two digits of the calendar year YY.

==&quot;Weeks&quot; in other calendars==
The term &quot;week&quot; is sometimes expanded to refer to other time units comprising a few days. Such &quot;weeks&quot; of between four and ten days have been used historically in various places. Intervals longer than 10 days are not usually termed &quot;weeks&quot; as they are closer in length to the fortnight or the month than to the seven-day week.

===Pre-modern===
Calendars unrelated to the Chaldean, Hellenistic, Christian, or Jewish traditions often have time cycles between the day and the month of varying lengths, sometimes also called &quot;weeks&quot;.

An eight-day week was used in Ancient Rome and possibly in the pre-Christian Celtic calendar. Traces of a nine-day week are found in Baltic languages and in Welsh. The ancient Chinese calendar had a ten-day week, as did the ancient Egyptian calendar (and, incidentally, the French Republican Calendar, dividing its 30-day months into thirds).

A six-day week is found in the Akan Calendar and Kabiye culture until 1981. Several cultures used a five-day week, including the 10th century Icelandic calendar, the Javanese calendar, and the traditional cycle of market days in Korea. The Igbo have a &quot;market week&quot; of four days. Evidence of a &quot;three-day week&quot; has been derived from the names of the days of the week in Guipuscoan Basque.

The Aztecs and Mayas used the Mesoamerican calendars. The most important of these calendars divided a ritual cycle of 260 days (known as &quot;Tonalpohualli&quot; in Nahuatl and &quot;Tzolk&#x27;in&quot; in Yucatec Maya) into 20 weeks of 13 days (known in Spanish as trecenas). They also divided the solar year into 18 periods (&quot;winal&quot;) of 20 days and five nameless days (&quot;wayebʼ&quot;), creating a 20-day month divided into four five-day weeks. The end of each five-day week was a market day.

The Balinese Pawukon is a 210-day calendar consisting of 10 different simultaneously running weeks of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 days, of which the weeks of 4, 8, and 9 days are interrupted to fit into the 210-day cycle.

===Modern reforms===
The International Fixed Calendar (also known as the &quot;Eastman plan&quot;) kept a 7-day week while defining a year of 13 months with 28 days each (364 days). Every calendar date was always on the same weekday. It was the official calendar of the Eastman Kodak Company for decades.

A 10-day week, called a &quot;décade&quot;, was used in Revolutionary France for nine and a half years from October 1793 to April 1802; furthermore, the Paris Commune adopted the Revolutionary Calendar for 18 days in 1871.

The Bahá&#x27;í calendar features a 19-day period that some classify as a month and others classify as a week.

====Soviet====

In the Soviet Union between 1929 and 1940, most factory and enterprise workers, but not collective farm workers, used five and six day work weeks while the country as a whole continued to use the traditional seven day week.

From 1929 to 1951, five national holidays were days of rest (, , ). From autumn 1929 to summer 1931, the remaining 360 days of the year were subdivided into 72 five day work weeks beginning on . Workers were assigned any one of the five days as their day off, even if their spouse or friends might be assigned a different day off. Peak use of the five day work week occurred on at 72% of industrial workers. From summer 1931 until , each Gregorian month was subdivided into five six day work weeks, more-or-less, beginning with the first day of each month. The sixth day of each six day work week was a uniform day of rest. On 74.2% of industrial workers were on non-continuous schedules, mostly six day work weeks, while 25.8% were still on continuous schedules, mostly five day work weeks. The Gregorian calendar with its irregular month lengths and the traditional seven day week were used in the Soviet Union during its entire existence, including 1929–1940; for example, in the masthead of &quot;Pravda&quot;, the official Communist newspaper, and in both Soviet calendars displayed here. The traditional names of the seven day week continued to be used, including &quot;Resurrection&quot; (Воскресенье) for Sunday and &quot;Sabbath&quot; (Суббота) for Saturday, despite the government&#x27;s official atheism.

==See also==

*Determination of the day of the week
*GPS week number
*Names of the days of the week
*Workweek and weekend

==Notes==
==References==

==Further reading==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23387" start="2" end="6" title="Week" label="week"/>
<link wikidata="Q573" start="40" end="43" title="day" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514663" start="222" end="229" title="worship" label="worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="262" end="268" title="Year" label="yearly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132" start="269" end="277" title="calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="427" end="436" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="475" end="489" title="Ancient Rome" label="ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="677" end="683" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="719" end="740" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962347" start="918" end="947" title="names of the days of the week" label="names of the days of the week"/>
<link wikidata="Q105" start="952" end="958" title="Monday" label="Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q127" start="960" end="967" title="Tuesday" label="Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q128" start="969" end="978" title="Wednesday" label="Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q129" start="980" end="988" title="Thursday" label="Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q130" start="990" end="996" title="Friday" label="Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q131" start="998" end="1006" title="Saturday" label="Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="1011" end="1017" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="1320" end="1324" title="year" label="year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535381" start="1377" end="1397" title="Golden Week (China)" label="Golden Week in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137351" start="1402" end="1407" title="Golden Week (Japan)" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972555" start="1413" end="1433" title="National Family Week" label="National Family Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111813" start="1490" end="1504" title="awareness week" label="awareness week"/>
<link wikidata="Q30722989" start="1669" end="1689" title="workweek and weekend" label="workweek and weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="1846" end="1852" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110154" start="1934" end="1947" title="ISO week date" label="ISO week date"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="1981" end="1989" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="2461" end="2480" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2535" end="2539" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322950" start="2554" end="2561" title="Sabbath" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="2563" end="2570" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="2666" end="2674" title="Genesis creation narrative" label="creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="2738" end="2748" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150253" start="2769" end="2784" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="2865" end="2886" title="resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="2888" end="2895" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2910" end="2941" title="Sabbath#Islam" label="&amp;quot;day of congregation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="3038" end="3043" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3079" end="3083" title=":wikt:week" label="week"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3105" end="3116" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="3137" end="3152" title="Common Germanic" label="Common Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="3288" end="3302" title="Roman calendar" label="Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="3359" end="3365" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="3399" end="3403" title="gospel of Luke" label="Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q181970" start="3502" end="3510" title="archaism" label="archaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993680" start="3639" end="3648" title="fortnight" label="fortnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="3735" end="3740" title="Koine Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="3796" end="3803" title="Romance languages" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3823" end="3828" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3883" end="3894" title=":wikt:Reconstruction:Proto-Slavic/tъdьnь" label="*tъ(žь)dьnь"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4019" end="4028" title=":wikt:星" label="planetary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4029" end="4038" title=":wikt:期" label="time unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q573" start="4199" end="4202" title="day" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q36669" start="4242" end="4262" title="daylight saving time" label="daylight saving time"/>
<link wikidata="Q194230" start="4278" end="4289" title="leap second" label="leap second"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="4377" end="4395" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="4456" end="4465" title="leap year" label="leap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="4524" end="4533" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="4616" end="4627" title="Julian year (calendar)" label="Julian year"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="4845" end="4849" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="4883" end="4891" title="lunation" label="lunation"/>
<link wikidata="Q672461" start="4964" end="4980" title="dominical letter" label="dominical letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q979637" start="5084" end="5114" title="determination of the day of the week" label="calculation of the day of week"/>
<link wikidata="Q14267" start="5181" end="5198" title="Julian day number" label="Julian day number"/>
<link wikidata="Q168182" start="5230" end="5234" title="noon" label="noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q874572" start="5235" end="5237" title="Universal Time" label="UT"/>
<link wikidata="Q846677" start="5258" end="5267" title="remainder" label="remainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799665" start="5324" end="5330" title="modulo operation" label="modulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="5368" end="5376" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
<link wikidata="Q268961" start="5494" end="5505" title="John Horton Conway" label="John Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q963762" start="5518" end="5531" title="Doomsday rule" label="Doomsday rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135397" start="5665" end="5681" title="classical planet" label="classical planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247932" start="5821" end="5841" title="ecclesiastical Latin" label="ecclesiastical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150253" start="5883" end="5898" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840718" start="6006" end="6029" title="interpretatio germanica" label="interpretatio germanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119786" start="6247" end="6264" title="planetary spheres" label="planetary spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201246" start="6418" end="6433" title="planetary hours" label="planetary hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="6600" end="6608" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="6857" end="6868" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44204" start="7038" end="7044" title="Cronus" label="Kronos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587862" start="7224" end="7230" title="Gothic Christianity" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="7288" end="7303" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="7311" end="7330" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="7558" end="7578" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="7591" end="7601" title="Latin Christianity" label="Latin West"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="7635" end="7644" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="7646" end="7654" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="7660" end="7670" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q199461" start="7803" end="7818" title="Sargon of Akkad" label="Sargon of Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q310336" start="7994" end="7999" title="Gudea" label="Gudea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207330" start="8020" end="8026" title="Lagash" label="Lagash"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="8030" end="8035" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064034" start="8047" end="8061" title="Gutian dynasty of Sumer" label="Gutian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="8179" end="8196" title="Mesopotamia" label="Assyro-Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8272" start="8197" end="8214" title="Epic of Gilgamesh" label="Epic of Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="8318" end="8322" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q767983" start="8341" end="8352" title="Utnapishtim" label="Utnapishtim"/>
<link wikidata="Q108566" start="8432" end="8440" title="new moon" label="new moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="9165" end="9172" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="9277" end="9285" title="Old Testament" label="biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q72141" start="9304" end="9323" title="Friedrich Delitzsch" label="Friedrich Delitzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="9404" end="9412" title="lunation" label="lunation"/>
<link wikidata="Q726847" start="9487" end="9506" title="Babylonian calendar" label="Babylonian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225911" start="9512" end="9523" title="Intercalation (timekeeping)" label="intercalary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536028" start="9700" end="9719" title="George Aaron Barton" label="George Aaron Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206063" start="9824" end="9834" title="Enûma Eliš" label="Enûma Eliš"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9962" end="9969" title="Biblical Sabbath#Etymology" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q104641" start="10060" end="10069" title="full moon" label="full moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="10172" end="10182" title="Babylonian language" label="Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206063" start="10233" end="10243" title="Enûma Eliš" label="Enûma Eliš"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031436" start="10344" end="10364" title="Niels-Erik Andreasen" label="Niels-Erik Andreasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858009" start="10366" end="10382" title="Jeffrey H. Tigay" label="Jeffrey H. Tigay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205615" start="10410" end="10426" title="Biblical Sabbath" label="Biblical Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="10495" end="10505" title="Pentateuch" label="Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="10571" end="10596" title="Babylonian exile of Judah" label="Babylonian exile of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="10771" end="10780" title="Israelites" label="Israelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="11260" end="11274" title="Persian Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068914" start="11279" end="11300" title="Hellenistic astrology" label="Hellenistic astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="11311" end="11329" title="Hellenistic period" label="Greek transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="11334" end="11345" title="Gupta India" label="Gupta India"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="11350" end="11360" title="Tang China" label="Tang China"/>
<link wikidata="Q185150" start="11447" end="11464" title="Eudoxus of Cnidus" label="Eudoxus of Cnidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382371" start="11652" end="11669" title="Eviatar Zerubavel" label="Eviatar Zerubavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201246" start="12079" end="12094" title="planetary hours" label="planetary hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="12239" end="12251" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="12344" end="12350" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="12355" end="12359" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066849" start="12492" end="12500" title="nundinal cycle" label="nundinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="12580" end="12591" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="12658" end="12672" title="Sunday" label="Day of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q226798" start="12722" end="12742" title="Zoroastrian calendar" label="Zoroastrian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179575" start="12844" end="12855" title="Ahura Mazda" label="Ahura Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="12953" end="12967" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489491" start="13031" end="13044" title="Frank Senn" label="Frank C. Senn"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="13229" end="13249" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="13303" end="13320" title="Temple of Solomon" label="Temple of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="13369" end="13385" title="Genesis creation narrative" label="Creation account"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="13393" end="13408" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="13416" end="13428" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q868915" start="13436" end="13439" title="Elohim" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q9190" start="13536" end="13550" title="Book of Exodus" label="Book of Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="13570" end="13586" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="13624" end="13631" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="13767" end="13787" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205363" start="13843" end="13863" title="Second Temple Judaism" label="Second Temple period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322950" start="13935" end="13942" title="Sabbath" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="13999" end="14007" title="lunation" label="lunation"/>
<link wikidata="Q72141" start="14433" end="14452" title="Friedrich Delitzsch" label="Friedrich Delitzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q156318" start="14460" end="14473" title="origin theory" label="origin theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="14498" end="14505" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="14532" end="14543" title="lunar cycle" label="lunar cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="14757" end="14771" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="Jewish sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="14791" end="14801" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q190068" start="14838" end="14848" title="synecdoche" label="synecdoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q51632" start="14939" end="14959" title="Parables of Jesus" label="Jesus&amp;#x27;s parable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166064" start="14967" end="14992" title="Pharisee and the Publican" label="Pharisee and the Publican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066849" start="15328" end="15336" title="nundinum" label="nundinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="15352" end="15367" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="15552" end="15563" title="Constantine I (emperor)" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962347" start="15640" end="15656" title="days of the week" label="days of the week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="15739" end="15748" title="Roman era" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="15855" end="15863" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962347" start="15913" end="15928" title="day of the week" label="day of the week"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="15972" end="15978" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q128" start="16161" end="16170" title="Wednesday" label="Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201246" start="16267" end="16282" title="planetary hours" label="planetary hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q69326" start="16568" end="16579" title="Abu Hurayra" label="Abu Huraira"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="16594" end="16602" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="17201" end="17212" title="Jin dynasty (265–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="17240" end="17251" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q457629" start="17314" end="17321" title="I Ching (monk)" label="Yi Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363621" start="17371" end="17378" title="Amoghavajra" label="Bu Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="17399" end="17411" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q222227" start="17501" end="17506" title="Kūkai" label="Kūkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q433133" start="17566" end="17584" title="Fujiwara Michinaga" label="Fujiwara Michinaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="17621" end="17633" title="Heian Period" label="Heian Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="17812" end="17824" title="Meiji Period" label="Meiji Period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17929" end="17945" title="Pancasiddhantika#Pancha-Siddhantika" label="Pañcasiddhāntikā"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060332" start="17974" end="17987" title="Yuga Purana" label="Garga Samhita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102542" start="18147" end="18163" title="terminus ad quem" label="terminus ad quem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102542" start="18187" end="18201" title="terminus post quem" label="terminus a quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="18317" end="18328" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137175" start="18343" end="18358" title="Western history" label="Western history"/>
<link wikidata="Q750430" start="18409" end="18415" title="Coptic calendar" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="18417" end="18423" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="18429" end="18438" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="18478" end="18484" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q56318457" start="18533" end="18551" title="computus" label="computistic tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395471" start="18860" end="18870" title="Erra Pater" label="Erra Pater"/>
<link wikidata="Q258766" start="18931" end="18944" title="Samuel Butler (poet)" label="Samuel Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142171" start="18958" end="18966" title="Hudibras" label="Hudibras"/>
<link wikidata="Q130" start="19343" end="19349" title="Friday" label="Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="19371" end="19391" title="crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucifixion of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="19393" end="19399" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291868" start="19426" end="19441" title="Anastasia the Patrician" label="Saint Anastasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="19569" end="19575" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150253" start="19710" end="19720" title="The eighth day (Christian)" label="eighth day"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="19787" end="19800" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896500" start="20134" end="20140" title="octave (liturgy)" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574384" start="20158" end="20180" title="Roman Catholic liturgy" label="Roman Catholic liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110154" start="20685" end="20698" title="ISO week date" label="ISO week date"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="20728" end="20736" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="22101" end="22110" title="leap year" label="leap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110154" start="22331" end="22344" title="ISO week date" label="ISO week date"/>
<link wikidata="Q30722989" start="22857" end="22865" title="workweek" label="workweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q235687" start="23077" end="23083" title="Common year starting on Monday" label="Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q235684" start="23085" end="23092" title="Common year starting on Tuesday" label="Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q235676" start="23094" end="23103" title="Common year starting on Wednesday" label="Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q235690" start="23108" end="23116" title="Common year starting on Thursday" label="Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q235680" start="23173" end="23209" title="Common year starting on Friday" label="In years where 1 January is a Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q235673" start="23267" end="23305" title="Common year starting on Saturday" label="In years where 1 January is a Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q235670" start="23447" end="23483" title="Common year starting on Sunday" label="In years where 1 January is a Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24142" end="24173" title="semiconductor package#Date code" label="semiconductor package date code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24344" end="24381" title="tire code#DOT code" label="tire date code mandated by the US DOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993680" start="24853" end="24862" title="fortnight" label="fortnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151" start="24870" end="24875" title="month" label="month"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303852" start="25122" end="25136" title="eight-day week" label="eight-day week"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25149" end="25161" title="Roman calendar#Nundinal cycle" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q544443" start="25196" end="25211" title="Celtic calendar" label="Celtic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="25276" end="25281" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q134032" start="25318" end="25330" title="Chinese ten-day week" label="ten-day week"/>
<link wikidata="Q254101" start="25351" end="25368" title="Egyptian calendar" label="Egyptian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181974" start="25393" end="25419" title="French Republican Calendar" label="French Republican Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698190" start="25494" end="25507" title="Akan Calendar" label="Akan Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102636" start="25512" end="25518" title="Kabye people" label="Kabiye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644058" start="25605" end="25623" title="Icelandic calendar" label="Icelandic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830837" start="25629" end="25646" title="Javanese calendar" label="Javanese calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q599979" start="25692" end="25697" title="Korean culture" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25703" end="25707" title="Igbo Culture#Calendar (Iguafo Igbo)" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q954141" start="25853" end="25870" title="Guipuscoan Basque" label="Guipuscoan Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933843" start="25903" end="25925" title="Mesoamerican calendars" label="Mesoamerican calendars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015120" start="26016" end="26029" title="Tonalpohualli" label="Tonalpohualli"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="26039" end="26046" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q490939" start="26057" end="26070" title="Tzolk&amp;#x27;in" label="Tzolk&amp;#x27;in"/>
<link wikidata="Q13354" start="26080" end="26092" title="Yucatec Maya" label="Yucatec Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770171" start="26140" end="26147" title="trecena" label="trecena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086617" start="26396" end="26403" title="Pawukon" label="Pawukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q649751" start="26637" end="26665" title="International Fixed Calendar" label="International Fixed Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="26882" end="26903" title="Eastman Kodak Company" label="Eastman Kodak Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26942" end="26960" title="French Revolutionary Calendar#Ten days of the week" label="&amp;quot;décade&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="27071" end="27084" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q373037" start="27146" end="27166" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;í calendar" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;í calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="27277" end="27289" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q183644" start="28496" end="28502" title="Pravda" label="Pravda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186975" start="28793" end="28801" title="Marxist–Leninist atheism" label="official"/>
<link wikidata="Q864936" start="28802" end="28809" title="state atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q979637" start="28827" end="28863" title="Determination of the day of the week" label="Determination of the day of the week"/>
<link wikidata="Q62060882" start="28865" end="28880" title="GPS week number" label="GPS week number"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962347" start="28882" end="28911" title="Names of the days of the week" label="Names of the days of the week"/>
<link wikidata="Q30722989" start="28913" end="28933" title="Workweek and weekend" label="Workweek and weekend"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33539" wikidata="Q1066801" url="?curid=33539" title="White trash">
<text>White trash is a derogatory term in American English for poor white people, especially in the rural areas of the southern United States. The label signifies a social class inside the white population and especially a degraded standard of living. It is used as a way to separate the &quot;noble and hardworking&quot; &quot;good poor&quot; from the lazy, &quot;undisciplined, ungrateful and disgusting&quot; &quot;bad poor&quot;. The use of the term provides middle- and upper-class whites a means of distancing themselves from the poverty and powerlessness of poor whites, who cannot enjoy the same class privileges, as well as a way to disown their perceived behavior.

The term has been adopted for white people living on the fringes of the social order, who are seen as dangerous because they may be criminal, unpredictable, and without respect for political, legal, or moral authority. While the term is mostly used pejoratively by urban and middle-class whites as a class signifier, some white entertainers self-identify as &quot;white trash&quot;, considering it a badge of honor, and celebrate the stereotypes and social marginalization of lower-class whiteness.

In common usage, &quot;white trash&quot; overlaps in meaning with &quot;cracker&quot;, used of people in the backcountry of the Southern states; &quot;hillbilly&quot;, regarding poor people from Appalachia; &quot;Okie&quot; regarding those with origins in Oklahoma; &quot;Hoosier&quot; used in St. Louis meaning &quot;poor, rural, white trash&quot;; and &quot;redneck&quot;, regarding rural origins, especially from the South. The primary difference is that &quot;redneck&quot;, &quot;cracker&quot;, &quot;Okie&quot;, and &quot;hillbilly&quot; emphasize that a person is poor and uneducated and comes from the backwoods with little awareness of and interaction with the modern world, while &quot;white trash&quot; – and the modern term &quot;trailer trash&quot; – emphasizes the person&#x27;s supposed moral failings, without regard to the setting of their upbringing. While the other terms suggest rural origins, &quot;white trash&quot; and &quot;trailer trash&quot; may be urban or suburban as well.

Scholars from the late 19th to the early 21st century explored generations of families who were considered &quot;disreputable&quot;, such as the Jukes family and the Kallikak family, both pseudonyms for real families.

==Terminology==
The expression &quot;white trash&quot; probably originated in the slang used by enslaved African Americans, in the early decades of the 1800s, and was quickly adopted by richer white people who used the term to stigmatize and separate themselves from the kind of whites they considered to be inferior and without honor, thus carrying on &quot;the ancient prejudice against menials, swineherds, peddlers and beggars.&quot;

&quot;Poor white trash&quot; signifies the &quot;bad poor&quot;, not the romanticized &quot;noble and hardworking&quot; &quot;good poor&quot;. One word applied to such people was &quot;tackeys&quot; or &quot;tackies&quot;. There may have been an intermediate time when it was used to describe those who may have been wealthy but had no family roots or good breeding. It now generally refers to anything that is cheap, shoddy, gaudy, seedy, or in bad taste.

Academic Jacqueline Zara Wilson suggests the term is partly rooted in the British class system, brought to North America by British settlers, which tended to privilege English settlers over their Scottish, Welsh and Irish counterparts. Wilson also noted hierarchies within this framework, such as early Scots-Irish (Presbyterian) immigrants who saw themselves as better than later Irish (Catholic) immigrants.

In her book &quot;White Trash&quot;, Nancy Isenberg argues that the British saw the American colonies as a &quot;wasteland&quot;, and a place to dump their underclass — those people they called &quot;waste people&quot;, the &quot;scum and dregs&quot; of society. The early term &quot;waste people&quot; gave way to &quot;squatters&quot; and &quot;crackers&quot;, used to describe the settlers who populated the Western frontier of the United States and the backcountry of some southern states, but who did not have title to the land they settled on, and had little or no access to education or religious training. &quot;Cracker&quot; was especially used in the South. 

Isenberg also lists other derisive names that have been used to refer to poor whites:

===As a racial epithet===

Writing in the journal &quot;Critique of Anthropology&quot;, Jacqueline Zara Wilson suggests the term is a &quot;form of invisible racism&quot; which implicitly blames poor whites for their own circumstances. She says that, when used by whites in particular, it &quot;declares the accused to be poor and in one way or another un-civilized, without the excuse of being racially oppressed&quot;. She writes that this may be distinct from the way it was historically used by people of color as &quot;an implicitly anti-racist judgement&quot; or a &quot;vengeful&quot; racialized insult against those who were oppressing them, and that its use reveals hierarchies within whiteness itself.

Journalist Annalee Newitz and sociologist Matt Wray state that &quot;white trash&quot; is both a classist slur and a &quot;racial epithet&quot; that casts poor whites as &quot;a dysgenic race unto themselves&quot;. Filmmaker John Waters said it was &quot;the last racist thing you can say and get away with&quot;.

==Society and culture==
===Economic status===
Many poor whites in the 19th century South were only able to locate themselves on the worst possible land available to whites, since the best land had already been taken by the white slaveholders, large (such as the large-scale plantations owned by the planter class) and small. They lived and attempted to survive on ground that was sandy or swampy or covered in scrub pine and not suited for agriculture; for this, some became known as &quot;sandhillers&quot; and &quot;pineys&quot;. These &quot;hard-scratch&quot; inhabitants were seen to match their surroundings: they were &quot;stony, stumpy, and shrubby, as the land they lived on.&quot; Many ended up in the mountains, at the time the first frontier of the country. After the Civil War, these people began to be referred to as &quot;hillbillies&quot;.

In the popular imagination of the mid-19th century, &quot;poor white trash&quot; were a &quot;curious&quot; breed of degenerate, gaunt, haggard people who suffered from numerous physical and social defects. They were dirty, callow, ragged, cadaverous, leathery, and emaciated, and had feeble children with distended abdomens who were wrinkled and withered and looked aged beyond their physical years, so that even 10-year-olds&#x27; &quot;countenances are stupid and heavy and they often become dropsical and loathsome to sight,&quot; according to a New Hampshire schoolteacher. The skin of a poor white Southerner had a &quot;ghastly yellowish-white&quot; tinge to it, like &quot;yellow parchment&quot;, and was waxy looking, or they were so white they almost appeared to be albinos. The parents were listless and slothful, did not properly care for their children, and were addicted to alcohol. They were looked on with contempt by both upper-class planters and yeoman – the non-slave-owning smallholders.

Harriet Beecher Stowe described a white trash woman and her children in &quot;&quot;, published in 1856:

White Southerners of the period were used to equating coarse and disagreeable appearances with immoral thoughts and uncivil or criminal behavior: an evil countenance often meant a villainous character. In this way poor whites with unhealthy or ugly bodies – the result in large part of poor diets, lack of personal grooming, and a toxic environment – were condemned by the larger white community at first sight, with no thought given to investigating or ameliorating the conditions that were responsible for their appearances.

The physical characteristics of white trash were thought to be completely genetic in nature, passed on, parents to children, from generation to generation, serving to separate poor whites from the Southern gentility and those yeomen who shared patrician values. Slavery apologist Daniel R. Hundley&#x27;s 1860 book &quot;Social Relations in Our Southern States&quot; includes a chapter entitled &quot;White Trash&quot;. He used the existence of poor whites with supposed &quot;bad blood&quot; to argue that genetics and not societal structure was the problem, and that therefore slavery was justified. He called white trash the &quot;laziest two-legged animals that walk erect on the face of the Earth&quot;, describing their appearance as &quot;lank, lean, angular, and bony, with ... sallow complexion, awkward manners, and a natural stupidity or dullness of intellect that almost surpasses belief.&quot; &quot;Who ever yet knew a Godolphin [ideal man] that was sired by a miserable scrub?,&quot; asks Hundley as supposed proof for his theory, &quot;or who ever yet saw an athletic, healthy human being, standing six feet in his stockings, who was the offspring of runtish forefathers or wheezy, asthmatic, or consumptive parents?&quot; Hundley considered the white trash population to be morally inferior not only to other whites, but to the black slave population as well. His evaluation was seconded by Randolph Shotwell, a future Ku Klux Klan leader, who described them as &quot;a distinct race of people ... thriftless, uneducated, unthinking beings, who live little better than negroes.&quot;

W. J. Cash in &quot;The Mind of the South&quot; (1941) writes in his description of the mythical Old South that beneath the aristocratic Cavalier planters was perceived to be:

...a vague race lumped together indiscriminately as the poor whites – very often, in fact, as the &quot;white-trash&quot;. These people belong in the main to a physically inferior type, having sprung for the most part from the convict servants, redemptioners, and debtors of old Virginia and Georgia, with a sprinkling of the most unsuccessful sort of European peasants and farm laborers and the dregs of the European town slums. And so, of course, the gulf between them and the master class was impassable, and their ideas and feeling did not enter into the make-up of he prevailing Southern civilization.

Cash goes on to explain that those who arrived in the New World under these circumstances – at least early in the history of European settlement there – were as likely to end up in the planter class or as yeoman farmers as they were to become poor whites, as land, at first, was cheap and available, and hard work could pay off in a rise in economic and social status. But there were some who did not succeed,

...the weakest element of the old backcountry population ... those who had been driven back [by the plantation system] to the red hills and the sandlands and the pine barrens and the swamps – to all the marginal lands of the South; those who, because of the poorness of the soil on which they dwelt or the great inaccessibility of markets, were, as a group, completely barred from escape or economic and social advance. They were the people to whom the term &quot;cracker&quot; properly applied – the &quot;white-trash&quot; and &quot;po&#x27; bukra&quot; ... [They exhibited] a distinctive physical character – a striking lankness of frame and slackness of muscle in association with a shambling gait, a boniness and misshapeness of head and feature, a peculiar swallow swartness, or alternatively a not less peculiar and a not less faded-out colorness of skin and hair.

According to Cash, this physical appearance is not, for the most part, genetically determined, but is the result of the brutal circumstances in which this group had to survive.

===Cultural traditions===
====Child rearing====

In the mid-19th century South, even upper-class parents were extremely indulgent of their children, encouraging both boys and girls to be aggressive, even ferocious. They soon learned that they were expected to grab for what they wanted, wrestle with their siblings in front of their parents, disobey parental orders, make a racket with their toys, and physically attack visitors. Patrician girls would later be taught to be proper young ladies, but boys continued to be unrestrained, lest they become effeminate. These behaviors – which were also practiced by poorer whites to the extent their circumstances allowed – propelled young men into gambling, drinking, whoring and fighting, which &quot;manly&quot; behavior was more or less expected – but which their mothers carefully did not allow themselves to be aware of – and which was certainly preferred to effeminacy. This pattern of child-rearing was predominate in the backwoods, where it was not limited to the upper class, but could be found among yeoman and poor whites alike. For white trash, given this method of raising children, combined with violent folkways inherited from their English, Irish, and Scottish progenitors, it is not unremarkable that their culture should have been a violent one.

====Proximity to blacks and Native Americans====

Wyatt-Brown argues that the Southern style of child-rearing was seen as paralleling that of the Native Americans who were a constant presence in post-colonial America, especially in the backwoods areas. Thus it is not unusual that another theory for the existence of the white trash population held that the degraded condition of poor white southerners was the result of their living in such close proximity to blacks and Native Americans. Samuel Stanhope Smith, a minister and educator who was the seventh president of Princeton College, wrote in 1810 that poor white southerners lived in &quot;a state of absolute savagism,&quot; which caused them to resemble Indians in the color of their skin and their clothing, a belief that was endemic in the 18th and early 19th century. Smith saw them as a stumbling block in the evolution of mainstream American whites, a view that had previously been expressed by Michel-Guillaume-Jean de Crèvecoeur in his 1782 book, &quot;Letters from an American Farmer&quot;. Crèvecoeur, a French soldier-diplomat who resettled in the United States and changed his name to J. Hector St. John, considered poor white southerners to be &quot;not ... a very pleasing spectacle&quot; and inferior to the prototypical American he celebrated in his book, but still hopes that the effects of progress would improve the condition of these mongrelized, untamed, half-savage drunken people who exhibit &quot;the most hideous parts of our society.&quot;

====Celtic heritage====

The Brandeis University historian David Hackett Fischer makes a case for an enduring genetic basis for a &quot;willingness to resort to violence&quot; – citing especially the finding of high blood levels of testosterone – in the four main chapters of his book &quot;Albion&#x27;s Seed&quot;. He proposes that a propensity for violence in the Mid-Atlantic, Southern and Western states is inheritable by genetic changes wrought over generations living in traditional herding societies in Northern England, the Scottish Borders, and Irish Border Region. He proposes that this propensity has been transferred to other ethnic groups by shared culture, whence it can be traced to different urban populations of the United States.

Even before there was any scientific investigation into the roots of the poor white people of the South, social critic H. L. Mencken, in his 1919 essay &quot;Sahara of the Bozart&quot;, challenged the prevailing myth at the time that &quot;poor white trash&quot;, and, indeed, most of the South&#x27;s population, were primarily of Anglo-Saxon stock. Mencken wrote:The chief strain down there, I believe, is Celtic rather than Saxon, particularly in the hill country French blood, too, shows itself here and there, and so does Spanish, and so does German. The last-named entered from the northward, by way of the limestone belt just east of the Alleghenies. Again, it is very likely that in some parts of the South a good many of the plebeian whites have more than a trace of Negro blood. Interbreeding under concubinage produced some very light half-breeds at an early day, and no doubt appreciable numbers of them went over into the white race by the simple process of changing their abode.

====As a legacy of slavery====

In his classic study, &quot;Democracy in America&quot; (1835), French aristocrat Alexis de Tocqueville sees the state of poor white southerners as being one of the effects of the slave system. He describes them as ignorant, idle, prideful, self-indulgent, and weak, and writes about southern whites in general:

Restricted from holding political office due to property qualifications, their ability to vote at the mercy of the courts, which were controlled by the slave-holding planters, poor whites had few advocates within the political system or the dominant social hierarchy. Although many were tenant farmers or day laborers, other white trash people were forced to live as scavengers, thieves and vagrants. But all, employed or not, were socially ostracized by &quot;proper&quot; white society by being forced to use the back door when entering &quot;proper&quot; homes. Even slaves looked down on them: when poor whites came begging for food, the slaves called them &quot;stray goats.&quot;

Despite poor whites being looked down on by both the planters and the yeoman farmers, and their &quot;rage&quot; at being referred to as &quot;white-trash&quot;, they, as a group, held the Blacks of the South in deep contempt. Cash writes that the slave system &quot;bred [in common whites] a savage and ignoble hate for the Negro, which required only opportunity to break forth in relentless ferocity...&quot;

====Roistering among the British working class====

Poor Southern whites in the 19th century were often casual about male sexual activity outside of marriage, sometimes exhibiting a moral informality that was only slightly suppressed by the rise of evangelical revivalism and increasing church discipline. Wyatt-Brown argues that this behavior was part of a roistering tradition that had roots in the British origins of the class, and differentiated white trash from both the yeoman class and landed gentry of the plantations, where church proscriptions and social inhibitions held sway, respectively.

For poor white women, there was generally a double standard, and a girl who broke the code of chastity and bore a child outside of wedlock would usually be branded as &quot;shameless&quot; and was often subject to public humiliation. However, there were instances where this was not the case. In some deep backwoods of the mountains, a girl bearing a child before marriage was not shamed, as it was considered proof of the female&#x27;s fecundity.

These patterns of behavior, and the sexual casualness they imply, may have become a stereotype, but the perception nevertheless continued into the 20th century and remains an important part of the idea of how white trash people – such as &quot;trailer trash&quot; – behave.

===Politics===

Northerners claimed that the existence of white trash was the result of the system of slavery in the South, while Southerners worried that these clearly inferior whites would upset the &quot;natural&quot; class system which held that all whites were superior to all other races, especially blacks. People of both regions expressed concern that if the number of white trash people increased significantly, they would threaten the Jeffersonian ideal of a population of educated white freemen as the basis of a robust American democracy.

For Ralph Waldo Emerson, the transcendentalist and pre-eminent American lecturer, writer and philosopher of the mid-nineteenth century, poor people of all kinds – including poor white Southerners – lived in poverty because of inherent traits in their nature. The poor were &quot;ferried over the Atlantic &amp; carted to America to ditch &amp; to drudge, to make the land fertile ... and then to lie down prematurely to make a spot of greener grass...&quot; These people Emerson referred to as &quot;guano&quot; were fated to inhabit the lowest niches of society, and he specifically excluded them from his definition of what an &quot;American&quot; was. Emerson&#x27;s &quot;American&quot; was of Saxon heritage, descended from the Danes, Norsemen, Saxons, and Anglo-Saxons, known for their &quot;excess of virility&quot;, their &quot;beastly ferocity&quot;, and – at least in Emerson&#x27;s eyes – their beauty. These were not traits that were shared by the poor white Southerners. Americans may have degenerated somewhat in comparison to their ancestors, one of the weakening effects of civilization, but they still maintained their superiority over other &quot;races&quot;, and white Southerners of all kinds, but especially poor ones, were themselves inferior to their countrymen from New England and the north.

Some, such as Theodore Roosevelt, saw poor &quot;degenerate&quot; whites – as well as the mass of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe (those from northern Europe having been accepted in the Anglo-Saxon white race) – as being a major part of the problem of &quot;race suicide&quot;, the concept that poor whites and unwanted immigrants would eventually out-procreate those of the dominant and superior white &quot;race&quot;, causing it to die out or be supplanted, to the detriment of the country.

==History==
In the early 17th century, Virginia Governor Thomas Dale requested more colonists to work in the fields. It was difficult to find local workers, since those wealthy enough to emigrate to the colonies often became landowners instead. In response, King James sent felons and vagrant children (around a hundred of each) to Virginia.

By 1617, the Virginia Company instituted the headright system, bestowing 50 acres of land to anyone who sponsored an indentured worker&#x27;s passage to the colony. The Plymouth Company followed suit, as did other colonies, including Maryland, Georgia, North Carolina and South Carolina. This helped poorer European workers come to the colonies but it also had the effect of incentivizing planters to sponsor large numbers of workers (and later, enslaved Africans) in exchange for expanding their land rights. Once their indenture was complete, these workers often became landowners themselves, though were usually given poorer, undeveloped land on the Western frontier. Others were unable to afford their independence and carried on working for planters as free wage laborers.

To meet demand, British gangs sometimes organized kidnappings, paid for by planters and speculators, to increase the numbers shipped overseas — amounting to perhaps thousands of unwilling migrants sent to North America by the middle of the century. Political and military prisoners were also sent as indentured servants to the colonies as a result of insurrections in Ireland. Oliver Cromwell sent hundreds of Irish Catholics to British North America during the Irish Confederate Wars (1641–1653).

In 1717, the Parliament of Great Britain passed the Transportation Act to regulate the system of shipping convicts as indentured servants to North America. This had previously operated for about a century under the royal prerogative of mercy, though was open to exploitation. One of the Act&#x27;s stated aims was to increase the availability of laborers for the colonies. It also allowed the willing transportation of children as young as 15 on eight-year contracts of indenture. In 1720, the Act was amended to allow merchants to be paid for transporting felons. By the time penal transportation ceased during the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783), some 30,000–50,000 people had been transported to the New World under the law.

In total, 300,000 to 400,000 people were shipped to the North American colonies as indentured servants (between 1/2 and 2/3 of all white immigrants), serving up to seven years. While they expanded the populations of the colonies, and enriched the planter class, the systems of headright and indenture also expanded the lower class and the use of chattel slavery.

Many of the poorer whites sent to the Western frontier, as well as those who settled in the backcountry of some southern states, were called &quot;waste people&quot;, &quot;squatters&quot; and &quot;crackers&quot;. They did not have title to the land they settled on, and had little access to education or religious training, if any. These people – trappers, miners, and small farmers of the backwoods – brought with them the &quot;customs, routines and beliefs&quot; of the old country, including orally-based ethics and morality which were adapted to fit their new environment. These included concepts of personal worthiness and honor, as well as the desire to protect the community from outside dangers by, for instance, the abhorrence for and prevention of race-mixing.

===Early 19th century===
The first use of &quot;white trash&quot; in print to describe the Southern poor white population occurred in 1821. It came into common use in the 1830s as a pejorative used by the house slaves of &quot;quality folk&quot; against poor whites. In 1833, Fanny Kemble, an English actress visiting Georgia, noted in her journal: &quot;The slaves themselves entertain the very highest contempt for white servants, whom they designate as &#x27;poor white trash&#x27;&quot;. This term achieved widespread popularity in the 1850s, and by 1855, it had passed into common usage by upper-class whites, and was common usage among all Southerners, regardless of race, throughout the rest of the 19th century.

In 1854, Harriet Beecher Stowe wrote the chapter &quot;Poor White Trash&quot; in her book &quot;A Key to Uncle Tom&#x27;s Cabin&quot;. Stowe wrote that slavery not only produces &quot;degraded, miserable slaves&quot;, but also &quot;a poor white population as degraded and brutal as ever existed in any of the most crowded districts of Europe.&quot; The plantation system forced those whites to struggle for subsistence, becoming an &quot;inconceivably brutal&quot; group resembling &quot;some blind, savage monster, which, when aroused, tramples heedlessly over everything in its way.&quot; Beyond economic factors, Stowe traces the existence of this class to the shortage of schools and churches in their communities, and remarks that both blacks and whites in the area look down on these &quot;poor white trash&quot;.

In Stowe&#x27;s second novel &quot;Dred&quot;, she describes the poor white inhabitants of the Great Dismal Swamp, which formed much of the border between Virginia and North Carolina, as an ignorant, degenerate, and immoral class of people prone to criminality. Hinton Rowan Helper&#x27;s extremely influential 1857 book &quot;The Impending Crisis of the South&quot; – which sold 140,000 copies and was considered to be the most important book of the 19th century by many people – describes the region&#x27;s poor Caucasians as a class oppressed by the effects of slavery, a people of lesser physical stature who would be driven to extinction by the South&#x27;s &quot;cesspool of degradation and ignorance.&quot;

Historian Jeffrey Glossner of the University of Mississippi writes:

===During the Civil War===
During the Civil War, the Confederacy instituted conscription to raise soldiers for its army, with all men between the ages of 18 and 35 being eligible to be drafted – later expanded to all men between 17 and 50. However, exemptions were numerous, including any slave-owner with more than 20 slaves, political officeholders, teachers, ministers and clerks, and men who worked in valuable trades. Left to be drafted, or to serve as paid substitutes, were poor white trash Southerners, who were looked down on as cannon fodder. Conscripts who failed to report for duty were hunted down by so-called &quot;dog catchers&quot;. Poor southerners said that it was a &quot;rich man&#x27;s war&quot;, but &quot;a poor man&#x27;s fight.&quot; While upper-class Southern &quot;cavalier&quot; officers were granted frequent furloughs to return home, this was not the case with the ordinary private soldier, which led to an extremely high rate of desertion among this group, who put their families&#x27; well-being above the cause of the Confederacy, and thought of themselves as &quot;Conditional Confederates.&quot; Deserters harassed soldiers, raided farms and stole food, and sometimes banded together in settlements, such as the &quot;Free State of Jones&quot; (formerly Jones County) in Mississippi; desertion was openly joked about. When found, deserters could be executed or humiliated by being put into chains.

Despite the war being fought to protect the right of the patrician elite of the South to own slaves, the planter class was reluctant to give up their cash crop, cotton, to grow the corn and grain needed by the Confederate armies and the civilian population. As a result, food shortages, exacerbated by inflation and hoarding of foodstuffs by the rich, caused the poor of the South to suffer greatly. This led to food riots of angry mobs of poor women who raided stores, warehouses, and depots looking for sustenance for their families. Both the male deserters and the female rioters put the lie to the myth of Confederate unity, and that the war was being fought for the rights of all white Southerners.

Ideologically, the Confederacy claimed that the system of slavery in the South was superior to the class divisions of the North, because while the South devolved all its degrading labor onto what it saw as an inferior race, the black slaves, the North did so to its own &quot;brothers in blood&quot;, the white working class. This the leaders and intellectuals of the Confederacy called &quot;mudsill&quot; democracy, and lauded the superiority of the pure-blooded Southern slave-owning &quot;cavaliers&quot; – who were worth five Northerners in a fight – over the sullied Anglo-Saxon upper class of the North. For its part, some of the military leaders of the North, especially Generals Ulysses S. Grant and William Tecumseh Sherman, recognized that their fight was not only to liberate slaves, but also the poor white Southerners who were oppressed by the system of slavery. Thus they took steps to exploit the class divisions between the &quot;white trash&quot; population and plantation owners. An Army chaplain wrote in a letter to his wife after the Union siege of Petersburg, Virginia that winning the war would not only result in the end of American slavery, but would also increase opportunities for &quot;poor white trash.&quot; He said that the war would &quot;knock off the shackles of millions of poor whites, whose bondage was really worse than that African.&quot; In these respects, the Civil War was to a certain extent a class war. After the Civil War and his presidency, in 1879 during his world tour, Grant said that he had hoped that the war would have freed the &quot;poor white class&quot; of the South from &quot;a bondage in some respects even worse than slavery. ... But they have been as much under the thumb of the slave holder as before the war.&quot;

===During Reconstruction===
After the war, President Andrew Johnson&#x27;s first idea for the reconstruction of the South was not to take steps to create an egalitarian democracy. Instead, he envisioned what was essentially a &quot;white trash republic&quot;, in which the aristocracy would maintain their property holdings and an amount of social power, but be disenfranchised until they could show their loyalty to the Union. The freed blacks would no longer be slaves, but would still be denied essential rights of citizenship and would make up the lowest rung on the social ladder. In between would be the poor white Southerner, the white trash, who while occupying a lesser social position, would essentially become the masters of the South, voting and occupying political offices, and maintaining a superior status to the free blacks and freed slaves. Emancipated from the inequities of the plantation system, poor white trash would become the bulwark of Johnson&#x27;s rebuilding of the South and its restoration into the Union.

Johnson&#x27;s plan was never put into effect, and the Freedmen&#x27;s Bureau – which was created in 1865, before President Abraham Lincoln was assassinated – was authorized to help &quot;all refugees and all freedmen&quot;, black and white alike. The agency did this despite Johnson&#x27;s basic lack of concern for the freed slaves the war had supposedly been fought over. But even though they provided relief to them, the Bureau did not accept Johnson&#x27;s vision of poor whites as the loyal and honorable foundation of a reconstructed South. Northern journalists and other observers maintained that poor white trash, who were now destitute refugees, &quot;beggars, dependents, houseless and homeless wanderers&quot;, were still victimized by poverty and vagrancy. They were &quot;loafers&quot; dressed in rags and covered in filth who did no work, but accepted government relief handouts. They were seen as only slightly more intelligent than blacks. One observer, James R. Gilmore, a cotton merchant and novelist who had traveled throughout the South, wrote the book &quot;Down in Tennessee&quot;, published in 1864, in which he differentiated poor whites into two groups, &quot;mean whites&quot; and &quot;common whites&quot;. While the former were thieves, loafers, and brutes, the latter were law-abiding citizens who were enterprising and productive. It was the &quot;mean&quot; minority who gave white trash their bad name and character.

A number of commentators noted that poor white Southerners did not compare favorably to freed blacks, who were described as &quot;capable, thrifty, and loyal to the Union.&quot; Marcus Sterling, a Freedmen&#x27;s Bureau agent and a former Union officer, said that the &quot;pitiable class of poor whites&quot; were &quot;the only class which seem almost unaffected by the [bureau&#x27;s] great benevolence and its bold reform&quot;, while in contrast black freedmen had become &quot;more settled, industrious and ambitious,&quot; eager to learn how to read and improve themselves. Sidney Andrews saw in blacks a &quot;shrewd instinct for preservation&quot; which poor whites did not have, and Whitelaw Reid, a politician and newspaper editor from Ohio, thought that black children appeared eager to learn. &quot;Atlantic Monthly&quot; went so far as to suggest that government policy should switch from &quot;disenfranchis[ing] the humble, quiet, hardworking Negro&quot; and cease to provide help to the &quot;worthless barbarian&quot;, the &quot;ignorant, illiterate, and vicious&quot; white trash population.

So, during the Reconstruction Era, white trash were no longer seen simply as a freakish, degenerate breed who lived almost invisibly in the backcountry wilderness, the war had brought them out of the darkness into the mainstream of society, where they developed the reputation of being a dangerous class of criminals, vagrants and delinquents, lacking intelligence, unable to speak properly, the &quot;Homo genus without the sapien&quot;, an evolutionary dead end in the Social Darwinist thinking of the time. Plus, they were immoral, breaking all social codes and sexual norms, engaging in incest and prostitution, pimping out family members, and producing numerous in-bred bastard children.

===Post-Reconstruction===
One of the responses of Southerners and Northern Democrats to Reconstruction was the invention of the myth of the &quot;carpetbaggers&quot;, those Northern Republican scoundrels and adventurers who were said to have invaded the South to take advantage of its people, but less well known are those that were called &quot;scalawags&quot;, Southern whites who betrayed their race by supporting the Republican Party and Reconstruction. The scalawag, even if they came from a higher social class, was often described as having a &quot;white trash heart&quot;. They were decried as &quot;Black Republicans&quot;, and were accused of easily mingling with blacks, inviting them to dine in their homes, and inciting them by encouraging them to seek social equality. The Democrats retaliated with &quot;Autobiography of a Scalawag&quot;, a parody of the standard &quot;self-made man&quot; story, in which a white trash southerner with no innate ambition is nevertheless raised to a position of middling power just by being in the right place at the right time, or by lying and cheating.

After Reconstruction governments were &quot;Redeemed&quot;, and Southern states returned to &quot;local control&quot; – i.e. white supremacist rule – some Southern conservatives in power expressed their desire to &quot;conserve&quot; the Blacks, and many African Americans, having no real alternative, accepted their protection as their best available option. This exposed a class-based fracture in the Southern white population. The aristocratic Governor of South Carolina, ex-Confederate General Wade Hampton, said that the &quot;better class of whites&quot; approved of this policy, but that &quot;the lower whites are less favorable.&quot; A Black member of the Virginia Assembly in 1877 noted as such in a debate; it was reported by Democratic politician Jabez Lamar Monroe Curry that the Assemblyman said that &quot;he and his race relied for the protection of their rights &amp; liberties, not on the &#x27;poor white trash&#x27; but on the &#x27;well-raised&#x27; gentleman.&quot; in 1890, the editor of a Black newspaper editorialized that the demand in the South for &quot;Jim Crow&quot; laws did not come from the &quot;best people of the South&quot;, but from the &quot;worst class of whites&quot; in that region. 

Around 1890, the term &quot;redneck&quot; began to be widely used for poor white southeers, especially those racist followers of the Democratic demagogues of the time. Rednecks were found working in the mills, living deep in the swamps, heckling at Republican rallies, and were even occasionally elected to be a state legislator. Such was the case with Guy Rencher, who claimed that &quot;redneck&quot; came from his own &quot;long red neck&quot;.

===The &quot;New South&quot;===
Beginning in the 1890s and continuing through the turn of the century, the &quot;New South&quot; movement introduced industrialization to the South, primarily in the form of hundreds of cotton mills, which sprang up in practically every town, village or hamlet where there was a flow of water to provide energy to power the mill. The poor whites who had not already become sharecroppers or tenant farmers on cotton plantations moved into housing provided by the mills, and every member of the family, down to children as young as 6, 7 or 8, worked at the mill, often from before dawn until after dark, for daily wages which were about half of those prevalent for similar work in the North. Deprived of sunlight, working on badly ventilated mill floors, eating a diet which was no better than they had consumed before becoming industrialized, the mill worker became a notable physical type:

A dead white skin, a sunken chest, and stooping shoulders were the earmarks of the breed. Chinless faces, microcephalic foreheads, rabbit teeth, goggling dead-fish eyes, rickety limbs and stuented stunted bodies abounded – over and beyond the limits of their prevalence in the countryside. The women were characteristically stringy-haired and limp of breast at twenty, and shrunken hags at thirty of forty. And the incidence of tuberculosis, of insanity and epilepsy, and, above all, of pellagra, the curious vitamin-deficiency disease which is nearly peculiar to the South, was increasing.

The societal organization of the mills was taken directly from that of the plantations, with the head of the mills replacing the planter as the master, and the mill providing for its workers housing – for which it charged rent – &quot;company stores&quot; – where goods could be bought and charged against future earnings, putting the worker eternally in the company&#x27;s debt – even churches and schools – paying the wages of the parson and the teacher – for the mills stood in large part just outside already organized municipal boundaries. And the mill workers, as described above, attracted a new bevy of insulting and disdainful names, such as &quot;lint-heads&quot;, &quot;cotton-tails&quot;, &quot;factory rats&quot;, and &quot;cotton-mill trash&quot;.

===Eugenics===
Also around 1890, the American eugenics movement turned its attention to poor white trash. They were stigmatized as being feeble-minded and promiscuous, having incestuous and inter-racial sex, and abandoning or mistreating the children of those unions. Eugenicists campaigned successfully for laws that would allow rural whites fitting these descriptions to be involuntarily sterilized by the state, in order to &quot;cleanse&quot; society of faulty genetic heritages.

In 1907, Indiana passed the first eugenics-based compulsory sterilization law in the world. Thirty U.S. states would soon follow their lead. Although the law was overturned by the Indiana Supreme Court in 1921, in the 1927 case &quot;Buck v. Bell&quot;, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924, allowing for the compulsory sterilization of patients of state mental institutions.

===The Depression===
The beginning of the 20th century brought no change of status for poor white southerners, especially after the onset of the Great Depression. The condition of this class was presented to the public in Margaret Bourke-White&#x27;s photographic series for &quot;Life&quot; magazine and the work of other photographers made for Roy Stryker&#x27;s Historical Section of the federal Resettlement Agency. Author James Agee wrote about them in his ground-breaking work &quot;Let Us Now Praise Famous Men&quot; (1941), as did Jonathan Daniels in &quot;A Southerner Discovers the South&quot; (1938).

A number of Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal agencies tried to help the rural poor to better themselves and to break through the social barriers of Southern society which held them back, reinstating the American Dream of upward mobility. Programs such as those of the Subsistence Homesteads Division of the Department of the Interior; its successor, the Resettlement Administration, whose express purpose was to help the poor in rural areas; and its replacement, the Farm Security Administration which aimed to break the cycle of tenant farming and sharecropping and help poor whites and blacks to own their own farms, and to initiate the creation of the communities necessary to support those farms. The agencies also provided services for migrant workers, such as the Arkies and Okies, who had been devastated by the Dust Bowl – the condition of which was well-documented by photographer Dorothea Lange in &quot;An American Exodus&quot; (1939) – and been forced to take to the road, jamming all their belongings into Ford motorcars and heading west toward California.

Important in the devising and running of these programs were politicians and bureaucrats such as Henry Wallace, the Secretary of Agriculture; Milburn Lincoln Wilson, the first head of the Subsistence Homesteads Division, who was a social scientist and an agricultural expert; and Rexford G. Tugwell, a Columbia University economics professor who managed to be appointed the first head of the Resettlement Agency, despite refusing to present himself with a &quot;homely, democratic manner&quot; in his confirmation hearings. Tugwell understood that the status of tenant farmers would not change if they could not vote, so he campaigned against poll tax, which prevented them voting, since they could not afford to pay it. His agency&#x27;s goals were the four &quot;R&#x27;s&quot;: &quot;retirement of bad land, relocation of rural poor, resettlement of the unemployed in suburban communities, and rehabilitation of farm families.&quot;

Other individuals important in the fight to help the rural poor were Arthur Raper, an expert on tenancy farming, whose study &quot;Preface to Peasantry&quot; (1936) explained why the south&#x27;s system held back the region&#x27;s poor and caused them to migrate; and Howard Odum, a University of North Carolina sociologist and psychologist who founded the journal &quot;Social Forces&quot;, and worked closely with the Federal government. Odum wrote the 600-page masterwork &quot;Southern Regions of the United States&quot;, which became a guidebook for the New Deal. Journalist Gerald W. Johnson translated Odum&#x27;s ideas in the book into a popular volume, &quot;The Wasted Land&quot;. It was Odum who, in 1938, mailed questionnaires to academics to determine their views on what &quot;poor white&quot; meant to them. The results were in many ways indistinguishable from the popular views of &quot;white trash&quot; that had been held for many decades, since the words that came back all indicated serious character flaws in poor whites: &quot;purposeless, hand to mouth, lazy, unambitious, no account, no desire to improve themselves, inertia&quot;, but, most often, &quot;shiftless&quot;. Despite the passage of time, poor whites were still seen as white trash, a breed apart, a class partway between blacks and whites, whose shiftless ways may have even originated from their proximity to blacks.

===&quot;Trailer trash&quot;===
Trailers got their start in the 1930s, and their use proliferated during the housing shortage of World War II, when the Federal government used as many as 30,000 of them to house defense workers, soldiers and sailors throughout the country, but especially around areas with a large military or defense presence, such as Mobile, Alabama and Pascagoula, Mississippi. In her book &quot;Journey Through Chaos&quot;, reporter Agnes Meyer of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; travelled throughout the country, reporting on the condition of the &quot;neglected rural areas&quot;, and described the people who lived in the trailers, tents, and shacks in such areas as malnourished, unable to read or write, and generally ragged. The workers who came to Mobile and Pascagoula to work in the shipyards there were from the backwoods of the South, &quot;subnormal swamp and mountain folk&quot; whom the locals described as &quot;vermin&quot;; elsewhere, they were called &quot;squatters&quot;. They were accused of having loose morals, high illegitimacy rates, and of allowing prostitution to thrive in their &quot;Hillbilly Havens&quot;. The trailers themselves – sometimes purchased second- or third-hand – were often unsightly, unsanitary, and dilapidated, causing communities to zone them away from the more desirable areas, which meant away from schools, stores, and other necessary facilities, often literally on the other side of the railroad tracks.

In the mid-20th century, poor whites who could not afford to buy suburban-style tract housing began to purchase mobile homes, which were not only cheaper, but which could be easily relocated if work in one location ran out. These – sometimes by choice and sometimes through local zoning laws – gathered in trailer camps, and the people who lived in them became known as &quot;trailer trash&quot;. Despite many of them having jobs, albeit sometimes itinerant ones, the character flaws that had been perceived in poor white trash in the past were transferred to so-called &quot;trailer trash&quot;, and trailer camps or parks were seen as being inhabited by retired persons, migrant workers, and, generally, the poor. By 1968, a survey found that only 13% of those who owned and lived in mobile homes had white collar jobs.

==Analysis==
Sociologist Allyson Drinkard writes in &quot;The Social History of the American Family&quot; that to be considered &quot;white trash&quot; in modern American society is different from simply being poor and white. The term

Drinkard writes that as economic inequality continues to grow in the United States, the number of poor white people in both rural and urban areas will continue to grow. At the same time, as white privilege declines in general and minorities continue to hold a growing percentage of jobs in a declining job market, the poor white segment of the population will continue to be caught in the paradox of being a part of a privileged class, but without being able to benefit from their supposed privilege. Being white will no longer enable them to get and hold a good job, or to earn a suitable income. Poor white people, like other oppressed minorities, are born trapped in poverty, and – again, like other minorities – are blamed for their predicament, and for not being able to &quot;raise themselves&quot; out of their social conditions and economic status. Meanwhile, upper- and middle-class whites will continue to label them as &quot;white trash&quot; in order to solidify their feeling of superiority by making sure that &quot;white trash&quot; people are seen as outsiders.

English professor Nell Sullivan argues that the term &quot;white trash&quot; erases the humanity of poor whites in a manner analogous to the word &quot;nigger&quot; for African Americans, through the &quot;invisibility that the middle and upper classes demand of the lower economic classes&quot;. Isenberg writes:

==In popular culture==

===White popular culture===
*American pop culture connects being a white, poor, rural man to both drinking and violence.

*In 1900, Evelyn Greenleaf Sutherland&#x27;s play &quot;Po&#x27; White Trash&quot;, explored the complicated cultural tensions and social and racial status of poor whites in the post-Reconstruction South. In O Henry&#x27;s short story &quot;Shoes&quot; (c.1907), the protagonist, John De Graffenreid Atwood from Alabama, languishing in Mexico as an American consul, refers to a former adversary, Pink Dawson, as &quot;Poor white trash&quot;, although he does admit that Dawson &quot;[h]ad five hundred acres of farming land ...&quot; Such a sizable landholding would, of course, disqualify Dawson from actually being &quot;poor white trash&quot;, so Atwood&#x27;s statement must have been an insult and not a description. George Bernard Shaw uses the term in his 1909 play &quot;The Shewing-Up of Blanco Posnet&quot;, set in the wild American west. The prostitute Feemy says to Blanco &quot;I&#x27;ll hang you, you dirty horse-thief; or not a man in this camp will ever get a word or a look from me again. You&#x27;re just trash: that&#x27;s what you are. White trash.&quot;

*Ernest Matthew Mickler&#x27;s &quot;White Trash Cooking&quot; (1986), based on the cooking of rural white Southerners, enjoyed an unanticipated rise to popularity. Sherrie A. Inness writes that authors such as Mickler use humor to convey the experience of living on the margins of white society, and to expand the definition of American culinary history beyond upper-class traditions based on European cooking.

*By the 1980s, fiction was being published by Southern authors who identified as having redneck or white trash origins, such as Harry Crews, Dorothy Allison, Larry Brown, and Tim McLaurin. Autobiographies sometimes mention white trash origins. Gay rights activist Amber L. Hollibaugh wrote, &quot;I grew up a mixed-race, white-trash girl in a country that considered me dangerous, corrupt, fascinating, exotic. I responded to the challenge by becoming that alarming, hazardous, sexually disruptive woman.&quot;

*Dolly Parton regularly referred to herself as white trash telling &quot;Southern Living&quot;

White trash! I am. People always say, &#x27;Aren&#x27;t you insulted when people call you white trash?&#x27; I say, &#x27;Well it depends on who&#x27;s calling me white trash and how they mean it.&#x27; But we really were, to some degree. Because when you&#x27;re that poor and you&#x27;re not educated, you fall in those categories.

:Talking about her fame, Parton said &quot;There’s nothing like white trash at the White House!&quot; She cheerfully told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; she will always remain &quot;a white-trash person&quot;.

*President Jimmy Carter quoted a supporter who called him &quot;white trash made good&quot;. In his 2001 biography &quot;An Hour Before Daylight: Memories of a Rural Boyhood&quot;, Carter wrote about poor white people in the 1920s and 1930s rural Georgia &quot;For those who were lazy or dishonest, or had repulsive personal habits, &#x27;white trash&#x27; was a greater insult than any epithet based on race.&quot; &quot;People&quot; magazine lampooned a book on Carter as a &quot;Southern white trash novel&quot;.

*In 2006, country music star Toby Keith released an album called &quot;White Trash with Money&quot;, which reached platinum sales levels.

*An, earlier example of self-identification is the 1969 song &quot;Fancy&quot; which was written and recorded by singer Bobbie Gentry. In the song, which was in part inspired by Gentry&#x27;s own life, Gentry describes the narrator&#x27;s impoverished childhood as having been &quot;born just plain white trash&quot;, a beginning which leads her into prostitution to escape from the cycle of poverty.

*In a number of instances, characters in television programs have self-identified as &quot;white trash.&quot; For instance in the &quot;Brown History Month&quot; episode of the animated television series &quot;The Cleveland Show&quot; (season 1, episode 19, first broadcast on May 10, 2010), the protagonist, Cleveland Brown, a black man (who is voiced by a white actor), lives next door to Lester Krinklesac, a white man (voiced by a black actor), who has a Confederate battle flag displayed on his house. When the two come into conflict during Black History Month, Lester wears a t-shirt which says &quot;Proud White Trash&quot;.

===Black popular culture===
*Use of &quot;white trash&quot; epithets has been extensively reported in African American culture and folkore. As an example, enslaved blacks would, when out of earshot, refer to harsh slave owners as &quot;lower than poor white trash&quot;. Some black authors have noted that blacks, when taunted by whites as &quot;niggers&quot;, taunted back, calling them &quot;white trash&quot;.

*Zora Neale Hurston&#x27;s &quot;Seraph on the Suwanee&quot; (1948) explored images of &quot;white trash&quot; women. In 2000, Chuck Jackson argued in the &quot;African American Review&quot; that Hurston&#x27;s meditation on abjection, waste, and the construction of class and gender identities among poor whites critiques the eugenics discourses of the 1920s.

==See also==

* List of ethnic slurs
* Chav
* Classism
* Clay eater
* Cracker
** Florida cracker
** Georgia cracker

* Eurotrash (term)
* Hillbilly
* Okie
* Peckerwood
* Poor White
* Redneck

* Scalawag
* Stereotypes of white people in the United States
* Trailer trash
* Underclass
* Whiteness studies
* Yokel
==Notes==
==References==
==Works cited==
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
*
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1066801" start="0" end="11" title="White trash" label="White trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="36" end="52" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348679" start="57" end="67" title="poor white" label="poor white"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="113" end="135" title="southern United States" label="southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="159" end="171" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567826" start="1242" end="1249" title="cracker (pejorative)" label="cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448" start="1321" end="1330" title="hillbilly" label="hillbilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="1365" end="1375" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q446406" start="1383" end="1387" title="Okie" label="Okie"/>
<link wikidata="Q359058" start="1442" end="1449" title="Hoosier" label="Hoosier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1464" end="1473" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135775" start="1530" end="1537" title="redneck" label="redneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832808" start="1912" end="1925" title="trailer trash" label="trailer trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743799" start="2318" end="2330" title="Jukes family" label="Jukes family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915179" start="2339" end="2354" title="The Kallikak Family" label="Kallikak family"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="2361" end="2370" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="2488" end="2514" title="Slavery in the United States" label="enslaved African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408534" start="3363" end="3383" title="Social class in the United Kingdom" label="British class system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="3457" end="3473" title="English Americans" label="English settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="3485" end="3493" title="Scottish Americans" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094841" start="3495" end="3500" title="Welsh Americans" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="3505" end="3510" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="3592" end="3603" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="3605" end="3617" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="3677" end="3685" title="Irish Catholics" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006336" start="3856" end="3866" title="underclass" label="underclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="4111" end="4127" title="American frontier" label="Western frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186894" start="4513" end="4537" title="Critique of Anthropology" label="Critique of Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767817" start="5181" end="5195" title="Annalee Newitz" label="Annalee Newitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414964" start="5267" end="5275" title="classist" label="classist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269262" start="5348" end="5356" title="dysgenic" label="dysgenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q314926" start="5395" end="5406" title="John Waters" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="5759" end="5770" title="Plantation complexes in the Southern United States" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="5784" end="5797" title="planter class" label="planter class"/>
<link wikidata="Q81867" start="7118" end="7124" title="albino" label="albino"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="7293" end="7301" title="Planter class" label="planters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7306" end="7312" title="Yeoman#Yeoman farmers" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="7336" end="7348" title="smallholding" label="smallholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q102513" start="7351" end="7372" title="Harriet Beecher Stowe" label="Harriet Beecher Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103798" start="8918" end="8927" title="Godolphin (novel)" label="Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="9421" end="9433" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945712" start="9587" end="9597" title="W. J. Cash" label="W. J. Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945712" start="9607" end="9628" title="The Mind of the South" label="The Mind of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q729469" start="9684" end="9693" title="Old South" label="Old South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412687" start="13634" end="13655" title="Samuel Stanhope Smith" label="Samuel Stanhope Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="13714" end="13731" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493812" start="14102" end="14137" title="J. Hector St. John de Crèvecœur" label="Michel-Guillaume-Jean de Crèvecoeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237022" start="14162" end="14193" title="Letters from an American Farmer" label="Letters from an American Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49119" start="14697" end="14716" title="Brandeis University" label="Brandeis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234590" start="14727" end="14748" title="David Hackett Fischer" label="David Hackett Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="14900" end="14912" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712461" start="14959" end="14977" title="Albion&amp;#x27;s Seed" label="Albion&amp;#x27;s Seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="15179" end="15195" title="Northern England" label="Northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="15201" end="15217" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944607" start="15229" end="15242" title="Border Region" label="Border Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q439204" start="15537" end="15550" title="H. L. Mencken" label="H. L. Mencken"/>
<link wikidata="Q784882" start="16472" end="16492" title="Democracy in America" label="Democracy in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q140694" start="16525" end="16546" title="Alexis de Tocqueville" label="Alexis de Tocqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="19738" end="19757" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="19763" end="19780" title="transcendentalism" label="transcendentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="20432" end="20437" title="Saxon" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="21066" end="21084" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795531" start="21322" end="21334" title="race suicide" label="race suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645953" start="21616" end="21627" title="Thomas Dale" label="Thomas Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152507" start="21915" end="21931" title="Virginia Company" label="Virginia Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689927" start="21947" end="21963" title="Headright" label="headright system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="22019" end="22036" title="Indentured servitude" label="indentured worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452027" start="22136" end="22144" title="Province of Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q785035" start="22146" end="22153" title="Province of Georgia" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334526" start="22155" end="22169" title="Province of North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513167" start="22174" end="22188" title="Province of South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="22930" end="22939" title="Political prisoner" label="Political"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="22944" end="22962" title="Prisoner of war" label="military prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148629" start="23032" end="23056" title="List of Irish uprisings" label="insurrections in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="23058" end="23073" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="23091" end="23106" title="Irish Catholics" label="Irish Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672808" start="23143" end="23165" title="Irish Confederate Wars" label="Irish Confederate Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="23193" end="23220" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197655" start="23232" end="23250" title="Transportation Act 1717" label="Transportation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770529" start="23277" end="23317" title="Penal transportation" label="shipping convicts as indentured servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240694" start="23395" end="23421" title="royal prerogative of mercy" label="royal prerogative of mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="23796" end="23822" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="23890" end="23899" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="24262" end="24277" title="Slavery in the United States" label="chattel slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="24318" end="24334" title="American frontier" label="Western frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915703" start="25260" end="25271" title="house slave" label="house slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q433397" start="25331" end="25343" title="Fanny Kemble" label="Fanny Kemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857642" start="25872" end="25903" title="A Key to Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin" label="A Key to Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578694" start="26130" end="26147" title="plantation system" label="plantation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544257" start="26693" end="26711" title="Great Dismal Swamp" label="Great Dismal Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767691" start="26860" end="26879" title="Hinton Rowan Helper" label="Hinton Rowan Helper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741524" start="26925" end="26958" title="The Impending Crisis of the South" label="The Impending Crisis of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="27347" end="27372" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="27420" end="27429" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="27435" end="27446" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="27458" end="27470" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q130008" start="28630" end="28661" title="Free state of jones" label="&amp;quot;Free State of Jones&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="29119" end="29128" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="30210" end="30226" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="30231" end="30255" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q815195" start="30584" end="30613" title="siege of Petersburg" label="siege of Petersburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="30960" end="30969" title="class conflict" label="class war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="31356" end="31370" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="31397" end="31424" title="Reconstruction Era" label="reconstruction of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928426" start="32395" end="32417" title="Freedmen&amp;#x27;s Bureau" label="Freedmen&amp;#x27;s Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="32464" end="32479" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025404" start="32484" end="32496" title="assassination of Abraham Lincoln" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386012" start="34484" end="34497" title="Whitelaw Reid" label="Whitelaw Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="34603" end="34619" title="Atlantic Monthly" label="Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q202261" start="35374" end="35390" title="Social Darwinism" label="Social Darwinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="35494" end="35500" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q38978" start="35570" end="35577" title="in-bred" label="in-bred"/>
<link wikidata="Q113886" start="35743" end="35755" title="carpetbagger" label="carpetbagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228835" start="35943" end="35951" title="scalawag" label="scalawag"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604529" start="36416" end="36443" title="Autobiography of a Scalawag" label="Autobiography of a Scalawag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448143" start="36482" end="36495" title="self-made man" label="self-made man"/>
<link wikidata="Q751148" start="36745" end="36753" title="Redemptionists" label="Redeemed"/>
<link wikidata="Q881227" start="37199" end="37211" title="Wade Hampton III" label="Wade Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q357356" start="37461" end="37485" title="Jabez Lamar Monroe Curry" label="Jabez Lamar Monroe Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="37784" end="37803" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow&amp;quot; laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011590" start="38491" end="38500" title="New South" label="New South"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="38596" end="38607" title="cotton mill" label="cotton mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="38783" end="38795" title="sharecropper" label="sharecropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q54639972" start="38800" end="38813" title="tenant farmer" label="tenant farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221441" start="39788" end="39796" title="pellagra" label="pellagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418006" start="40128" end="40141" title="company store" label="company store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102213" start="40693" end="40719" title="American eugenics movement" label="American eugenics movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="41150" end="41157" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="41190" end="41214" title="compulsory sterilization" label="compulsory sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644915" start="41321" end="41342" title="Indiana Supreme Court" label="Indiana Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891943" start="41375" end="41387" title="Buck v. Bell" label="Buck v. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="41399" end="41417" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963267" start="41454" end="41488" title="Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924" label="Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q706716" start="41507" end="41531" title="compulsory sterilization" label="compulsory sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="41720" end="41736" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q238364" start="41797" end="41818" title="Margaret Bourke-White" label="Margaret Bourke-White"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="41856" end="41860" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070603" start="41921" end="41932" title="Roy Stryker" label="Roy Stryker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315356" start="41974" end="41993" title="Resettlement Agency" label="Resettlement Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q352963" start="42002" end="42012" title="James Agee" label="James Agee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108471" start="42064" end="42092" title="Let Us Now Praise Famous Men" label="Let Us Now Praise Famous Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q15521711" start="42114" end="42130" title="Jonathan Daniels" label="Jonathan Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="42200" end="42221" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="42229" end="42237" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q214100" start="42396" end="42410" title="American Dream" label="American Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632012" start="42461" end="42492" title="Subsistence Homesteads Division" label="Subsistence Homesteads Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="42500" end="42526" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q204493" start="42660" end="42688" title="Farm Security Administration" label="Farm Security Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q54639972" start="42723" end="42737" title="tenant farming" label="tenant farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="42742" end="42755" title="sharecropping" label="sharecropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="42963" end="42969" title="Arkies" label="Arkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q446406" start="42974" end="42979" title="Okies" label="Okies"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="43012" end="43021" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q230673" start="43083" end="43097" title="Dorothea Lange" label="Dorothea Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q464219" start="43361" end="43374" title="Henry Cantwell Wallace" label="Henry Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029955" start="43380" end="43404" title="United States Secretary of Agriculture" label="Secretary of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q30088046" start="43406" end="43428" title="Milburn Lincoln Wilson" label="Milburn Lincoln Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q887045" start="43544" end="43562" title="Rexford G. Tugwell" label="Rexford G. Tugwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="43566" end="43585" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q721368" start="43907" end="43915" title="poll taxes" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798648" start="44270" end="44282" title="Arthur Raper" label="Arthur Raper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631941" start="44469" end="44480" title="Howard W. Odum" label="Howard Odum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="44484" end="44512" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550658" start="44572" end="44585" title="Social Forces" label="Social Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549648" start="44781" end="44798" title="Gerald W. Johnson (journalist)" label="Gerald W. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q216040" start="45639" end="45647" title="Caravan (trailer)" label="Trailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="45736" end="45748" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="45959" end="45974" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q913225" start="45979" end="46002" title="Pascagoula, Mississippi" label="Pascagoula, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q394508" start="46060" end="46071" title="Agnes E. Meyer" label="Agnes Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="46081" end="46100" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="46702" end="46714" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140144" start="47164" end="47177" title="tract housing" label="tract housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="47364" end="47375" title="zoning laws" label="zoning laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832808" start="47460" end="47473" title="trailer trash" label="trailer trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q255274" start="47887" end="47899" title="White-collar worker" label="white collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="49374" end="49380" title="nigger" label="nigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381749" start="49693" end="49720" title="Evelyn Greenleaf Sutherland" label="Evelyn Greenleaf Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172788" start="49891" end="49898" title="O Henry" label="O Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="50405" end="50424" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882425" start="50462" end="50493" title="The Shewing-Up of Blanco Posnet" label="The Shewing-Up of Blanco Posnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393537" start="50760" end="50782" title="Ernest Matthew Mickler" label="Ernest Matthew Mickler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586451" start="51300" end="51311" title="Harry Crews" label="Harry Crews"/>
<link wikidata="Q275012" start="51313" end="51328" title="Dorothy Allison" label="Dorothy Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741264" start="51436" end="51455" title="Amber L. Hollibaugh" label="Amber L. Hollibaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="51481" end="51491" title="mixed-race" label="mixed-race"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="51685" end="51697" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570096" start="51757" end="51772" title="Southern Living" label="Southern Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="52243" end="52256" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="52332" end="52344" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="52743" end="52749" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q559819" start="52867" end="52877" title="Toby Keith" label="Toby Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995496" start="52909" end="52931" title="White Trash with Money" label="White Trash with Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433668" start="53044" end="53049" title="Fancy (Bobbie Gentry song)" label="Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q272253" start="53097" end="53110" title="Bobbie Gentry" label="Bobbie Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34397" start="53589" end="53607" title="The Cleveland Show" label="The Cleveland Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="54114" end="54130" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007177" start="54131" end="54138" title="African-American culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689640" start="54143" end="54150" title="African-American folktales" label="folkore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="54358" end="54365" title="niggers" label="niggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q220480" start="54427" end="54445" title="Zora Neale Hurston" label="Zora Neale Hurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q24255887" start="54459" end="54480" title="Seraph on the Suwanee" label="Seraph on the Suwanee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689674" start="54587" end="54610" title="African American Review" label="African American Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="54753" end="54761" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q25197302" start="54804" end="54824" title="List of ethnic slurs" label="List of ethnic slurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432214" start="54827" end="54831" title="Chav" label="Chav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414964" start="54834" end="54842" title="Class discrimination" label="Classism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349107" start="54845" end="54855" title="Clay eater" label="Clay eater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567826" start="54858" end="54865" title="Cracker (term)" label="Cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461716" start="54869" end="54884" title="Florida cracker" label="Florida cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547884" start="54888" end="54903" title="Georgia cracker" label="Georgia cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q337914" start="54907" end="54923" title="Eurotrash (term)" label="Eurotrash (term)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448" start="54926" end="54935" title="Hillbilly" label="Hillbilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q446406" start="54938" end="54942" title="Okie" label="Okie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084382" start="54945" end="54955" title="Peckerwood" label="Peckerwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348679" start="54958" end="54968" title="Poor White" label="Poor White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135775" start="54971" end="54978" title="Redneck" label="Redneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228835" start="54982" end="54990" title="Scalawag" label="Scalawag"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807863" start="54993" end="55041" title="Stereotypes of white Americans" label="Stereotypes of white people in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832808" start="55044" end="55057" title="Trailer trash" label="Trailer trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006336" start="55060" end="55070" title="Underclass" label="Underclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q64711016" start="55073" end="55090" title="Whiteness studies" label="Whiteness studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158349" start="55093" end="55098" title="Yokel" label="Yokel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33545" wikidata="Q9309" url="?curid=33545" title="Welsh language">
<text>Welsh ( or ) is a Celtic language of the Brittonic subgroup that is native to the Welsh people. Welsh is spoken natively in Wales, by some in England, and in (the Welsh colony in Chubut Province, Argentina).

It is spoken by smaller numbers of people in Canada and the United States descended from Welsh immigrants, within their households (especially in Nova Scotia). Historically, it has also been known in English as &quot;British&quot;, &quot;Cambrian&quot;, &quot;Cambric&quot; and &quot;Cymric&quot;.

The Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011 gave the Welsh language official status in Wales. Welsh and English are &quot;de jure&quot; official languages of the Welsh Parliament, the Senedd, with Welsh being the only &quot;de jure&quot; official language in any part of the United Kingdom, with English being merely &quot;de facto&quot; official.

According to the 2021 census, the Welsh-speaking population of Wales aged three or older was 538,300 (17.8%) and nearly three quarters of the population in Wales said they had no Welsh language skills. Other estimates suggest that 862,700 people (28.0%) aged three or older in Wales could speak Welsh in March 2024. Almost half of all Welsh speakers consider themselves fluent, while 20 per cent are able to speak a fair amount. 56 per cent of Welsh speakers speak the language daily, and 19 per cent speak the language weekly. Year upon year since 1951, the number of Welsh speakers in Wales has increased, though the percentage of those speakers within the population of Wales has decreased every decade apart from numbers reported via the 1991 and 2001 UK Census.

The Welsh Government plans to increase the number of Welsh-language speakers to one million by 2050. Since 1980, the number of children attending Welsh-medium schools has increased, while the number going to Welsh bilingual and dual-medium schools has decreased. Welsh is considered the least endangered Celtic language by UNESCO.

==History==

The language of the Welsh developed from the language of Britons. The emergence of Welsh was not instantaneous and clearly identifiable. Instead, the shift occurred over a long period, with some historians claiming that it had happened by as late as the 9th century, with a watershed moment being that proposed by linguist Kenneth H. Jackson, the Battle of Dyrham, a military battle between the West Saxons and the Britons in 577 AD, which split the South Western British from direct overland contact with the Welsh.

Four periods are identified in the history of Welsh, with rather indistinct boundaries: Primitive Welsh, Old Welsh, Middle Welsh, and Modern Welsh. The period immediately following the language&#x27;s emergence is sometimes referred to as Primitive Welsh, followed by the Old Welsh period – which is generally considered to stretch from the beginning of the 9th century to sometime during the 12th century. The Middle Welsh period is considered to have lasted from then until the 14th century, when the Modern Welsh period began, which in turn is divided into Early and Late Modern Welsh.

The word &quot;Welsh&quot; is a descendant, via Old English , of the Proto-Germanic word , which was derived from the name of the Celtic people known to the Romans as and which came to refer to speakers of Celtic languages, and then indiscriminately to the people of the Western Roman Empire. In Old English the term went through semantic narrowing, coming to refer to either Britons in particular or, in some contexts, slaves. The plural form evolved into the name for their territory, Wales.

The modern names for various Romance-speaking people in Continental Europe (e.g. Walloons, Valaisans, Vlachs/Wallachians, and , the Polish name for Italians) have a similar etymology. The Welsh term for the language, , descends from the Brythonic word , meaning &#x27;compatriots&#x27; or &#x27;fellow countrymen&#x27;.

===Origins===
Welsh evolved from Common Brittonic, the Celtic language spoken by the ancient Celtic Britons. Classified as Insular Celtic, the British language probably arrived in Britain during the Bronze Age or Iron Age and was probably spoken throughout the island south of the Firth of Forth. During the Early Middle Ages the British language began to fragment due to increased dialect differentiation, thus evolving into Welsh and the other Brittonic languages. It is not clear when Welsh became distinct.

Linguist Kenneth H. Jackson has suggested that the evolution in syllabic structure and sound pattern was complete by around AD 550, and labelled the period between then and about AD 800 &quot;Primitive Welsh&quot;. This Primitive Welsh may have been spoken in both Wales and the (&#x27;Old North&#x27;) – the Brittonic-speaking areas of what are now northern England and southern Scotland – and therefore may have been the ancestor of Cumbric as well as Welsh. Jackson, however, believed that the two varieties were already distinct by that time.

The earliest Welsh poetry – that attributed to the or &quot;Early Poets&quot; – is generally considered to date to the Primitive Welsh period. However, much of this poetry was supposedly composed in the , raising further questions about the dating of the material and language in which it was originally composed. This discretion stems from the fact that Cumbric was widely believed to have been the language used in Hen Ogledd. An 8th-century inscription in Tywyn shows the language already dropping inflections in the declension of nouns.

Janet Davies proposed that the origins of the Welsh language were much less definite; in &quot;The Welsh Language: A History&quot;, she proposes that Welsh may have been around even earlier than 600 AD. This is evidenced by the dropping of final syllables from Brittonic: &#x27;poet&#x27; became , and &#x27;river&#x27; became . Though both Davies and Jackson cite minor changes in syllable structure and sounds as evidence for the creation of Old Welsh, Davies suggests it may be more appropriate to refer to this derivative language as rather than characterising it as a new language altogether.

=== Primitive Welsh ===
The argued dates for the period of &quot;Primitive Welsh&quot; are widely debated, with some historians&#x27; suggestions differing by hundreds of years.

===Old Welsh===

The next main period is Old Welsh (, 9th to 11th centuries); poetry from both Wales and Scotland has been preserved in this form of the language. As Germanic and Gaelic colonisation of Britain proceeded, the Brittonic speakers in Wales were split off from those in northern England, speaking Cumbric, and those in the southwest, speaking what would become Cornish, so the languages diverged. Both the works of Aneirin (, ) and the &quot;Book of Taliesin&quot; () were written during this era.

===Middle Welsh===

Middle Welsh () is the label attached to the Welsh of the 12th to 14th centuries, of which much more remains than for any earlier period. This is the language of nearly all surviving early manuscripts of the , although the tales themselves are certainly much older. It is also the language of the existing Welsh law manuscripts. Middle Welsh is reasonably intelligible to a modern-day Welsh speaker.


=== Modern Welsh ===
The Bible translations into Welsh helped maintain the use of Welsh in daily life, and standardised spelling. The New Testament was translated by William Salesbury in 1567, and the complete Bible by William Morgan in 1588. Modern Welsh is subdivided into Early Modern Welsh and Late Modern Welsh. Early Modern Welsh ran from the 15th century through to the end of the 16th century, and the Late Modern Welsh period roughly dates from the 16th century onwards. Contemporary Welsh differs greatly from the Welsh of the 16th century, but they are similar enough for a fluent Welsh speaker to have little trouble understanding it.

During the Modern Welsh period, there has been a decline in the popularity of the Welsh language: the number of Welsh speakers declined to the point at which there was concern that the language would become extinct. During industrialisation in the late 19th century, immigrants from England led to the decline in Welsh speakers particularly in the South Wales Valleys. Welsh government processes and legislation have worked to increase the proliferation of the Welsh language, for example through education.

==Geographic distribution==
=== Wales ===

Welsh has been spoken continuously in Wales throughout history; however, by 1911, it had become a minority language, spoken by 43.5 per cent of the population. While this decline continued over the following decades, the language did not die out. The smallest number of speakers was recorded in 1981 with 503,000 although the lowest percentage was recorded in the most recent census in 2021 at 17.8 per cent. By the start of the 21st century, numbers began to increase once more, at least partly as a result of the increase in Welsh-medium education.

The 2004 Welsh Language Use Survey showed that 21.7 per cent of the population of Wales spoke Welsh, compared with 20.8 per cent in the 2001 census, and 18.5 per cent in the 1991 census. Since 2001, however, the number of Welsh speakers has declined in both the 2011 and 2021 censuses to about 538,300 or 17.8 per cent in 2021, lower than 1991, although it is still higher in absolute terms. The 2011 census also showed a &quot;big drop&quot; in the number of speakers in the Welsh-speaking heartlands, with the number dropping to under 50 per cent in Ceredigion and Carmarthenshire for the first time. However, according to the Welsh Language Use Survey in 2019–20, 22 per cent of people aged three and over were able to speak Welsh.

The Annual Population Survey (APS) by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimated that as of March 2024, approximately 862,700, or 28.0 per cent of the population of Wales aged 3 and over, were able to speak the language. Children and young people aged three to 15 years old were more likely to report that they could speak Welsh than any other age group (48.4 per cent, 241,300). Around 1,001,500 people, or 32.5 per cent, reported that they could understand spoken Welsh. 24.7 per cent (759,200) could read and 22.2 per cent (684,500) could write in Welsh. The APS estimates of Welsh language ability are historically higher than those produced by the census.

In terms of usage, ONS also reported that 14.4 per cent (443,800) of people aged three or older in Wales reported that they spoke Welsh daily in March 2024, with 5.4 per cent (165,500) speaking it weekly and 6.5 per cent (201,200) less often. Approximately 1.7 per cent (51,700) reported that they never spoke Welsh despite being able to speak the language, with the remaining 72.0 per cent of the population not being able to speak it.

The National Survey for Wales, conducted by Welsh Government, has also tended to report a higher percentage of Welsh speakers than the census, with the most recent results for 2022–2023 suggesting that 18 per cent of the population aged 3 and over were able to speak Welsh, with an additional 16 per cent noting that they had some Welsh-speaking ability.

Historically, large numbers of Welsh people spoke only Welsh. Over the course of the 20th century this monolingual population all but disappeared, but a small percentage remained at the time of the 1981 census. Most Welsh-speaking people in Wales also speak English. However, many Welsh-speaking people are more comfortable expressing themselves in Welsh than in English. A speaker&#x27;s choice of language can vary according to the subject domain and the social context, even within a single discourse (known in linguistics as code-switching).

Welsh speakers are largely concentrated in the north and west of Wales, principally , Conwy County Borough, Denbighshire, Anglesey, Carmarthenshire, north Pembrokeshire, , parts of Glamorgan, and north-west and extreme south-west . However, first-language and other fluent speakers can be found throughout Wales.

=== Outside Wales ===
==== The rest of the UK ====
Welsh-speaking communities persisted well into the modern period across the border in England. Archenfield was still Welsh enough in the time of Elizabeth I for the Bishop of Hereford to be made responsible, together with the four Welsh bishops, for the translation of the Bible and the Book of Common Prayer into Welsh. Welsh was still commonly spoken there in the first half of the 19th century, and churchwardens&#x27; notices were put up in both Welsh and English until about 1860. Alexander John Ellis in the 1880s identified a small part of Shropshire as still then speaking Welsh, with the &quot;Celtic Border&quot; passing from Llanymynech through Oswestry to Chirk.

The number of Welsh-speaking people in the rest of Britain has not yet been counted for statistical purposes. In 1993, the Welsh-language television channel S4C published the results of a survey into the numbers of people who spoke or understood Welsh, which estimated that there were around 133,000 Welsh-speaking people living in England, about 50,000 of them in the Greater London area. The Welsh Language Board, on the basis of an analysis of the Office for National Statistics Longitudinal Study, estimated there were 110,000 Welsh-speaking people in England, and another thousand in Scotland and Northern Ireland.

In the 2011 census, 8,248 people in England gave Welsh in answer to the question &quot;What is your main language?&quot; The Office for National Statistics subsequently published a census glossary of terms to support the release of results from the census, including their definition of &quot;main language&quot; as referring to &quot;first or preferred language&quot; (though that wording was not in the census questionnaire itself). The wards in England with the most people giving Welsh as their main language were the Liverpool wards of Central and Greenbank; and Oswestry South in Shropshire. The wards of Oswestry South (1.15%), Oswestry East (0.86%) and St Oswald (0.71%) had the highest percentage of residents giving Welsh as their main language.

The census also revealed that 3,528 wards in England, or 46% of the total number, contained at least one resident whose main language is Welsh. In terms of the regions of England, North West England (1,945), London (1,310) and the West Midlands (1,265) had the highest number of people noting Welsh as their main language. According to the 2021 census, 7,349 people in England recorded Welsh to be their &quot;main language&quot;.

In the 2011 census, 1,189 people aged three and over in Scotland noted that Welsh was a language (other than English) that they used at home.

==== Argentina ====
It is believed that there are as many as 5,000 speakers of Patagonian Welsh.

==== Australia ====
In response to the question &#x27;Does the person speak a language other than English at home?&#x27; in the 2016 Australian census, 1,688 people noted that they spoke Welsh.

==== Canada ====
In the 2011 Canadian census, 3,885 people reported Welsh as their first language. According to the 2021 Canadian census, 1,130 people noted that Welsh was their mother tongue.

====New Zealand====
The 2018 New Zealand census noted that 1,083 people in New Zealand spoke Welsh.

==== United States ====
The American Community Survey 2009–2013 noted that 2,235 people aged five years and over in the United States spoke Welsh at home. The highest number of those (255) lived in Florida.

==Status==


=== Number of speakers ===

=== Legal status ===
Calls for the Welsh language to be granted official status grew with the establishment of the nationalist political party Plaid Cymru in 1925, the establishment of the Welsh Language Society in 1962 and the rise of Welsh nationalism in the later 20th century. Of the six living Celtic languages (including two revived), Welsh has the highest number of native speakers who use the language on a daily basis, and it is the Celtic language which is considered the least endangered by UNESCO.

The Welsh Language Act 1993 and the Government of Wales Act 1998 provide that the Welsh and English languages be treated equally in the public sector, as far as is reasonable and practicable. Each public body is required to prepare for approval a Welsh Language Scheme, which indicates its commitment to the equality of treatment principle. This is sent out in draft form for public consultation for a three-month period, whereupon comments on it may be incorporated into a final version. It requires the final approval of the now defunct Welsh Language Board (). Thereafter, the public body is charged with implementing and fulfilling its obligations under the Welsh Language Scheme. The list of other public bodies which have to prepare Schemes could be added to by initially the Secretary of State for Wales, from 1993 to 1997, by way of statutory instrument. Subsequent to the forming of the National Assembly for Wales in 1997, the Government Minister responsible for the Welsh language can and has passed statutory instruments naming public bodies who have to prepare Schemes. Neither the 1993 Act nor secondary legislation made under it covers the private sector, although some organisations, notably banks and some railway companies, provide some of their information in Welsh.

On 7 December 2010, the Welsh Assembly unanimously approved a set of measures to develop the use of the Welsh language within Wales. On 9 February 2011 this measure, the Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011, was passed and received Royal Assent, thus making the Welsh language an officially recognised language within Wales. The measure:
* confirmed the official status of the Welsh language
* created a new system of placing duties on bodies to provide services through the medium of Welsh
* created a Welsh Language Commissioner with strong enforcement powers to protect the rights of Welsh-speaking people to access services through the medium of Welsh
* established a Welsh Language Tribunal
* gave individuals and bodies the right to appeal decisions made in relation to the provision of services through the medium of Welsh
* created a Welsh Language Partnership Council to advise Government on its strategy in relation to the Welsh language
* allowed for an official investigation by the Welsh Language Commissioner of instances where there is an attempt to interfere with the freedom of Welsh-speaking people to use the language with one another

The measure required public bodies and some private companies to provide services in Welsh. The Welsh government&#x27;s Minister for Heritage at the time, Alun Ffred Jones, said, &quot;The Welsh language is a source of great pride for the people of Wales, whether they speak it or not, and I am delighted that this measure has now become law. I am very proud to have steered legislation through the Assembly which confirms the official status of the Welsh language; which creates a strong advocate for Welsh speakers and will improve the quality and quantity of services available through the medium of Welsh. I believe that everyone who wants to access services in the Welsh language should be able to do so, and that is what this government has worked towards. This legislation is an important and historic step forward for the language, its speakers and for the nation.&quot; The measure was not welcomed warmly by all supporters: Bethan Williams, chairman of the Welsh Language Society, gave a mixed response to the move, saying, &quot;Through this measure we have won official status for the language and that has been warmly welcomed. But there was a core principle missing in the law passed by the Assembly before Christmas. It doesn&#x27;t give language rights to the people of Wales in every aspect of their lives. Despite that, an amendment to that effect was supported by 18 Assembly Members from three different parties, and that was a significant step forward.&quot;

On 5 October 2011, Meri Huws, Chair of the Welsh Language Board, was appointed the new Welsh Language Commissioner. She released a statement that she was &quot;delighted&quot; to have been appointed to the &quot;hugely important role&quot;, adding, &quot;I look forward to working with the Welsh Government and organisations in Wales in developing the new system of standards. I will look to build on the good work that has been done by the Welsh Language Board and others to strengthen the Welsh language and ensure that it continues to thrive.&quot; First Minister Carwyn Jones said that Huws would act as a champion for the Welsh language, though some had concerns over her appointment: Plaid Cymru spokeswoman Bethan Jenkins said, &quot;I have concerns about the transition from Meri Huws&#x27;s role from the Welsh Language Board to the language commissioner, and I will be asking the Welsh government how this will be successfully managed. We must be sure that there is no conflict of interest, and that the Welsh Language Commissioner can demonstrate how she will offer the required fresh approach to this new role.&quot; Huws started her role as the Welsh Language Commissioner on 1 April 2012.

Local councils and the Senedd use Welsh, issuing Welsh versions of their literature, to varying degrees.
Road signs in Wales are in Welsh and English. Prior to 2016, the choice of which language to display first was the responsibility of the local council. Since then, as part of the Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011, all new signs have Welsh displayed first. There have been incidents of one of the languages being vandalised, which may be considered a hate crime.

Since 2000, the teaching of Welsh has been compulsory in all schools in Wales up to age 16; this has had an effect in stabilising and reversing the decline in the language.

Text on UK coins tends to be in English and Latin. However, a Welsh-language edge inscription was used on pound coins dated 1985, 1990 and 1995, which circulated in all parts of the UK prior to their 2017 withdrawal. The wording is , and derives from the national anthem of Wales, &quot;&quot;. Banknotes used in Wales are in English only, as these are issued by the Bank of England for both England and Wales.

Some shops employ bilingual signage. Welsh sometimes appears on product packaging or instructions.

The UK government has ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in respect of Welsh.
The language has greatly increased its prominence since the creation of the television channel S4C in November 1982, which until digital switchover in 2010 broadcast 70 per cent of Channel 4&#x27;s programming along with a majority of Welsh language shows during peak viewing hours. The all-Welsh-language digital station is available throughout Europe on satellite and online throughout the UK. Since the digital switchover was completed in South Wales on 31 March 2010, became the main broadcasting channel and fully in Welsh. The main evening television news provided by the BBC in Welsh is available for download. There is also a Welsh-language radio station, , which was launched in 1977.

The only Welsh-language national newspaper (&quot;The Welshman&quot;) was published weekly until 2017, and monthly thereafter, following a change in ownership. There is no daily newspaper in Welsh. A daily newspaper called (&quot;The World&quot;) was scheduled to be launched on 3 March 2008, but was scrapped, owing to insufficient sales of subscriptions and the Welsh Government offering only one third of the £600,000 public funding it needed. There is a Welsh-language online news service which publishes news stories in Welsh called (&#x27;360 [degree] view&#x27;).

As of March 2021, there were 58 local Welsh language community newspapers, known as , in circulation.

===In education===

The decade around 1840 was a period of great social upheaval in Wales, manifested in the Chartist movement. In 1839, 20,000 people marched on Newport, resulting in a riot when 20 people were killed by soldiers defending the Westgate Hotel, and the Rebecca Riots where tollbooths on turnpikes were systematically destroyed.

This unrest brought the state of education in Wales to the attention of the British government since social reformers of the time considered education as a means of dealing with social ills. &quot;The Times&quot; newspaper was prominent among those who considered that the lack of education of the Welsh people was the root cause of most of the problems.

In July 1846, three commissioners, R.R.W. Lingen, Jellynger C. Symons and H.R. Vaughan Johnson, were appointed to inquire into the state of education in Wales; the Commissioners were all Anglicans and thus presumed unsympathetic to the nonconformist majority in Wales. The Commissioners presented their report to the Government on 1 July 1847 in three large blue-bound volumes. This report quickly became known in Wales as the (&quot;Treason of the Blue Books&quot;) since, apart from documenting the state of education in Wales, the Commissioners were also free with their comments disparaging the language, nonconformity, and the morals of the Welsh people in general. An immediate effect of the report was that ordinary Welsh people began to believe that the only way to get on in the world was through the medium of English, and an inferiority complex developed about the Welsh language whose effects have not yet been completely eradicated. The historian Professor Kenneth O. Morgan referred to the significance of the report and its consequences as &quot;the Glencoe and the Amritsar of Welsh history&quot;.

In the later 19th century, the teaching of English in Welsh schools was generally supported by the Welsh public and parents who saw it as the language of economic advancement. Virtually all teaching in the schools of Wales was in English, even in areas where the pupils barely understood English. Some schools used the Welsh Not, a piece of wood, often bearing the letters &quot;WN&quot;, which was hung around the neck of any pupil caught speaking Welsh. The pupil could pass it on to any schoolmate heard speaking Welsh, with the pupil wearing it at the end of the day being punished. One of the most famous Welsh-born pioneers of higher education in Wales was Sir Hugh Owen. He made great progress in the cause of education, and more especially the University College of Wales at Aberystwyth, of which he was chief founder. He has been credited with the Welsh Intermediate Education Act 1889 (52 &amp; 53 Vict c 40), following which several new Welsh schools were built. The first was completed in 1894 and named .

Towards the beginning of the 20th century this policy slowly began to change, partly owing to the efforts of O.M. Edwards when he became chief inspector of schools for Wales in 1907.
The (&#x27;Aberystwyth Welsh School&#x27;) was founded in 1939 by Sir Ifan ap Owen Edwards, the son of O.M. Edwards, as the first Welsh Primary School. The headteacher was Norah Isaac. is still a very successful school, and now there are Welsh-language primary schools all over the country. was established in Rhyl in 1956 as the first Welsh-medium secondary school.
Welsh is now widely used in education, with 101,345 children and young people in Wales receiving their education in Welsh medium schools in 2014/15, 65,460 in primary and 35,885 in secondary. 26 per cent of all schools in Wales are defined as Welsh medium schools, with a further 7.3 per cent offering some Welsh-medium instruction to pupils. 22 per cent of pupils are in schools in which Welsh is the primary language of instruction. Under the National Curriculum, it is compulsory that all students study Welsh up to the age of 16 as either a first or a second language. Some students choose to continue with their studies through the medium of Welsh for the completion of their A-levels as well as during their college years. All local education authorities in Wales have schools providing bilingual or Welsh-medium education. The remainder study Welsh as a second language in English-medium schools. Specialist teachers of Welsh called support the teaching of Welsh in the National Curriculum. Welsh is also taught in adult education classes. The Welsh Government has recently set up six centres of excellence in the teaching of Welsh for Adults, with centres in North Wales, Mid Wales, South West, Glamorgan, Gwent, and Cardiff.

The ability to speak Welsh or to have Welsh as a qualification is desirable for certain career choices in Wales, such as teaching or customer service. All universities in Wales teach courses in the language, with many undergraduate and post-graduate degree programmes offered in the medium of Welsh, ranging from law, modern languages, social sciences, and also other sciences such as biological sciences. Aberystwyth, Cardiff, Bangor, and Swansea have all had chairs in Welsh since their virtual establishment, and all their schools of Welsh are successful centres for the study of the Welsh language and its literature, offering a BA in Welsh as well as post-graduate courses. At all Welsh universities and the Open University, students have the right to submit assessed work and sit exams in Welsh even if the course was taught in English (usually the only exception is where the course requires demonstrating proficiency in another language). Following a commitment made in the One Wales coalition government between Labour and Plaid Cymru, the (Welsh Language National College) was established. The purpose of the federal structured college, spread out between all the universities of Wales, is to provide and also advance Welsh medium courses and Welsh medium scholarship and research in Welsh universities. There is also a Welsh-medium academic journal called (&#x27;Oasis&#x27;), which is a platform for academic research in Welsh and is published quarterly. There have been calls for more teaching of Welsh in English-medium schools.

===Use in professional engineering ===
When conducting applicants&#x27; professional reviews for Chartered Engineer status, the Institution of Engineering and Technology accepts applications in Welsh and will conduct face-to-face interviews in Welsh if requested to do so. One of the requirements for Chartered Engineer is also to be able to communicate effectively in English.

===In information technology===
Like many of the world&#x27;s languages, the Welsh language has seen an increased use and presence on the internet, ranging from formal lists of terminology in a variety of fields to Welsh language interfaces for Microsoft Windows XP and up, Microsoft Office, LibreOffice, OpenOffice.org, Mozilla Firefox and a variety of Linux distributions, and on-line services to blogs kept in Welsh. Wikipedia has had a Welsh version since July 2003 and Facebook since 2009.

===Mobile phone technology===
In 2006 the Welsh Language Board launched a free software pack which enabled the use of SMS predictive text in Welsh. At the National Eisteddfod of Wales 2009, a further announcement was made by the Welsh Language Board that the mobile phone company Samsung was to work with the network provider Orange to provide the first mobile phone in the Welsh language, with the interface and the T9 dictionary on the Samsung S5600 available in the Welsh language. The model, available with the Welsh language interface, has been available since 1 September 2009, with plans to introduce it on other networks.

On Android devices, both the built-in Google Keyboard and user-created keyboards can be used. iOS devices have fully supported the Welsh language since the release of iOS 8 in September 2014. Users can switch their device to Welsh to access apps that are available in Welsh. Date and time on iOS is also localised, as shown by the built-in Calendar application, as well as certain third-party apps that have been localised.

===In warfare===
Secure communications are often difficult to achieve in wartime. Just as Navajo code talkers were used by the United States military during World War II, the a Welsh regiment serving in Bosnia, used Welsh for emergency communications that needed to be secure.

===Use within the British parliament ===
In 2017, parliamentary rules were amended to allow the use of Welsh when the Welsh Grand Committee meets at Westminster. The change did not alter the rules about debates within the House of Commons, where only English can be used.

In February 2018, Welsh was first used when the Welsh Secretary, Alun Cairns, delivered his welcoming speech at a sitting of the committee. He said, &quot;I am proud to be using the language I grew up speaking, which is not only important to me, my family and the communities Welsh MPs represent, but is also an integral part of Welsh history and culture&quot;.

===Use at the European Union===
In November 2008, the Welsh language was used at a meeting of the European Union&#x27;s Council of Ministers for the first time. The Heritage Minister Alun Ffred Jones addressed his audience in Welsh and his words were interpreted into the EU&#x27;s 23 official languages. The official use of the language followed years of campaigning. Jones said &quot;In the UK we have one of the world&#x27;s major languages, English, as the mother tongue of many. But there is a diversity of languages within our islands. I am proud to be speaking to you in one of the oldest of these, Welsh, the language of Wales.&quot; He described the breakthrough as &quot;more than [merely] symbolic&quot; saying &quot;Welsh might be one of the oldest languages to be used in the UK, but it remains one of the most vibrant. Our literature, our arts, our festivals, our great tradition of song all find expression through our language. And this is a powerful demonstration of how our culture, the very essence of who we are, is expressed through language.&quot;

Jill Evans MEP used Welsh in a number of speeches in the European Parliament. In 2004, her using Welsh was the first use of the language in the European Parliament. The last time Welsh was spoken in the European Parliament was during Evans&#x27; last speech shortly before Brexit.

===Use by the Voyager programme===
A greeting in Welsh is one of the 55 languages included on the Voyager Golden Record chosen to be representative of Earth in NASA&#x27;s Voyager programme launched in 1977. The greetings are unique to each language, with the Welsh greeting being , which translates into English as &quot;Good health to you now and forever&quot;.

==Vocabulary==
Welsh supplements its core Brittonic vocabulary (words such as &quot;egg&quot;, &quot;stone&quot;) with hundreds of word lemmas borrowed from Latin, such as ( &#x27;window&#x27; &lt; Latin , &#x27;wine&#x27; &lt; Latin ). It also borrows words from English, such as ( &#x27;shelf&#x27;, &#x27;gate&#x27;).

==Phonology==

The phonology of Welsh includes a number of sounds that do not occur in English and are typologically rare in European languages. The voiceless alveolar lateral fricative , the voiceless nasals , and , and the voiceless alveolar trill are distinctive features of the Welsh language. Stress usually falls on the penultimate syllable in polysyllabic words, and the word-final unstressed syllable receives a higher pitch than the stressed syllable.

Symbols in parentheses are either allophones, or found only in loanwords.
The vowels /ɨ̞/ and /ɨ/ are only found in Northern varieties of Welsh. In the South these have merged with /ɪ/ and /i/ in all cases.

==Orthography==
Welsh is written in a Latin alphabet of 29 letters, of which eight are digraphs treated as single letters for collation, for example comes before in the dictionary:

: a, b, c, ch, d, dd, e, f, ff, g, ng, h, i, j, l, ll, m, n, o, p, ph, r, rh, s, t, th, u, w, y

In contrast to English practice, and are considered vowel letters in Welsh along with .

 was not used traditionally, but is now used in many everyday words borrowed from English, like (&#x27;jam&#x27;), (&#x27;joke&#x27;) and (&#x27;garage&#x27;). are used in some technical terms, like &quot;kilogram&quot;, &quot;volt&quot; and &quot;zero&quot;, but in all cases can be, and often are, replaced by Welsh letters (same pronunciation): , and . was in common use until the 16th century, but was dropped at the time of the publication of the New Testament in Welsh, as William Salesbury explained: &quot; for , because the printers have not so many as the Welsh requireth&quot;. This change was not popular at the time.

The most common diacritic is the circumflex (called in Welsh, lit. &#x27;little roof&#x27;), which usually disambiguates long vowels, most often in the case of homographs, where the vowel is short in one word and long in the other: e.g. (&#x27;place&#x27;) vs (&#x27;fine, small&#x27;).

==Morphology==
Welsh morphology has much in common with that of the other modern Insular Celtic languages, such as the use of initial consonant mutations and of so-called &quot;conjugated prepositions&quot; (prepositions that fuse with the personal pronouns that are their object). Welsh nouns belong to one of two grammatical genders, masculine and feminine, but they are not inflected for case. Welsh has a variety of different endings and other methods to indicate the plural, and two endings to indicate the singular (technically the singulative) of some nouns. In spoken Welsh, verbal features are indicated primarily by the use of auxiliary verbs rather than by the inflection of the main verb. In literary Welsh, on the other hand, inflection of the main verb is usual.

==Syntax==
The canonical word order in Welsh is verb–subject–object (VSO).

Colloquial Welsh inclines very strongly towards the use of auxiliaries with its verbs, as in English. The present tense is constructed with (&#x27;to be&#x27;) as an auxiliary verb, with the main verb appearing as a verbnoun (used in a way loosely equivalent to an infinitive) after the particle :
:Siân is going to Llanelli.
There, is a third-person singular present indicative form of , and is the verb-noun meaning &quot;to go&quot;. The imperfect is constructed in a similar manner, as are the periphrastic forms of the future and conditional tenses.

In the preterite, future and conditional mood tenses, there are inflected forms of all verbs, which are used in the written language. However, speech now more commonly uses the verbnoun together with an inflected form of (&#x27;do&#x27;), so &quot;I went&quot; can be or (&#x27;I did go&#x27;). is an example of a preverbal particle; such particles are common in Welsh, though less so in the spoken language.

Welsh lacks separate pronouns for constructing subordinate clauses; instead, special verb forms or relative pronouns that appear identical to some preverbal particles are used.

===Possessives as direct objects of verbnouns===
The Welsh for &quot;I like Rhodri&quot; is (word for word, &quot;am I [the] liking [of] Rhodri&quot;), with &quot;Rhodri&quot; in a possessive relationship with &quot;hoffi&quot;. With personal pronouns, the possessive form of the personal pronoun is used, as in &quot;I like &quot;him&quot;&quot;: [], literally, &quot;am I &quot;his&quot; liking&quot; – &quot;I like &quot;you&quot;&quot; is [] (&#x27;am I &quot;your&quot; liking&#x27;). Very informally, the pronouns are often heard in their normal subject/object form and aping English word order: (&#x27;Am I liking you&#x27;).

===Pronoun doubling===
In colloquial Welsh, possessive pronouns, whether they are used to mean &quot;my&quot;, &quot;your&quot;, etc. or to indicate the direct object of a verbnoun, are commonly reinforced by the use of the corresponding personal pronoun after the noun or verbnoun: &quot;his house&quot; (literally &quot;his house &quot;of him&quot;&quot;), &quot;I like you&quot; (&#x27;I am [engaged in the action of] your liking &quot;of you&quot;″), etc. The &quot;reinforcement&quot; (or, simply, &quot;redoubling&quot;) adds no emphasis in the colloquial register. While the possessive pronoun alone may be used, especially in more formal registers, as shown above, it is considered incorrect to use only the personal pronoun. Such usage is nevertheless sometimes heard in very colloquial speech, mainly among young speakers: (&#x27;Where are we going? Your house or my house?&#x27;).

== Grammar ==
Welsh is a moderately inflecting language. Verbs inflect at least for person, number and mood, while nouns inflect for number and there is a masculine-feminine distinction, of which the latter is marked via consonant mutation.

Colloquial and literary grammar show more differences than in English.

==Counting system==

The traditional counting system used in the Welsh language is vigesimal, i.e. it is based on twenties. Welsh numbers from 11 to 14 are &quot;&quot;x&quot; on ten&quot; (e.g. : 11), 16 to 19 are &quot;&quot;x&quot; on fifteen&quot; (e.g. : 16), though 18 is , &quot;two nines&quot;; numbers from 21 to 39 are &quot;1–19 on twenty&quot;(e.g. : 30), 40 is &quot;two twenties&quot;, 60 is &quot;three twenties&quot;, etc. This form continues to be used, especially by older people, and it is obligatory in certain circumstances (such as telling the time, and in ordinal numbers).

There is also a decimal counting system, which has become relatively widely used, though less so in giving the time, ages, and dates (it features no ordinal numbers). This system originated in Patagonian Welsh and was subsequently introduced to Wales in the 1940s. Whereas 39 in the vigesimal system is (&#x27;four on fifteen on twenty&#x27;) or even (&#x27;two twenty minus one&#x27;), in the decimal system it is (&#x27;three tens nine&#x27;).

Although there is only one word for &quot;one&quot; (), it triggers the soft mutation () of feminine nouns, where possible, other than those beginning with &quot;ll&quot; or &quot;rh&quot;. There are separate masculine and feminine forms of the numbers &#x27;two&#x27; ( and ), &#x27;three&#x27; ( and ) and &#x27;four&#x27; ( and ), which must agree with the grammatical gender of the objects being counted. The objects being counted appear in the singular, not plural form.

==Dialects==
The differences between the dialects of modern colloquial Welsh are insignificant in comparison with the difference between the spoken and standard language. The latter is much more formal and is, among other things, the language of the Welsh translations of the Bible (but the – &quot;New Welsh Bible&quot; – is much less formal in language than the traditional 1588 Bible). Among the characteristics of the literary language, in comparison with the spoken language, are more frequent use of conjugated verb forms, a change in the use of certain tenses (for example, the literary imperfect in modern language has the meaning of the subjunctive mood), a reduction in the frequency of the use of pronouns (since the information they convey is usually conveyed by forms of inflected verbs and prepositions) and a more pronounced tendency to replace English borrowings with native Welsh words.

For example: consider the question &quot;Do you want a cuppa &quot;[a cup of tea]&quot;?&quot; In Gwynedd this would typically be while in the south of Dyfed one would be more likely to hear (though in other parts of the South one would not be surprised to hear as well, among other possibilities). An example of a pronunciation difference is the tendency in some southern dialects to palatalise the letter &quot;s&quot;, e.g. , usually pronounced , but as in parts of the south. This normally occurs next to a high front vowel like /i/, although exceptions include the pronunciation of &quot;how&quot; as in the southern dialects (compared with northern ).

===The four traditional dialects===
Although modern understanding often splits Welsh into northern () and southern () &#x27;dialects&#x27;, the traditional classification of four Welsh dialects remains the most academically useful:

*, the Gwynedd dialect
*, the Powys dialect
*, the Dyfed dialect
*, the dialect of Gwent and Morgannwg

A fifth dialect is Patagonian Welsh, which has developed since the start of (the Welsh settlement in Argentina) in 1865; it includes Spanish loanwords and terms for local features, but a survey in the 1970s showed that the language in Patagonia is consistent throughout the lower Chubut Valley and in the Andes.

Subdialects exist within the main dialects (such as the Cofi dialect). The 1989 book was accompanied by a cassette containing recordings of 14 different speakers demonstrating aspects of different regional dialects. The book also refers to the earlier &quot;Linguistic Geography of Wales&quot; (1973) as describing six different regions which could be identified as having words specific to those regions.

In the 1970s, there was an attempt to standardise the Welsh language by teaching (&#x27;Living Welsh&#x27;) – a colloquially-based generic form of Welsh, but the attempt largely failed because it did not encompass the regional differences used by Welsh-speakers.

==Registers==
Modern Welsh can be considered to fall broadly into two main registers—Colloquial Welsh () and Literary Welsh (). Colloquial Welsh is used in most speech and informal writing. Literary Welsh is closer to the form of Welsh standardised by the 1588 translation of the Bible and is found in official documents and other formal registers, including much literature. As a standardised form, literary Welsh shows little if any of the dialectal variation found in colloquial Welsh. Some differences include:

Amongst the characteristics of the literary, as against the spoken language are a higher dependence on inflected verb forms, different usage of some of the tenses, less frequent use of pronouns (since the information is usually conveyed in the verb/preposition inflections) and a much lesser tendency to substitute English loanwords for native Welsh words. In addition, more archaic pronouns and forms of mutation may be observed in Literary Welsh.

===Examples of sentences in literary and colloquial Welsh===
The differences between dialects of modern spoken Welsh pale into insignificance compared to the difference between some forms of the spoken language and the most formal constructions of the literary language. The latter is considerably more conservative and is the language used in Welsh translations of the Bible, amongst other things – although the 2004 is significantly less formal than the traditional 1588 Bible. Gareth King, author of a popular Welsh grammar, observes, &quot;The difference between these two is much greater than between the virtually identical colloquial and literary forms of English.&quot; A grammar of Literary Welsh can be found in &quot;A Grammar of Welsh&quot; by Stephen J. Williams or more completely in by Peter Wynn Thomas. (No comprehensive grammar of formal literary Welsh exists in English.) An English-language guide to colloquial Welsh forms and register and dialect differences is by Ceri Jones.

==Example text==
Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:

==See also==
* Association of Welsh Translators and Interpreters
* &quot;English and Welsh&quot;
* Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion
* Languages in the United Kingdom
* List of Welsh-language media
* List of Welsh films
* List of Welsh-language authors
* List of Welsh-language poets (6th century to c. 1600)
* List of Welsh people
* List of Welsh areas by percentage of Welsh-speakers
* Welsh literature
* St Benet&#x27;s, Paul&#x27;s Wharf
* Welsh Language Board
* Welsh placenames
* Welsh Tract
* Sindarin 

==Notes==
==References==
* J.W. Aitchison; H. Carter (2000). &quot;Language, Economy and Society. The changing fortunes of the Welsh Language in the Twentieth Century&quot;. Cardiff. University of Wales Press.
* J.W. Aitchison; H. Carter (2004). &quot;Spreading the Word. The Welsh Language 2001&quot;. Y Lolfa.

== Further reading ==


==External links==
* Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011: available in Welsh and **English.
*Welsh Language Commissioner
*Welsh language at Omniglot
* Welsh Language Board: &quot;The Vitality of Welsh: A Statistical Balance Sheet&quot;, August 2010
* Link for Welsh language statistics from the Welsh Assembly Government (accessed 10 January 2009)
* Example knowledge of Welsh (KS25) data (Newport) from the Office for National Statistics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="0" end="5" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="18" end="33" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="41" end="50" title="Brittonic languages" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="82" end="94" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh people"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="124" end="129" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="142" end="149" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q45007" start="179" end="194" title="Chubut Province" label="Chubut Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="196" end="205" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="355" end="366" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13130119" start="512" end="547" title="Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011" label="Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="626" end="633" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="688" end="694" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="827" end="835" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="870" end="881" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="887" end="912" title="Welsh-speaking population" label="Welsh-speaking population"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="1625" end="1641" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406299" start="1767" end="1787" title="Welsh-medium education" label="Welsh-medium schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1944" end="1950" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="2023" end="2030" title="Celtic Britons" label="Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083" start="2220" end="2231" title="9th century" label="9th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058259" start="2289" end="2307" title="Kenneth H. Jackson" label="Kenneth H. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429157" start="2313" end="2329" title="Battle of Deorham" label="Battle of Dyrham"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="2361" end="2372" title="Wessex" label="West Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="2756" end="2765" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487263" start="2895" end="2907" title="Middle Welsh" label="Middle Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188478" start="2987" end="2999" title="History of the Welsh language" label="Modern Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="3143" end="3157" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="3204" end="3217" title="Celts" label="Celtic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="3345" end="3365" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3370" end="3381" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939117" start="3404" end="3422" title="semantic change" label="semantic narrowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="3598" end="3614" title="Romance languages" label="Romance-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="3625" end="3643" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q381151" start="3650" end="3658" title="Walloons" label="Walloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="3660" end="3668" title="Valaisan" label="Valaisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="3671" end="3677" title="Vlachs" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="3678" end="3687" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="3701" end="3707" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="3806" end="3815" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="3923" end="3939" title="Common Brittonic" label="Common Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="3983" end="3997" title="Celtic Britons" label="Celtic Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q214506" start="4013" end="4027" title="Insular Celtic languages" label="Insular Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="4070" end="4077" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4089" end="4099" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q277399" start="4103" end="4111" title="British Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="4171" end="4185" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="4198" end="4215" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058259" start="4411" end="4429" title="Kenneth H. Jackson" label="Kenneth H. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="4466" end="4474" title="syllable" label="syllabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="4782" end="4790" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="4837" end="4844" title="Cumbric" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272941" start="5409" end="5414" title="Tywyn" label="Tywyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="5451" end="5461" title="inflection" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="6311" end="6320" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="6348" end="6354" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="6375" end="6383" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="6436" end="6444" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="6449" end="6455" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="6643" end="6650" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q514898" start="6697" end="6704" title="Aneirin" label="Aneirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515117" start="6724" end="6740" title="Book of Taliesin" label="Book of Taliesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165011" start="7107" end="7116" title="Welsh law" label="Welsh law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903237" start="7228" end="7257" title="Bible translations into Welsh" label="Bible translations into Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="7337" end="7350" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018052" start="7369" end="7386" title="William Salesbury" label="William Salesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624753" start="7422" end="7436" title="William Morgan (Bible translator)" label="William Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21279755" start="8698" end="8702" title="1921 United Kingdom census" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="8789" end="8793" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406299" start="8930" end="8952" title="Welsh-medium education" label="Welsh-medium education"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="9091" end="9102" title="United Kingdom Census 2001" label="2001 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887926" start="9129" end="9140" title="1991 census" label="1991 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="9217" end="9221" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q217829" start="9507" end="9517" title="Ceredigion" label="Ceredigion"/>
<link wikidata="Q217840" start="9522" end="9537" title="Carmarthenshire" label="Carmarthenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769662" start="9695" end="9719" title="Annual Population Survey" label="Annual Population Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="9733" end="9763" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="11649" end="11658" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q255615" start="11684" end="11698" title="code-switching" label="code-switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q817971" start="11788" end="11808" title="Conwy (county borough)" label="Conwy County Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q650682" start="11810" end="11822" title="Denbighshire" label="Denbighshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="11824" end="11832" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q217840" start="11834" end="11849" title="Carmarthenshire" label="Carmarthenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q213361" start="11857" end="11870" title="Pembrokeshire" label="Pembrokeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="11883" end="11892" title="Glamorgan" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15187222" start="12162" end="12173" title="Archenfield" label="Archenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="12212" end="12223" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q460988" start="12232" end="12250" title="Bishop of Hereford" label="Bishop of Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q784710" start="12354" end="12375" title="Book of Common Prayer" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q621776" start="12553" end="12573" title="Alexander John Ellis" label="Alexander John Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="12614" end="12624" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397480" start="12703" end="12714" title="Llanymynech" label="Llanymynech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009221" start="12723" end="12731" title="Oswestry" label="Oswestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316216" start="12735" end="12740" title="Chirk" label="Chirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q426637" start="12900" end="12903" title="S4C" label="S4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400384" start="13137" end="13157" title="Welsh Language Board" label="Welsh Language Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="13194" end="13224" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="13371" end="13382" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="13886" end="13895" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060237" start="13905" end="13912" title="Central (Liverpool ward)" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603674" start="13917" end="13926" title="Greenbank (ward)" label="Greenbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="13950" end="13960" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48091" start="14281" end="14299" title="regions of England" label="regions of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="14461" end="14472" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798706" start="14775" end="14791" title="Patagonian Welsh" label="Patagonian Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q33128519" start="14922" end="14944" title="2016 Australian census" label="2016 Australian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029304" start="15013" end="15033" title="2011 Canadian Census" label="2011 Canadian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="15072" end="15086" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="15105" end="15125" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Canadian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="15207" end="15230" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="15312" end="15337" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="15404" end="15417" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="15482" end="15489" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="15676" end="15687" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q499322" start="15722" end="15744" title="Welsh Language Society" label="Welsh Language Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670915" start="15769" end="15786" title="Welsh nationalism" label="Welsh nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="16035" end="16041" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981936" start="16048" end="16071" title="Welsh Language Act 1993" label="Welsh Language Act 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540463" start="16080" end="16108" title="Government of Wales Act 1998" label="Government of Wales Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400384" start="16583" end="16603" title="Welsh Language Board" label="Welsh Language Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604686" start="16885" end="16905" title="Statutory Instrument (UK)" label="statutory instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="16940" end="16967" title="National Assembly for Wales" label="National Assembly for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q13130119" start="17501" end="17536" title="Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011" label="Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405595" start="18640" end="18656" title="Alun Ffred Jones" label="Alun Ffred Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819154" start="19985" end="19994" title="Meri Huws" label="Meri Huws"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400384" start="20009" end="20029" title="Welsh Language Board" label="Welsh Language Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="20256" end="20272" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q111840" start="20533" end="20545" title="Carwyn Jones" label="Carwyn Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="20656" end="20667" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q123758171" start="21170" end="21184" title="Local government in Wales" label="Local councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="21193" end="21199" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="21627" end="21637" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="22181" end="22196" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="22361" end="22412" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q426637" start="22529" end="22532" title="S4C" label="S4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330048" start="22563" end="22581" title="digital television transition" label="digital switchover"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="23012" end="23015" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="23493" end="23509" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q193974" start="23913" end="23921" title="Chartism" label="Chartist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101254" start="23966" end="23973" title="Newport, Wales" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124572" start="24072" end="24085" title="Rebecca Riots" label="Rebecca Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="24092" end="24101" title="Toll road" label="tollbooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="24106" end="24115" title="Toll road" label="turnpikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="24345" end="24354" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287802" start="24539" end="24552" title="Ralph Lingen, 1st Baron Lingen" label="R.R.W. Lingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="24691" end="24700" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="24740" end="24753" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836552" start="24801" end="24813" title="Reports of the Commissioners of Inquiry into the State of Education in Wales" label="their report"/>
<link wikidata="Q13132548" start="25113" end="25126" title="nonconformity in Wales" label="nonconformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q93657" start="25474" end="25491" title="Kenneth O. Morgan" label="Kenneth O. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254804" start="25569" end="25576" title="Massacre of Glencoe" label="Glencoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="25585" end="25593" title="Jallianwala Bagh massacre" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058291" start="25938" end="25947" title="Welsh Not" label="Welsh Not"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932209" start="26282" end="26295" title="Hugh Owen (educator)" label="Sir Hugh Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q319761" start="26371" end="26398" title="Aberystwyth University" label="University College of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q213154" start="26402" end="26413" title="Aberystwyth" label="Aberystwyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q108471067" start="26476" end="26513" title="Welsh Intermediate Education Act 1889" label="Welsh Intermediate Education Act 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114583" start="26747" end="26759" title="Owen Morgan Edwards" label="O.M. Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399427" start="26887" end="26911" title="Ifan ab Owen Edwards" label="Sir Ifan ap Owen Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015856" start="26993" end="27004" title="Norah Isaac" label="Norah Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020203" start="27131" end="27135" title="Rhyl" label="Rhyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q113549391" start="27633" end="27652" title="Curriculum for Wales (2022 to present)" label="National Curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664350" start="27921" end="27948" title="local education authority" label="local education authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807178" start="28000" end="28006" title="medium of instruction" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="28842" end="28849" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="29056" end="29058" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="29136" end="29151" title="Open University" label="Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093340" start="29405" end="29414" title="One Wales" label="One Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185073" start="30064" end="30082" title="Chartered Engineer" label="Chartered Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164410" start="30095" end="30136" title="Institution of Engineering and Technology" label="Institution of Engineering and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="30591" end="30611" title="Microsoft Windows XP" label="Microsoft Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="30620" end="30636" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q10135" start="30638" end="30649" title="LibreOffice" label="LibreOffice"/>
<link wikidata="Q511977" start="30651" end="30665" title="OpenOffice.org" label="OpenOffice.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="30667" end="30682" title="Mozilla Firefox" label="Mozilla Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="30700" end="30718" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="30745" end="30749" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="30820" end="30828" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400384" start="30884" end="30904" title="Welsh Language Board" label="Welsh Language Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="30960" end="30963" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745177" start="30997" end="31025" title="National Eisteddfod of Wales" label="National Eisteddfod of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="31122" end="31129" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859717" start="31168" end="31174" title="Orange (UK)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="31476" end="31483" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q15893711" start="31511" end="31526" title="Google Keyboard" label="Google Keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="31567" end="31570" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q912310" start="31988" end="32006" title="Navajo code talker" label="Navajo code talker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="32025" end="32047" title="Military of the United States" label="United States military"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="32055" end="32067" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="32101" end="32107" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981904" start="32294" end="32315" title="Welsh Grand Committee" label="Welsh Grand Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="32325" end="32336" title="British parliament" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q268030" start="32514" end="32525" title="Alun Cairns" label="Alun Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="32932" end="32952" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405595" start="32995" end="33011" title="Alun Ffred Jones" label="Alun Ffred Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q272522" start="33883" end="33893" title="Jill Evans" label="Jill Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="34156" end="34162" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34234" end="34246" title="Contents of the Voyager Golden Record#Greetings" label="55 languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q156315" start="34263" end="34284" title="Voyager Golden Record" label="Voyager Golden Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q155311" start="34337" end="34352" title="Voyager program" label="Voyager program"/>
<link wikidata="Q18514" start="34666" end="34672" title="Lemma (morphology)" label="lemmas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34682" end="34692" title=":wikt:Category:Welsh terms borrowed from Latin" label="from Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="34794" end="34801" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="34871" end="34880" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192625" start="34955" end="34968" title="linguistic typology" label="typologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="34977" end="34995" title="Languages of Europe" label="European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365390" start="35001" end="35037" title="voiceless dental and alveolar lateral fricatives" label="voiceless alveolar lateral fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q51593" start="35044" end="35059" title="voiceless nasal" label="voiceless nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994715" start="35077" end="35101" title="voiceless alveolar trill" label="voiceless alveolar trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="35150" end="35156" title="Stress (linguistics)" label="Stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="35279" end="35284" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="35348" end="35357" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="35377" end="35385" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="35560" end="35574" title="Latin script" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="35581" end="35587" title="letter (alphabet)" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="35609" end="35616" title="digraph (orthography)" label="digraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953108" start="35648" end="35657" title="collation" label="collation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018052" start="36369" end="36386" title="William Salesbury" label="William Salesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="36537" end="36546" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11175" start="36554" end="36564" title="circumflex" label="circumflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="36642" end="36653" title="vowel length" label="long vowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q223981" start="36681" end="36690" title="homograph" label="homograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="36830" end="36840" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q214506" start="36890" end="36914" title="Insular Celtic languages" label="Insular Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q557863" start="36943" end="36961" title="consonant mutation" label="consonant mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030179" start="36986" end="37009" title="inflected preposition" label="conjugated prepositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="37017" end="37028" title="preposition" label="preposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q468801" start="37049" end="37065" title="personal pronoun" label="personal pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="37082" end="37088" title="object (grammar)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="37124" end="37142" title="grammatical gender" label="grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="37200" end="37204" title="grammatical case" label="case"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="37321" end="37329" title="grammatical number" label="singular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450795" start="37347" end="37358" title="singulative number" label="singulative"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="37446" end="37460" title="auxiliary verb" label="auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="37481" end="37508" title="grammatical conjugation" label="inflection of the main verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q166097" start="37635" end="37654" title="verb–subject–object" label="verb–subject–object"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="37829" end="37843" title="auxiliary verb" label="auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920975" start="37879" end="37887" title="verbnoun" label="verbnoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q108524486" start="38104" end="38113" title="imperfect" label="imperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108642" start="38161" end="38173" title="periphrastic" label="periphrastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="38187" end="38193" title="future tense" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q625581" start="38198" end="38209" title="conditional mood" label="conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q442485" start="38226" end="38235" title="preterite" label="preterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q318917" start="38283" end="38292" title="inflected language" label="inflected"/>
<link wikidata="Q842387" start="40731" end="40740" title="vigesimal" label="vigesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q125490425" start="41765" end="41778" title="Welsh morphology" label="soft mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="42038" end="42043" title="Agreement (linguistics)" label="agree"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="42053" end="42071" title="grammatical gender" label="grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q473746" start="42816" end="42832" title="subjunctive mood" label="subjunctive mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="43597" end="43602" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q816814" start="43974" end="43981" title="Kingdom of Gwynedd" label="Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q769782" start="43997" end="44002" title="Kingdom of Powys" label="Powys"/>
<link wikidata="Q956451" start="44018" end="44023" title="Kingdom of Dyfed" label="Dyfed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594661" start="44050" end="44055" title="Kingdom of Gwent" label="Gwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13131807" start="44060" end="44069" title="Kingdom of Morgannwg" label="Morgannwg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798706" start="44090" end="44106" title="Patagonian Welsh" label="Patagonian Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="44212" end="44220" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="44306" end="44315" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q955354" start="44351" end="44364" title="Chubut Valley" label="Chubut Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141038" start="44440" end="44452" title="Cofi dialect" label="Cofi dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q286576" start="45130" end="45139" title="register (sociolinguistics)" label="registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903237" start="46365" end="46383" title="Welsh Bible" label="Welsh translations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="46391" end="46396" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="47054" end="47091" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q27437568" start="47109" end="47158" title="Association of Welsh Translators and Interpreters" label="Association of Welsh Translators and Interpreters"/>
<link wikidata="Q330441" start="47167" end="47184" title="English and Welsh" label="English and Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897217" start="47193" end="47227" title="Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion" label="Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217446" start="47230" end="47261" title="Languages in the United Kingdom" label="Languages in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603902" start="47264" end="47292" title="List of Welsh-language media" label="List of Welsh-language media"/>
<link wikidata="Q15062066" start="47295" end="47314" title="List of Welsh films" label="List of Welsh films"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107434" start="47317" end="47347" title="List of Welsh-language authors" label="List of Welsh-language authors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092459" start="47350" end="47403" title="List of Welsh-language poets (6th century to c. 1600)" label="List of Welsh-language poets (6th century to c. 1600)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398720" start="47406" end="47426" title="List of Welsh people" label="List of Welsh people"/>
<link wikidata="Q478220" start="47429" end="47480" title="List of Welsh areas by percentage of Welsh-speakers" label="List of Welsh areas by percentage of Welsh-speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204104" start="47483" end="47499" title="Literature of Wales (Welsh language)" label="Welsh literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116552" start="47502" end="47536" title="St Benet&amp;#x27;s, Paul&amp;#x27;s Wharf" label="St Benet&amp;#x27;s, Paul&amp;#x27;s Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400384" start="47539" end="47559" title="Welsh Language Board" label="Welsh Language Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q25710" start="47562" end="47578" title="Welsh placenames" label="Welsh placenames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982000" start="47581" end="47592" title="Welsh Tract" label="Welsh Tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q56437" start="47595" end="47603" title="Sindarin" label="Sindarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101254" start="48333" end="48340" title="Newport, Wales" label="Newport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33546" wikidata="Q2558042" url="?curid=33546" title="Welsh">
<text>Welsh may refer to:
==Related to Wales==
* Welsh, of or about Wales
* Welsh language, spoken in Wales
* Welsh people, an ethnic group native to Wales

==Places==
* Welsh, Arkansas, U.S.
* Welsh, Louisiana, U.S.
* Welsh, Ohio, U.S.
* Welsh Basin, during the Cambrian, Ordovician and Silurian geological periods

==Other uses==
* Welsh (surname), including a list of people with the name
* Welsh pig, a breed of domestic pig

==See also==
* 
* Welch (disambiguation)
* Welsch, a surname</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2558042" start="0" end="5" title="Welsh" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="62" end="67" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="70" end="84" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="104" end="116" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh people"/>
<link wikidata="Q85814933" start="164" end="179" title="Welsh, Arkansas" label="Welsh, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459054" start="188" end="204" title="Welsh, Louisiana" label="Welsh, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q22390632" start="213" end="224" title="Welsh, Ohio" label="Welsh, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981861" start="233" end="244" title="Welsh Basin" label="Welsh Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143287" start="328" end="343" title="Welsh (surname)" label="Welsh (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993512" start="388" end="397" title="Welsh pig" label="Welsh pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q299540" start="442" end="464" title="Welch (disambiguation)" label="Welch (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745119" start="467" end="473" title="Welsch" label="Welsch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33550" wikidata="Q287" url="?curid=33550" title="Wood">
<text>Wood is a structural tissue/material found as &quot;xylem&quot; in the stems and roots of trees and other woody plants. It is an organic materiala natural composite of cellulosic fibers that are strong in tension and embedded in a matrix of lignin that resists compression. Wood is sometimes defined as only the secondary xylem in the stems of trees, or more broadly to include the same type of tissue elsewhere, such as in the roots of trees or shrubs. In a living tree, it performs a mechanical-support function, enabling woody plants to grow large or to stand up by themselves. It also conveys water and nutrients among the leaves, other growing tissues, and the roots. Wood may also refer to other plant materials with comparable properties, and to material engineered from wood, woodchips, or fibers.

Wood has been used for thousands of years for fuel, as a construction material, for making tools and weapons, furniture and paper. More recently it emerged as a feedstock for the production of purified cellulose and its derivatives, such as cellophane and cellulose acetate.

As of 2020, the growing stock of forests worldwide was about 557 billion cubic meters. As an abundant, carbon-neutral renewable resource, woody materials have been of intense interest as a source of renewable energy. In 2008, approximately 3.97 billion cubic meters of wood were harvested. Dominant uses were for furniture and building construction.

Wood is scientifically studied and researched through the discipline of wood science, which was initiated since the beginning of the 20th century.

==History==

A 2011 discovery in the Canadian province of New Brunswick yielded the earliest known plants to have grown wood, approximately 395 to 400 million years ago.

Wood can be dated by carbon dating and in some species by dendrochronology to determine when a wooden object was created.

People have used wood for thousands of years for many purposes, including as a fuel or as a construction material for making houses, tools, weapons, furniture, packaging, artworks, and paper. Known constructions using wood date back ten thousand years. Buildings like the longhouses in Neolithic Europe were made primarily of wood.

Recent use of wood has been enhanced by the addition of steel and bronze into construction.

The year-to-year variation in tree-ring widths and isotopic abundances gives clues to the prevailing climate at the time a tree was cut.

==Physical properties==
===Growth rings===
Wood, in the strict sense, is yielded by trees, which increase in diameter by the formation, between the existing wood and the inner bark, of new woody layers which envelop the entire stem, living branches, and roots. This process is known as secondary growth; it is the result of cell division in the vascular cambium, a lateral meristem, and subsequent expansion of the new cells. These cells then go on to form thickened secondary cell walls, composed mainly of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin.

Where the differences between the seasons are distinct, e.g. New Zealand, growth can occur in a discrete annual or seasonal pattern, leading to growth rings; these can usually be most clearly seen on the end of a log, but are also visible on the other surfaces. If the distinctiveness between seasons is annual (as is the case in equatorial regions, e.g. Singapore), these growth rings are referred to as annual rings. Where there is little seasonal difference growth rings are likely to be indistinct or absent. If the bark of the tree has been removed in a particular area, the rings will likely be deformed as the plant overgrows the scar.

If there are differences within a growth ring, then the part of a growth ring nearest the center of the tree, and formed early in the growing season when growth is rapid, is usually composed of wider elements. It is usually lighter in color than that near the outer portion of the ring, and is known as earlywood or springwood. The outer portion formed later in the season is then known as the latewood or summerwood. There are major differences, depending on the kind of wood. If a tree grows all its life in the open and the conditions of soil and site remain unchanged, it will make its most rapid growth in youth, and gradually decline. The annual rings of growth are for many years quite wide, but later they become narrower and narrower. Since each succeeding ring is laid down on the outside of the wood previously formed, it follows that unless a tree materially increases its production of wood from year to year, the rings must necessarily become thinner as the trunk gets wider. As a tree reaches maturity its crown becomes more open and the annual wood production is lessened, thereby reducing still more the width of the growth rings. In the case of forest-grown trees so much depends upon the competition of the trees in their struggle for light and nourishment that periods of rapid and slow growth may alternate. Some trees, such as southern oaks, maintain the same width of ring for hundreds of years. On the whole, as a tree gets larger in diameter the width of the growth rings decreases.

===Knots===

As a tree grows, lower branches often die, and their bases may become overgrown and enclosed by subsequent layers of trunk wood, forming a type of imperfection known as a knot. The dead branch may not be attached to the trunk wood except at its base and can drop out after the tree has been sawn into boards. Knots affect the technical properties of the wood, usually reducing tension strength, but may be exploited for visual effect. In a longitudinally sawn plank, a knot will appear as a roughly circular &quot;solid&quot; (usually darker) piece of wood around which the grain of the rest of the wood &quot;flows&quot; (parts and rejoins). Within a knot, the direction of the wood (grain direction) is up to 90 degrees different from the grain direction of the regular wood.

In the tree a knot is either the base of a side branch or a dormant bud. A knot (when the base of a side branch) is conical in shape (hence the roughly circular cross-section) with the inner tip at the point in stem diameter at which the plant&#x27;s vascular cambium was located when the branch formed as a bud.

In grading lumber and structural timber, knots are classified according to their form, size, soundness, and the firmness with which they are held in place. This firmness is affected by, among other factors, the length of time for which the branch was dead while the attaching stem continued to grow.


Knots do not necessarily influence the stiffness of structural timber; this will depend on the size and location. Stiffness and elastic strength are more dependent upon the sound wood than upon localized defects. The breaking strength is very susceptible to defects. Sound knots do not weaken wood when subject to compression parallel to the grain.

In some decorative applications, wood with knots may be desirable to add visual interest. In applications where wood is painted, such as skirting boards, fascia boards, door frames and furniture, resins present in the timber may continue to &#x27;bleed&#x27; through to the surface of a knot for months or even years after manufacture and show as a yellow or brownish stain. A knot primer paint or solution (knotting), correctly applied during preparation, may do much to reduce this problem but it is difficult to control completely, especially when using mass-produced kiln-dried timber stocks.

===Heartwood and sapwood===


Heartwood (or duramen) is wood that as a result of a naturally occurring chemical transformation has become more resistant to decay. Heartwood formation is a genetically programmed process that occurs spontaneously. Some uncertainty exists as to whether the wood dies during heartwood formation, as it can still chemically react to decay organisms, but only once.

The term &quot;heartwood&quot; derives solely from its position and not from any vital importance to the tree. This is evidenced by the fact that a tree can thrive with its heart completely decayed. Some species begin to form heartwood very early in life, so having only a thin layer of live sapwood, while in others the change comes slowly. Thin sapwood is characteristic of such species as chestnut, black locust, mulberry, osage-orange, and sassafras, while in maple, ash, hickory, hackberry, beech, and pine, thick sapwood is the rule. Some others never form heartwood.

Heartwood is often visually distinct from the living sapwood and can be distinguished in a cross-section where the boundary will tend to follow the growth rings. For example, it is sometimes much darker. Other processes such as decay or insect invasion can also discolor wood, even in woody plants that do not form heartwood, which may lead to confusion.

Sapwood (or alburnum) is the younger, outermost wood; in the growing tree it is living wood, and its principal functions are to conduct water from the roots to the leaves and to store up and give back according to the season the reserves prepared in the leaves. By the time they become competent to conduct water, all xylem tracheids and vessels have lost their cytoplasm and the cells are therefore functionally dead. All wood in a tree is first formed as sapwood. The more leaves a tree bears and the more vigorous its growth, the larger the volume of sapwood required. Hence trees making rapid growth in the open have thicker sapwood for their size than trees of the same species growing in dense forests. Sometimes trees (of species that do form heartwood) grown in the open may become of considerable size, or more in diameter, before any heartwood begins to form, for example, in second growth hickory, or open-grown pines.
No definite relation exists between the annual rings of growth and the amount of sapwood. Within the same species the cross-sectional area of the sapwood is very roughly proportional to the size of the crown of the tree. If the rings are narrow, more of them are required than where they are wide. As the tree gets larger, the sapwood must necessarily become thinner or increase materially in volume. Sapwood is relatively thicker in the upper portion of the trunk of a tree than near the base, because the age and the diameter of the upper sections are less.

When a tree is very young it is covered with limbs almost, if not entirely, to the ground, but as it grows older some or all of them will eventually die and are either broken off or fall off. Subsequent growth of wood may completely conceal the stubs which will remain as knots. No matter how smooth and clear a log is on the outside, it is more or less knotty near the middle. Consequently, the sapwood of an old tree, and particularly of a forest-grown tree, will be freer from knots than the inner heartwood. Since in most uses of wood, knots are defects that weaken the timber and interfere with its ease of working and other properties, it follows that a given piece of sapwood, because of its position in the tree, may well be stronger than a piece of heartwood from the same tree.

Different pieces of wood cut from a large tree may differ decidedly, particularly if the tree is big and mature. In some trees, the wood laid on late in the life of a tree is softer, lighter, weaker, and more even textured than that produced earlier, but in other trees, the reverse applies. This may or may not correspond to heartwood and sapwood. In a large log the sapwood, because of the time in the life of the tree when it was grown, may be inferior in hardness, strength, and toughness to equally sound heartwood from the same log. In a smaller tree, the reverse may be true.

===Color===

In species which show a distinct difference between heartwood and sapwood the natural color of heartwood is usually darker than that of the sapwood, and very frequently the contrast is conspicuous (see section of yew log above). This is produced by deposits in the heartwood of chemical substances, so that a dramatic color variation does not imply a significant difference in the mechanical properties of heartwood and sapwood, although there may be a marked biochemical difference between the two.

Some experiments on very resinous longleaf pine specimens indicate an increase in strength, due to the resin which increases the strength when dry. Such resin-saturated heartwood is called &quot;fat lighter&quot;. Structures built of fat lighter are almost impervious to rot and termites, and very flammable. Tree stumps of old longleaf pines are often dug, split into small pieces and sold as kindling for fires. Stumps thus dug may actually remain a century or more since being cut. Spruce impregnated with crude resin and dried is also greatly increased in strength thereby.

Since the latewood of a growth ring is usually darker in color than the earlywood, this fact may be used in visually judging the density, and therefore the hardness and strength of the material. This is particularly the case with coniferous woods. In ring-porous woods the vessels of the early wood often appear on a finished surface as darker than the denser latewood, though on cross sections of heartwood the reverse is commonly true. Otherwise the color of wood is no indication of strength.

Abnormal discoloration of wood often denotes a diseased condition, indicating unsoundness. The black check in western hemlock is the result of insect attacks. The reddish-brown streaks so common in hickory and certain other woods are mostly the result of injury by birds. The discoloration is merely an indication of an injury, and in all probability does not of itself affect the properties of the wood. Certain rot-producing fungi impart to wood characteristic colors which thus become symptomatic of weakness. Ordinary sap-staining is due to fungal growth, but does not necessarily produce a weakening effect.

===Water content===
Water occurs in living wood in three locations, namely:
* in the cell walls
* in the protoplasmic contents of the cells
* as free water in the cell cavities and spaces, especially of the xylem

In heartwood it occurs only in the first and last forms. Wood that is thoroughly air-dried (in equilibrium with the moisture content of the air) retains 8–16% of the water in the cell walls, and none, or practically none, in the other forms. Even oven-dried wood retains a small percentage of moisture, but for all except chemical purposes, may be considered absolutely dry.

The general effect of the water content upon the wood substance is to render it softer and more pliable. A similar effect occurs in the softening action of water on rawhide, paper, or cloth. Within certain limits, the greater the water content, the greater its softening effect. The moisture in wood can be measured by several different moisture meters.

Drying produces a decided increase in the strength of wood, particularly in small specimens. An extreme example is the case of a completely dry spruce block 5 cm in section, which will sustain a permanent load four times as great as a green (undried) block of the same size will.

The greatest strength increase due to drying is in the ultimate crushing strength, and strength at elastic limit in endwise compression; these are followed by the modulus of rupture, and stress at elastic limit in cross-bending, while the modulus of elasticity is least affected.

===Structure===

Wood is a heterogeneous, hygroscopic, cellular and anisotropic (or more specifically, orthotropic) material. It consists of cells, and the cell walls are composed of micro-fibrils of cellulose (40–50%) and hemicellulose (15–25%) impregnated with lignin (15–30%).

In coniferous or softwood species the wood cells are mostly of one kind, tracheids, and as a result the material is much more uniform in structure than that of most hardwoods. There are no vessels (&quot;pores&quot;) in coniferous wood such as one sees so prominently in oak and ash, for example.

The structure of hardwoods is more complex. The water conducting capability is mostly taken care of by vessels: in some cases (oak, chestnut, ash) these are quite large and distinct, in others (buckeye, poplar, willow) too small to be seen without a hand lens. In discussing such woods it is customary to divide them into two large classes, &quot;ring-porous&quot; and &quot;diffuse-porous&quot;.

In ring-porous species, such as ash, black locust, catalpa, chestnut, elm, hickory, mulberry, and oak, the larger vessels or pores (as cross sections of vessels are called) are localized in the part of the growth ring formed in spring, thus forming a region of more or less open and porous tissue. The rest of the ring, produced in summer, is made up of smaller vessels and a much greater proportion of wood fibers. These fibers are the elements which give strength and toughness to wood, while the vessels are a source of weakness.

In diffuse-porous woods the pores are evenly sized so that the water conducting capability is scattered throughout the growth ring instead of being collected in a band or row. Examples of this kind of wood are alder, basswood, birch, buckeye, maple, willow, and the &quot;Populus&quot; species such as aspen, cottonwood and poplar. Some species, such as walnut and cherry, are on the border between the two classes, forming an intermediate group.

===Earlywood and latewood===

====In softwood====

In temperate softwoods, there often is a marked difference between latewood and earlywood. The latewood will be denser than that formed early in the season. When examined under a microscope, the cells of dense latewood are seen to be very thick-walled and with very small cell cavities, while those formed first in the season have thin walls and large cell cavities. The strength is in the walls, not the cavities. Hence the greater the proportion of latewood, the greater the density and strength. In choosing a piece of pine where strength or stiffness is the important consideration, the principal thing to observe is the comparative amounts of earlywood and latewood. The width of ring is not nearly so important as the proportion and nature of the latewood in the ring.

If a heavy piece of pine is compared with a lightweight piece it will be seen at once that the heavier one contains a larger proportion of latewood than the other, and is therefore showing more clearly demarcated growth rings. In white pines there is not much contrast between the different parts of the ring, and as a result the wood is very uniform in texture and is easy to work. In hard pines, on the other hand, the latewood is very dense and is deep-colored, presenting a very decided contrast to the soft, straw-colored earlywood.

It is not only the proportion of latewood, but also its quality, that counts. In specimens that show a very large proportion of latewood it may be noticeably more porous and weigh considerably less than the latewood in pieces that contain less latewood. One can judge comparative density, and therefore to some extent strength, by visual inspection.

No satisfactory explanation can as yet be given for the exact mechanisms determining the formation of earlywood and latewood. Several factors may be involved. In conifers, at least, rate of growth alone does not determine the proportion of the two portions of the ring, for in some cases the wood of slow growth is very hard and heavy, while in others the opposite is true. The quality of the site where the tree grows undoubtedly affects the character of the wood formed, though it is not possible to formulate a rule governing it. In general, where strength or ease of working is essential, woods of moderate to slow growth should be chosen.

====In ring-porous woods====

In ring-porous woods, each season&#x27;s growth is always well defined, because the large pores formed early in the season abut on the denser tissue of the year before.

In the case of the ring-porous hardwoods, there seems to exist a pretty definite relation between the rate of growth of timber and its properties. This may be briefly summed up in the general statement that the more rapid the growth or the wider the rings of growth, the heavier, harder, stronger, and stiffer the wood. This, it must be remembered, applies only to ring-porous woods such as oak, ash, hickory, and others of the same group, and is, of course, subject to some exceptions and limitations.

In ring-porous woods of good growth, it is usually the latewood in which the thick-walled, strength-giving fibers are most abundant. As the breadth of ring diminishes, this latewood is reduced so that very slow growth produces comparatively light, porous wood composed of thin-walled vessels and wood parenchyma. In good oak, these large vessels of the earlywood occupy from six to ten percent of the volume of the log, while in inferior material they may make up 25% or more. The latewood of good oak is dark colored and firm, and consists mostly of thick-walled fibers which form one-half or more of the wood. In inferior oak, this latewood is much reduced both in quantity and quality. Such variation is very largely the result of rate of growth.

Wide-ringed wood is often called &quot;second-growth&quot;, because the growth of the young timber in open stands after the old trees have been removed is more rapid than in trees in a closed forest, and in the manufacture of articles where strength is an important consideration such &quot;second-growth&quot; hardwood material is preferred. This is particularly the case in the choice of hickory for handles and spokes. Here not only strength, but toughness and resilience are important.

The results of a series of tests on hickory by the U.S. Forest Service show that:
:&quot;The work or shock-resisting ability is greatest in wide-ringed wood that has from 5 to 14 rings per inch (rings 1.8-5 mm thick), is fairly constant from 14 to 38 rings per inch (rings 0.7–1.8 mm thick), and decreases rapidly from 38 to 47 rings per inch (rings 0.5–0.7 mm thick). The strength at maximum load is not so great with the most rapid-growing wood; it is maximum with from 14 to 20 rings per inch (rings 1.3–1.8 mm thick), and again becomes less as the wood becomes more closely ringed. The natural deduction is that wood of first-class mechanical value shows from 5 to 20 rings per inch (rings 1.3–5 mm thick) and that slower growth yields poorer stock. Thus the inspector or buyer of hickory should discriminate against timber that has more than 20 rings per inch (rings less than 1.3 mm thick). Exceptions exist, however, in the case of normal growth upon dry situations, in which the slow-growing material may be strong and tough.&quot;

The effect of rate of growth on the qualities of chestnut wood is summarized by the same authority as follows:

:&quot;When the rings are wide, the transition from spring wood to summer wood is gradual, while in the narrow rings the spring wood passes into summer wood abruptly. The width of the spring wood changes but little with the width of the annual ring, so that the narrowing or broadening of the annual ring is always at the expense of the summer wood. The narrow vessels of the summer wood make it richer in wood substance than the spring wood composed of wide vessels. Therefore, rapid-growing specimens with wide rings have more wood substance than slow-growing trees with narrow rings. Since the more the wood substance the greater the weight, and the greater the weight the stronger the wood, chestnuts with wide rings must have stronger wood than chestnuts with narrow rings. This agrees with the accepted view that sprouts (which always have wide rings) yield better and stronger wood than seedling chestnuts, which grow more slowly in diameter.&quot;

====In diffuse-porous woods====
In the diffuse-porous woods, the demarcation between rings is not always so clear and in some cases is almost (if not entirely) invisible to the unaided eye. Conversely, when there is a clear demarcation there may not be a noticeable difference in structure within the growth ring.

In diffuse-porous woods, as has been stated, the vessels or pores are even-sized, so that the water conducting capability is scattered throughout the ring instead of collected in the earlywood. The effect of rate of growth is, therefore, not the same as in the ring-porous woods, approaching more nearly the conditions in the conifers. In general, it may be stated that such woods of medium growth afford stronger material than when very rapidly or very slowly grown. In many uses of wood, total strength is not the main consideration. If ease of working is prized, wood should be chosen with regard to its uniformity of texture and straightness of grain, which will in most cases occur when there is little contrast between the latewood of one season&#x27;s growth and the earlywood of the next.

===Monocots===

Structural material that resembles ordinary, &quot;dicot&quot; or conifer timber in its gross handling characteristics is produced by a number of monocot plants, and these also are colloquially called wood. Of these, bamboo, botanically a member of the grass family, has considerable economic importance, larger culms being widely used as a building and construction material and in the manufacture of engineered flooring, panels and veneer. Another major plant group that produces material that often is called wood are the palms. Of much less importance are plants such as &quot;Pandanus,&quot; &quot;Dracaena&quot; and &quot;Cordyline.&quot; With all this material, the structure and composition of the processed raw material is quite different from ordinary wood.

===Specific gravity===
The single most revealing property of wood as an indicator of wood quality is specific gravity (Timell 1986), as both pulp yield and lumber strength are determined by it. Specific gravity is the ratio of the mass of a substance to the mass of an equal volume of water; density is the ratio of a mass of a quantity of a substance to the volume of that quantity and is expressed in mass per unit substance, e.g., grams per milliliter (g/cm3 or g/ml). The terms are essentially equivalent as long as the metric system is used. Upon drying, wood shrinks and its density increases. Minimum values are associated with green (water-saturated) wood and are referred to as &quot;basic specific gravity&quot; (Timell 1986).

The U.S. Forest Products Laboratory lists a variety of ways to define specific gravity (G) and density (ρ) for wood:

The FPL has adopted Gb and G12 for specific gravity, in accordance with the ASTM D2555 standard. These are scientifically useful, but don&#x27;t represent any condition that could physically occur. The FPL Wood Handbook also provides formulas for approximately converting any of these measurements to any other.

===Density===

Wood density is determined by multiple growth and physiological factors compounded into &quot;one fairly easily measured wood characteristic&quot; (Elliott 1970).

Age, diameter, height, radial (trunk) growth, geographical location, site and growing conditions, silvicultural treatment, and seed source all to some degree influence wood density. Variation is to be expected. Within an individual tree, the variation in wood density is often as great as or even greater than that between different trees (Timell 1986). Variation of specific gravity within the bole of a tree can occur in either the horizontal or vertical direction.

Because the specific gravity as defined above uses an unrealistic condition, woodworkers tend to use the &quot;average dried weight&quot;, which is a density based on mass at 12% moisture content and volume at the same (ρ12). This condition occurs when the wood is at equilibrium moisture content with air at about 65% relative humidity and temperature at 30 °C (86 °F). This density is expressed in units of kg/m3 or lbs/ft3.

===Tables===
The following tables list the mechanical properties of wood and lumber plant species, including bamboo. See also Mechanical properties of tonewoods for additional properties.

Wood properties:

Bamboo properties:
==Hard versus soft==

It is common to classify wood as either softwood or hardwood. The wood from conifers (e.g. pine) is called softwood, and the wood from dicotyledons (usually broad-leaved trees, e.g. oak) is called hardwood. These names are a bit misleading, as hardwoods are not necessarily hard, and softwoods are not necessarily soft. The well-known balsa (a hardwood) is actually softer than any commercial softwood. Conversely, some softwoods (e.g. yew) are harder than many hardwoods.

There is a strong relationship between the properties of wood and the properties of the particular tree that yielded it, at least for certain species. For example, in loblolly pine, wind exposure and stem position greatly affect the hardness of wood, as well as compression wood content. The density of wood varies with species. The density of a wood correlates with its strength (mechanical properties). For example, mahogany is a medium-dense hardwood that is excellent for fine furniture crafting, whereas balsa is light, making it useful for model building. One of the densest woods is black ironwood.

==Chemistry==

The chemical composition of wood varies from species to species, but is approximately 50% carbon, 42% oxygen, 6% hydrogen, 1% nitrogen, and 1% other elements (mainly calcium, potassium, sodium, magnesium, iron, and manganese) by weight. Wood also contains sulfur, chlorine, silicon, phosphorus, and other elements in small quantity.

Aside from water, wood has three main components. Cellulose, a crystalline polymer derived from glucose, constitutes about 41–43%. Next in abundance is hemicellulose, which is around 20% in deciduous trees but near 30% in conifers. It is mainly five-carbon sugars that are linked in an irregular manner, in contrast to the cellulose. Lignin is the third component at around 27% in coniferous wood vs. 23% in deciduous trees. Lignin confers the hydrophobic properties reflecting the fact that it is based on aromatic rings. These three components are interwoven, and direct covalent linkages exist between the lignin and the hemicellulose. A major focus of the paper industry is the separation of the lignin from the cellulose, from which paper is made.

In chemical terms, the difference between hardwood and softwood is reflected in the composition of the constituent lignin. Hardwood lignin is primarily derived from sinapyl alcohol and coniferyl alcohol. Softwood lignin is mainly derived from coniferyl alcohol.

===Extractives===
Aside from the structural polymers, i.e. cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin (lignocellulose), wood contains a large variety of non-structural constituents, composed of low molecular weight organic compounds, called &quot;extractives&quot;. These compounds are present in the extracellular space and can be extracted from the wood using different neutral solvents, such as acetone. Analogous content is present in the so-called &quot;exudate&quot; produced by trees in response to mechanical damage or after being attacked by insects or fungi. Unlike the structural constituents, the composition of extractives varies over wide ranges and depends on many factors. The amount and composition of extractives differs between tree species, various parts of the same tree, and depends on genetic factors and growth conditions, such as climate and geography. For example, slower growing trees and higher parts of trees have higher content of extractives. Generally, the softwood is richer in extractives than the hardwood. Their concentration increases from the cambium to the pith. Barks and branches also contain extractives. Although extractives represent a small fraction of the wood content, usually less than 10%, they are extraordinarily diverse and thus characterize the chemistry of the wood species. Most extractives are secondary metabolites and some of them serve as precursors to other chemicals. Wood extractives display different activities, some of them are produced in response to wounds, and some of them participate in natural defense against insects and fungi.
These compounds contribute to various physical and chemical properties of the wood, such as wood color, fragnance, durability, acoustic properties, hygroscopicity, adhesion, and drying. Considering these impacts, wood extractives also affect the properties of pulp and paper, and importantly cause many problems in paper industry. Some extractives are surface-active substances and unavoidably affect the surface properties of paper, such as water adsorption, friction and strength. Lipophilic extractives often give rise to sticky deposits during kraft pulping and may leave spots on paper. Extractives also account for paper smell, which is important when making food contact materials.

Most wood extractives are lipophilic and only a little part is water-soluble. The lipophilic portion of extractives, which is collectively referred as wood resin, contains fats and fatty acids, sterols and steryl esters, terpenes, terpenoids, resin acids, and waxes. The heating of resin, i.e. distillation, vaporizes the volatile terpenes and leaves the solid component – rosin. The concentrated liquid of volatile compounds extracted during steam distillation is called essential oil. Distillation of oleoresin obtained from many pines provides rosin and turpentine.

Most extractives can be categorized into three groups: aliphatic compounds, terpenes and phenolic compounds. The latter are more water-soluble and usually are absent in the resin.
*Aliphatic compounds include fatty acids, fatty alcohols and their esters with glycerol, fatty alcohols (waxes) and sterols (steryl esters). Hydrocarbons, such as alkanes, are also present in the wood. Suberin is a polyester, made of suberin acids and glycerol, mainly found in barks. Fats serve as a source of energy for the wood cells. The most common wood sterol is sitosterol, and less commonly sitostanol, citrostadienol, campesterol or cholesterol.
*The main terpenes occurring in the softwood include mono-, sesqui- and diterpenes. Meanwhile, the terpene composition of the hardwood is considerably different, consisting of triterpenoids, polyprenols and other higher terpenes. Examples of mono-, di- and sesquiterpenes are α- and β-pinenes, 3-carene, β-myrcene, limonene, thujaplicins, α- and β-phellandrenes, α-muurolene, δ-cadinene, α- and δ-cadinols, α- and β-cedrenes, juniperol, longifolene, &quot;cis&quot;-abienol, borneol, pinifolic acid, nootkatin, chanootin, phytol, geranyl-linalool, β-epimanool, manoyloxide, pimaral and pimarol. Resin acids are usually tricyclic terpenoids, examples of which are pimaric acid, sandaracopimaric acid, isopimaric acid, abietic acid, levopimaric acid, palustric acid, neoabietic acid and dehydroabietic acid. Bicyclic resin acids are also found, such as lambertianic acid, communic acid, mercusic acid and secodehydroabietic acid. Cycloartenol, betulin and squalene are triterpenoids purified from hardwood. Examples of wood polyterpenes are rubber (&quot;cis&quot;-polypren), gutta percha (&quot;trans&quot;-polypren), gutta-balatá (&quot;trans&quot;-polypren) and betulaprenols (acyclic polyterpenoids). The mono- and sesquiterpenes of the softwood are responsible for the typical smell of pine forest. Many monoterpenoids, such as β-myrcene, are used in the preparation of flavors and fragrances. Tropolones, such as hinokitiol and other thujaplicins, are present in decay-resistant trees and display fungicidal and insecticidal properties. Tropolones strongly bind metal ions and can cause digester corrosion in the process kraft pulping. Owing to their metal-binding and ionophoric properties, especially thujaplicins are used in physiology experiments. Different other &quot;in-vitro&quot; biological activities of thujaplicins have been studied, such as insecticidal, anti-browning, anti-viral, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal, anti-proliferative and anti-oxidant.
*Phenolic compounds are especially found in the hardwood and the bark. The most well-known wood phenolic constituents are stilbenes (e.g. pinosylvin), lignans (e.g. pinoresinol, conidendrin, plicatic acid, hydroxymatairesinol), norlignans (e.g. nyasol, puerosides A and B, hydroxysugiresinol, sequirin-C), tannins (e.g. gallic acid, ellagic acid), flavonoids (e.g. chrysin, taxifolin, catechin, genistein). Most of the phenolic compounds have fungicidal properties and protect the wood from fungal decay. Together with the neolignans the phenolic compounds influence on the color of the wood. Resin acids and phenolic compounds are the main toxic contaminants present in the untreated effluents from pulping. Polyphenolic compounds are one of the most abundant biomolecules produced by plants, such as flavonoids and tannins. Tannins are used in leather industry and have shown to exhibit different biological activities. Flavonoids are very diverse, widely distributed in the plant kingdom and have numerous biological activities and roles.

==Uses==

=== Production ===

Global production of roundwood rose from 3.5 billion m&quot;³&quot; in 2000 to 4 billion m&quot;³&quot; in 2021. In 2021, wood fuel was the main product with a 49 percent share of the total (2 billion m&quot;³&quot;), followed by coniferous industrial roundwood with 30 percent (1.2 billion m&quot;³&quot;) and non-coniferous industrial roundwood with 21 percent (0.9 billion m&quot;³&quot;). Asia and the Americas are the two main producing regions, accounting for 29 and 28 percent of the total roundwood production, respectively; Africa and Europe have similar shares of 20–21 percent, while Oceania produces the remaining 2 percent.

===Fuel===

Wood has a long history of being used as fuel, which continues to this day, mostly in rural areas of the world. Hardwood is preferred over softwood because it creates less smoke and burns longer. Adding a woodstove or fireplace to a home is often felt to add ambiance and warmth.

===Pulpwood===
Pulpwood is wood that is raised specifically for use in making paper.

===Construction===

Wood has been an important construction material since humans began building shelters, houses and boats. Nearly all boats were made out of wood until the late 19th century, and wood remains in common use today in boat construction. Elm in particular was used for this purpose as it resisted decay as long as it was kept wet (it also served for water pipe before the advent of more modern plumbing).

Wood to be used for construction work is commonly known as &quot;lumber&quot; in North America. Elsewhere, &quot;lumber&quot; usually refers to felled trees, and the word for sawn planks ready for use is &quot;timber&quot;. In medieval Europe oak was the wood of choice for all wood construction, including beams, walls, doors, and floors. Today a wider variety of woods is used: solid wood doors are often made from poplar, small-knotted pine, and Douglas fir.
New domestic housing in many parts of the world today is commonly made from timber-framed construction. Engineered wood products are becoming a bigger part of the construction industry. They may be used in both residential and commercial buildings as structural and aesthetic materials.

In buildings made of other materials, wood will still be found as a supporting material, especially in roof construction, in interior doors and their frames, and as exterior cladding.

Wood is also commonly used as shuttering material to form the mold into which concrete is poured during reinforced concrete construction.

====Flooring====

A solid wood floor is a floor laid with planks or battens created from a single piece of timber, usually a hardwood. Since wood is hydroscopic (it acquires and loses moisture from the ambient conditions around it) this potential instability effectively limits the length and width of the boards.

Solid hardwood flooring is usually cheaper than engineered timbers and damaged areas can be sanded down and refinished repeatedly, the number of times being limited only by the thickness of wood above the tongue.

Solid hardwood floors were originally used for structural purposes, being installed perpendicular to the wooden support beams of a building (the joists or bearers) and solid construction timber is still often used for sports floors as well as most traditional wood blocks, mosaics and parquetry.

====Engineered products====
Engineered wood products, glued building products &quot;engineered&quot; for application-specific performance requirements, are often used in construction and industrial applications. Glued engineered wood products are manufactured by bonding together wood strands, veneers, lumber or other forms of wood fiber with glue to form a larger, more efficient composite structural unit.

These products include glued laminated timber (glulam), wood structural panels (including plywood, oriented strand board and composite panels), laminated veneer lumber (LVL) and other structural composite lumber (SCL) products, parallel strand lumber, and I-joists. Approximately 100 million cubic meters of wood was consumed for this purpose in 1991. The trends suggest that particle board and fiber board will overtake plywood.

Wood unsuitable for construction in its native form may be broken down mechanically (into fibers or chips) or chemically (into cellulose) and used as a raw material for other building materials, such as engineered wood, as well as chipboard, hardboard, and medium-density fiberboard (MDF). Such wood derivatives are widely used: wood fibers are an important component of most paper, and cellulose is used as a component of some synthetic materials. Wood derivatives can be used for kinds of flooring, for example laminate flooring.

===Furniture and utensils===
Wood has always been used extensively for furniture, such as chairs and beds. It is also used for tool handles and cutlery, such as chopsticks, toothpicks, and other utensils, like the wooden spoon and pencil.

===Other===
Further developments include new lignin glue applications, recyclable food packaging, rubber tire replacement applications, anti-bacterial medical agents, and high strength fabrics or composites.
As scientists and engineers further learn and develop new techniques to extract various components from wood, or alternatively to modify wood, for example by adding components to wood, new more advanced products will appear on the marketplace. Moisture content electronic monitoring can also enhance next generation wood protection.

===Art===

Wood has long been used as an artistic medium. It has been used to make sculptures and carvings for millennia. Examples include the totem poles carved by North American indigenous people from conifer trunks, often Western Red Cedar (&quot;Thuja plicata&quot;).

Other uses of wood in the arts include:
* Woodcut printmaking and engraving
* Wood can be a surface to paint on, such as in panel painting
* Many musical instruments are made mostly or entirely of wood

===Sports and recreational equipment===
Many types of sports equipment are made of wood, or were constructed of wood in the past. For example, cricket bats are typically made of white willow. The baseball bats which are legal for use in Major League Baseball are frequently made of ash wood or hickory, and in recent years have been constructed from maple even though that wood is somewhat more fragile. National Basketball Association courts have been traditionally made out of parquetry.

Many other types of sports and recreation equipment, such as skis, ice hockey sticks, lacrosse sticks and archery bows, were commonly made of wood in the past, but have since been replaced with more modern materials such as aluminium, titanium or composite materials such as fiberglass and carbon fiber. One noteworthy example of this trend is the family of golf clubs commonly known as the &quot;woods&quot;, the heads of which were traditionally made of persimmon wood in the early days of the game of golf, but are now generally made of metal or (especially in the case of drivers) carbon-fiber composites.

==Bacterial degradation==
Little is known about the bacteria that degrade cellulose. Symbiotic bacteria in &quot;Xylophaga&quot; may play a role in the degradation of sunken wood. &quot;Alphaproteobacteria&quot;, &quot;Flavobacteria&quot;, &quot;Actinomycetota&quot;, &quot;Clostridia&quot;, and &quot;Bacteroidota&quot; have been detected in wood submerged for over a year.
==See also==
* Acetylated wood
* Ancient Chinese wooden architecture
* Ash burner
* Burl
* Carpentry
* Certified wood
* Conservation and restoration of waterlogged wood
* Conservation and restoration of wooden artifacts
* Driftwood
* Dunnage
* Forestry
* Fossil wood
* Furfurylated wood
* Green building and wood
* Helsinki Central Library Oodi
* International Wood Products Journal
* List of tallest wooden buildings
* List of woods
* Log building
* Log cabin
* Log house
* Mineral bonded wood wool board
* Mjøstårnet
* Natural building
* Parquetry
* Pallet crafts
* Pellet fuel
* Petrified wood
* Pine tar
* Plyscraper
* Pulpwood
* Reclaimed lumber
* Sawdust brandy
* Sawdust
* Thermally modified wood
* Timber framing
* Timber pilings
* Timber recycling
* Tinder
* Wood ash
* Wood degradation
* Wood drying
* Wood economy
* Wood lagging
* Wood preservation
* Wood stabilization
* Wood warping
* Wood wool
* Wood-decay fungus
* Wooden box
* Wood-plastic composite
* Woodturning
* Woodworm
* Xylology
* Xylophagy
* Xylotheque
* Xylotomy
* &quot;Yakisugi&quot;
==Sources==
==References==

==External links==

* The Wood in Culture Association (archived 27 May 2016)
* The Wood Explorer: A comprehensive database of commercial wood species ()
* APA – The Engineered Wood Association (archived 14 April 2011)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="0" end="4" title="Wood" label="Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="52" end="57" title="xylem" label="xylem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="71" end="76" title="Plant stem" label="stems"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="90" end="94" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q757163" start="106" end="117" title="woody plant" label="woody plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783121" start="129" end="145" title="organic material" label="organic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="155" end="164" title="composite material" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="168" end="178" title="cellulose" label="cellulosic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="231" end="237" title=":wikt:matrix" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="241" end="247" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="322" end="327" title="xylem" label="xylem"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="607" end="615" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="627" end="633" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q663690" start="784" end="793" title="woodchips" label="woodchips"/>
<link wikidata="Q161" start="798" end="803" title="fiber" label="fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="853" end="857" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608318" start="864" end="885" title="construction material" label="construction material"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="898" end="902" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="908" end="914" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="917" end="926" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="931" end="936" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q193841" start="1048" end="1058" title="cellophane" label="cellophane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1063" end="1080" title="cellulose acetate#production" label="cellulose acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="1116" end="1122" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="1186" end="1200" title="carbon-neutral" label="carbon-neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q105596644" start="1506" end="1518" title="wood science" label="wood science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="1619" end="1636" title="Canadian province" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="1640" end="1653" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="1733" end="1750" title="million years ago" label="million years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="1774" end="1787" title="carbon dating" label="carbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="1811" end="1827" title="dendrochronology" label="dendrochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="1955" end="1959" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="1968" end="1980" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3947" start="2001" end="2006" title="house" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="2009" end="2013" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="2016" end="2022" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="2025" end="2034" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q207822" start="2036" end="2045" title="packaging" label="packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q838948" start="2047" end="2054" title="artwork" label="artwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="2061" end="2066" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="2074" end="2086" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2162" end="2171" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000285" start="2379" end="2384" title="proxy (climate)" label="clues"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="2524" end="2528" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="2549" end="2557" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="2616" end="2620" title="Bark (botany)" label="bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209966" start="2726" end="2742" title="secondary growth" label="secondary growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q369429" start="2785" end="2801" title="vascular cambium" label="vascular cambium"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="2948" end="2957" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q407490" start="2959" end="2972" title="hemicellulose" label="hemicellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="2977" end="2983" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3047" end="3058" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="3130" end="3141" title="growth ring" label="growth ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="3341" end="3350" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="4171" end="4175" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="4988" end="4991" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423948" start="5726" end="5731" title="wood grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923673" start="5979" end="5985" title="branch" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="6256" end="6262" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="6278" end="6284" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q174219" start="7017" end="7024" title="painted" label="painted"/>
<link wikidata="Q380866" start="7279" end="7285" title="primer (paint)" label="primer"/>
<link wikidata="Q129324" start="8282" end="8290" title="chestnut" label="chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q157417" start="8292" end="8304" title="black locust" label="black locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="8306" end="8314" title="mulberry" label="mulberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066106" start="8316" end="8328" title="osage-orange" label="osage-orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q131532" start="8334" end="8343" title="sassafras" label="sassafras"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="8354" end="8359" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="8361" end="8364" title="ash tree" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="8366" end="8373" title="hickory" label="hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q248582" start="8375" end="8384" title="Celtis" label="hackberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="8386" end="8391" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="8972" end="8976" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="8985" end="8991" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="9721" end="9728" title="hickory" label="hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="9744" end="9748" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="11560" end="11568" title="hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q240553" start="11570" end="11578" title="strength of materials" label="strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q148542" start="12233" end="12246" title="longleaf pine" label="longleaf pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="12302" end="12307" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="12478" end="12485" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q811646" start="12508" end="12518" title="Tree stump" label="Tree stump"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="12684" end="12690" title="Spruce" label="Spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q739430" start="13393" end="13400" title="Tsuga" label="hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q281331" start="13688" end="13707" title="wood-decay fungus" label="rot-producing fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q128700" start="13974" end="13983" title="cell wall" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q111180" start="13994" end="14004" title="protoplasm" label="protoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="14023" end="14028" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14198" end="14209" title="Equilibrium moisture content#Equilibrium moisture content of wood" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14505" end="14518" title="Water content#Wood moisture measurement" label="water content"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409381" start="14816" end="14830" title="moisture meter" label="moisture meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625767" start="14834" end="14840" title="Wood drying" label="Drying"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="14978" end="14984" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q899301" start="15214" end="15227" title="yield (engineering)" label="elastic limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192005" start="15354" end="15375" title="elastic modulus" label="modulus of elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933904" start="15423" end="15436" title="heterogeneous" label="heterogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q216678" start="15438" end="15449" title="hygroscopic" label="hygroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="15451" end="15459" title="cell (biology)" label="cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="15464" end="15475" title="anisotropy" label="anisotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q901006" start="15499" end="15510" title="Orthotropic material" label="orthotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="15596" end="15605" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q407490" start="15619" end="15632" title="hemicellulose" label="hemicellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="15659" end="15665" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="15694" end="15702" title="softwood" label="softwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425870" start="15750" end="15758" title="tracheid" label="tracheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="15842" end="15850" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q987768" start="16078" end="16085" title="vessel element" label="vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q158752" start="16169" end="16176" title="Aesculus" label="buckeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="16178" end="16184" title="Populus" label="poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="16186" end="16192" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q158072" start="16424" end="16431" title="catalpa" label="catalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="16443" end="16446" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="16457" end="16465" title="mulberry" label="mulberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="17117" end="17122" title="Alnus" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="17124" end="17132" title="Tilia" label="basswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="17134" end="17139" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="17157" end="17163" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="17179" end="17186" title="Populus" label="Populus"/>
<link wikidata="Q852572" start="17261" end="17267" title="Juglans nigra" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249454" start="17272" end="17278" title="Prunus pumila" label="cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924659" start="18412" end="18423" title="Pinus classification" label="white pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924659" start="18568" end="18578" title="Pinus classification" label="hard pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q845671" start="21586" end="21591" title="spoke" label="spoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="25048" end="25055" title="monocotyledon" label="monocot"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="25119" end="25125" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q477683" start="25336" end="25342" title="Wood veneer" label="veneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="25427" end="25432" title="Arecaceae" label="palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q471914" start="25483" end="25491" title="Pandanus" label="Pandanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q158009" start="25505" end="25513" title="Dracaena (plant)" label="Dracaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543189" start="25530" end="25539" title="Cordyline" label="Cordyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q11027905" start="25772" end="25788" title="Relative density" label="specific gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503740" start="26418" end="26444" title="Forest Products Laboratory" label="Forest Products Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q621977" start="26603" end="26607" title="ASTM International" label="ASTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q720362" start="27117" end="27130" title="silviculture" label="silvicultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q193472" start="27414" end="27418" title="trunk (botany)" label="bole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28042" end="28076" title="Tonewood#Mechanical properties of tonewoods" label="Mechanical properties of tonewoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="28204" end="28212" title="softwood" label="softwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="28216" end="28224" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="28240" end="28248" title="Pinophyta" label="conifers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="28299" end="28311" title="dicotyledons" label="dicotyledons"/>
<link wikidata="Q179729" start="28600" end="28603" title="Taxus baccata" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="29056" end="29064" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="29147" end="29152" title="Ochroma pyramidale" label="balsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979154" start="29184" end="29189" title="Physical model" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q568254" start="29228" end="29242" title="Olea laurifolia" label="black ironwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="29426" end="29433" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="29435" end="29444" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="29446" end="29452" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="29454" end="29463" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="29465" end="29469" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="29475" end="29484" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="29516" end="29522" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="29524" end="29532" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="29534" end="29541" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="29543" end="29553" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="29644" end="29653" title="Cellulose" label="Cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q407490" start="29746" end="29759" title="hemicellulose" label="hemicellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q205654" start="29839" end="29857" title="pentose" label="five-carbon sugars"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="29928" end="29934" title="Lignin" label="Lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210390" start="30101" end="30114" title="aromatic ring" label="aromatic ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="30463" end="30469" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418975" start="30513" end="30528" title="sinapyl alcohol" label="sinapyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q418993" start="30533" end="30550" title="coniferyl alcohol" label="coniferyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="30655" end="30662" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="30670" end="30679" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q407490" start="30681" end="30694" title="hemicellulose" label="hemicellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="30699" end="30705" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q508355" start="30707" end="30721" title="Lignocellulosic biomass" label="lignocellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q145623" start="30802" end="30818" title="molecular weight" label="molecular weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="30819" end="30835" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q14645596" start="30905" end="30924" title="extracellular space" label="extracellular space"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="30984" end="30991" title="solvent" label="solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="31002" end="31009" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="31155" end="31161" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="31166" end="31171" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="31593" end="31601" title="softwood" label="softwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="31636" end="31644" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025089" start="31685" end="31692" title="cambium" label="cambium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192576" start="31700" end="31704" title="pith" label="pith"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="31706" end="31710" title="Bark (botany)" label="Bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923673" start="31716" end="31722" title="branch" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q216678" start="32352" end="32366" title="hygroscopicity" label="hygroscopicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="32464" end="32468" title="Pulp (paper)" label="pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q335415" start="32519" end="32533" title="Papermaking" label="paper industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q898401" start="32687" end="32697" title="Lipophilicity" label="Lipophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q304698" start="32752" end="32765" title="kraft pulping" label="kraft pulping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352600" start="32869" end="32891" title="food contact materials" label="food contact materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q898401" start="32920" end="32930" title="Lipophilicity" label="lipophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="33050" end="33055" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="33066" end="33069" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="33075" end="33085" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q143623" start="33088" end="33094" title="sterol" label="sterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="33115" end="33122" title="terpene" label="terpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q426694" start="33125" end="33134" title="terpenoid" label="terpenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q424263" start="33137" end="33147" title="resin acid" label="resin acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="33154" end="33157" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="33188" end="33200" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q908990" start="33216" end="33224" title="Volatility (chemistry)" label="volatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q138937" start="33267" end="33272" title="rosin" label="rosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164392" start="33337" end="33355" title="steam distillation" label="steam distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="33366" end="33379" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019407" start="33397" end="33406" title="oleoresin" label="oleoresin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="33426" end="33431" title="pines" label="pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q138937" start="33441" end="33446" title="rosin" label="rosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201382" start="33451" end="33461" title="turpentine" label="turpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192596" start="33519" end="33537" title="aliphatic compound" label="aliphatic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="33540" end="33547" title="terpene" label="terpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q407142" start="33553" end="33571" title="Phenols" label="phenolic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q192596" start="33645" end="33663" title="Aliphatic compound" label="Aliphatic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q378871" start="33686" end="33699" title="fatty alcohol" label="fatty alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="33723" end="33731" title="glycerol" label="glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="33785" end="33796" title="Hydrocarbon" label="Hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41581" start="33807" end="33813" title="alkane" label="alkane"/>
<link wikidata="Q421955" start="33846" end="33853" title="Suberin" label="Suberin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="33922" end="33926" title="Bark (botany)" label="bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q121802" start="34013" end="34023" title="sitosterol" label="sitosterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973521" start="34043" end="34053" title="sitostanol" label="sitostanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756479" start="34071" end="34082" title="campesterol" label="campesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="34086" end="34097" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="34109" end="34116" title="terpene" label="terpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q32528" start="34152" end="34157" title="Monoterpene" label="mono-"/>
<link wikidata="Q80218" start="34159" end="34166" title="Sesquiterpene" label="sesqui-"/>
<link wikidata="Q59447" start="34171" end="34180" title="diterpene" label="diterpene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34275" end="34287" title="Triterpene#Triterpenoids" label="triterpenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226864" start="34290" end="34300" title="polyprenol" label="polyprenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q300852" start="34375" end="34377" title="alpha-Pinene" label="α-"/>
<link wikidata="Q300928" start="34382" end="34390" title="beta-Pinene" label="β-pinene"/>
<link wikidata="Q19414" start="34393" end="34401" title="3-carene" label="3-carene"/>
<link wikidata="Q424577" start="34403" end="34412" title="β-myrcene" label="β-myrcene"/>
<link wikidata="Q278809" start="34414" end="34422" title="limonene" label="limonene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798724" start="34424" end="34435" title="thujaplicin" label="thujaplicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q414794" start="34447" end="34459" title="phellandrene" label="phellandrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q414529" start="34475" end="34485" title="δ-cadinene" label="δ-cadinene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734900" start="34487" end="34489" title="alpha-cadinol" label="α-"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254530" start="34494" end="34503" title="delta-cadinol" label="δ-cadinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q109718675" start="34515" end="34522" title="cedrene" label="cedrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673936" start="34536" end="34547" title="longifolene" label="longifolene"/>
<link wikidata="Q412435" start="34574" end="34581" title="borneol" label="borneol"/>
<link wikidata="Q415945" start="34621" end="34627" title="phytol" label="phytol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539074" start="34718" end="34727" title="tricyclic" label="tricyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q426694" start="34728" end="34737" title="terpenoid" label="terpenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q418035" start="34762" end="34774" title="pimaric acid" label="pimaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198762" start="34799" end="34814" title="isopimaric acid" label="isopimaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q321068" start="34816" end="34828" title="abietic acid" label="abietic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535822" start="34830" end="34846" title="levopimaric acid" label="levopimaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q225972" start="34905" end="34913" title="Bicyclic molecule" label="Bicyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q586501" start="35027" end="35039" title="Cycloartenol" label="Cycloartenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q419726" start="35041" end="35048" title="betulin" label="betulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407560" start="35053" end="35061" title="squalene" label="squalene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35066" end="35078" title="Triterpene#Triterpenoids" label="triterpenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="35138" end="35144" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q423261" start="35173" end="35185" title="gutta percha" label="gutta percha"/>
<link wikidata="Q344942" start="35277" end="35284" title="Open-chain compound" label="acyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="35388" end="35392" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q424577" start="35430" end="35439" title="β-myrcene" label="β-myrcene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173974" start="35472" end="35478" title="Flavoring" label="flavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131746" start="35484" end="35494" title="Perfume" label="fragrances"/>
<link wikidata="Q19952843" start="35496" end="35505" title="Tropolone" label="Tropolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705171" start="35516" end="35526" title="hinokitiol" label="hinokitiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798724" start="35537" end="35548" title="thujaplicin" label="thujaplicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q281331" start="35566" end="35571" title="Wood-decay fungus" label="decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q193237" start="35600" end="35610" title="fungicidal" label="fungicidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="35615" end="35627" title="Insecticide" label="insecticidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="35699" end="35708" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q304698" start="35724" end="35737" title="kraft pulping" label="kraft pulping"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="35754" end="35767" title="Chelation" label="metal-binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q415168" start="35772" end="35782" title="Ionophore" label="ionophoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q407142" start="36065" end="36083" title="Phenols" label="Phenolic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q526360" start="36186" end="36195" title="stilbenes" label="stilbenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196412" start="36202" end="36212" title="pinosylvin" label="pinosylvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q424634" start="36215" end="36222" title="lignans" label="lignans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388802" start="36229" end="36240" title="pinoresinol" label="pinoresinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204956" start="36255" end="36268" title="plicatic acid" label="plicatic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15411031" start="36270" end="36289" title="hydroxymatairesinol" label="hydroxymatairesinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q27136365" start="36309" end="36315" title="nyasol" label="nyasol"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="36370" end="36376" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q375837" start="36384" end="36395" title="gallic acid" label="gallic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422044" start="36397" end="36409" title="ellagic acid" label="ellagic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="36412" end="36421" title="flavonoid" label="flavonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q973741" start="36429" end="36436" title="chrysin" label="chrysin"/>
<link wikidata="Q412191" start="36438" end="36447" title="taxifolin" label="taxifolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q415007" start="36449" end="36457" title="catechin" label="catechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q415957" start="36459" end="36468" title="genistein" label="genistein"/>
<link wikidata="Q281331" start="36555" end="36567" title="Wood-decay fungus" label="fungal decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057706" start="36749" end="36757" title="effluent" label="effluent"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="36764" end="36771" title="Pulp (paper)" label="pulping"/>
<link wikidata="Q290439" start="36773" end="36785" title="Polyphenolic" label="Polyphenolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="36866" end="36875" title="flavonoid" label="flavonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="36881" end="36887" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="36910" end="36917" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="36986" end="36995" title="Flavonoid" label="Flavonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="37041" end="37046" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="38406" end="38409" title="Elm" label="Elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="38639" end="38645" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="38817" end="38820" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="38991" end="38997" title="Populus" label="poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="39013" end="39017" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="39023" end="39034" title="Douglas fir" label="Douglas fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317763" start="39140" end="39155" title="Engineered wood" label="Engineered wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="39613" end="39632" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="40450" end="40456" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q838828" start="40462" end="40471" title="parquetry" label="parquetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q643449" start="40907" end="40929" title="glued laminated timber" label="glued laminated timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="40974" end="40981" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225439" start="40983" end="41004" title="oriented strand board" label="oriented strand board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5791381" start="41028" end="41051" title="laminated veneer lumber" label="laminated veneer lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134929" start="41112" end="41134" title="parallel strand lumber" label="parallel strand lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q898776" start="41546" end="41555" title="particle board" label="chipboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251688" start="41557" end="41566" title="hardboard" label="hardboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q642231" start="41572" end="41597" title="medium-density fiberboard" label="medium-density fiberboard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41743" end="41762" title="Organic compound#Synthetic compounds" label="synthetic materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006908" start="41828" end="41845" title="laminate flooring" label="laminate flooring"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="41919" end="41928" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15026" start="41938" end="41944" title="chairs" label="chairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q81980" start="42009" end="42019" title="chopsticks" label="chopsticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41331" start="42021" end="42030" title="toothpick" label="toothpick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762390" start="42062" end="42074" title="wooden spoon" label="wooden spoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14674" start="42079" end="42085" title="pencil" label="pencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="42133" end="42139" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q547989" start="42671" end="42686" title="media (arts)" label="artistic medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="42728" end="42736" title="wood carving" label="carvings"/>
<link wikidata="Q83809" start="42773" end="42783" title="totem pole" label="totem pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="42880" end="42893" title="Thuja plicata" label="Thuja plicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="42945" end="42952" title="Woodcut" label="Woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="42953" end="42964" title="printmaking" label="printmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259197" start="42969" end="42978" title="wood engraving" label="engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q55439" start="43027" end="43041" title="panel painting" label="panel painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="43049" end="43067" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q768186" start="43160" end="43176" title="sports equipment" label="sports equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q577263" start="43249" end="43260" title="cricket bat" label="cricket bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q156918" start="43284" end="43296" title="Salix alba" label="white willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q809910" start="43302" end="43314" title="baseball bat" label="baseball bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="43343" end="43364" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="43388" end="43396" title="Fraxinus" label="ash wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="43400" end="43407" title="hickory" label="hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="43456" end="43461" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="43510" end="43541" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43585" end="43594" title="Parquetry#Use in the NBA" label="parquetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q172226" start="43658" end="43661" title="ski" label="ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121249" start="43664" end="43680" title="ice hockey stick" label="ice hockey stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q644503" start="43683" end="43697" title="lacrosse stick" label="lacrosse stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="43703" end="43715" title="bow (weapon)" label="archery bows"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="43832" end="43840" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="43844" end="43862" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="43872" end="43882" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="43887" end="43899" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054671" start="43955" end="43965" title="Golf club (equipment)" label="golf clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259415" start="43994" end="43999" title="wood (golf)" label="woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q165258" start="44053" end="44062" title="Diospyros" label="persimmon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44173" end="44180" title="Wood (golf)#Drivers" label="drivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878491" start="44293" end="44311" title="Symbiotic bacteria" label="Symbiotic bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805852" start="44321" end="44330" title="Xylophaga" label="Xylophaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q306579" start="44394" end="44413" title="Alphaproteobacteria" label="Alphaproteobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458150" start="44427" end="44440" title="Flavobacteria" label="Flavobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q62573436" start="44454" end="44468" title="Actinomycetota" label="Actinomycetota"/>
<link wikidata="Q132809" start="44482" end="44492" title="Clostridia" label="Clostridia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9810870" start="44510" end="44522" title="Bacteroidota" label="Bacteroidota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672810" start="44598" end="44613" title="Acetylated wood" label="Acetylated wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752814" start="44616" end="44651" title="Ancient Chinese wooden architecture" label="Ancient Chinese wooden architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q722388" start="44654" end="44664" title="Ash burner" label="Ash burner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483529" start="44667" end="44671" title="Burl" label="Burl"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="44674" end="44683" title="Carpentry" label="Carpentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610429" start="44686" end="44700" title="Certified wood" label="Certified wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753871" start="44703" end="44751" title="Conservation and restoration of waterlogged wood" label="Conservation and restoration of waterlogged wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608316" start="44754" end="44802" title="Conservation and restoration of wooden artifacts" label="Conservation and restoration of wooden artifacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541894" start="44805" end="44814" title="Driftwood" label="Driftwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009658" start="44817" end="44824" title="Dunnage" label="Dunnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="44827" end="44835" title="Forestry" label="Forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473530" start="44838" end="44849" title="Fossil wood" label="Fossil wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q123554306" start="44852" end="44869" title="Furfurylated wood" label="Furfurylated wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603458" start="44872" end="44895" title="Green building and wood" label="Green building and wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659999" start="44898" end="44927" title="Helsinki Central Library Oodi" label="Helsinki Central Library Oodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054297" start="44930" end="44965" title="International Wood Products Journal" label="International Wood Products Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q50355566" start="44968" end="45000" title="List of tallest wooden buildings" label="List of tallest wooden buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q385562" start="45003" end="45016" title="List of woods" label="List of woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q884694" start="45019" end="45031" title="Log building" label="Log building"/>
<link wikidata="Q695207" start="45034" end="45043" title="Log cabin" label="Log cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q884742" start="45046" end="45055" title="Log house" label="Log house"/>
<link wikidata="Q20825919" start="45058" end="45088" title="Mineral bonded wood wool board" label="Mineral bonded wood wool board"/>
<link wikidata="Q56409092" start="45091" end="45101" title="Mjøstårnet" label="Mjøstårnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920737" start="45104" end="45120" title="Natural building" label="Natural building"/>
<link wikidata="Q838828" start="45123" end="45132" title="Parquetry" label="Parquetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127834" start="45135" end="45148" title="Pallet crafts" label="Pallet crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q146981" start="45151" end="45162" title="Pellet fuel" label="Pellet fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q837117" start="45165" end="45179" title="Petrified wood" label="Petrified wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q732279" start="45182" end="45190" title="Pine tar" label="Pine tar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455283" start="45193" end="45203" title="Plyscraper" label="Plyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026887" start="45206" end="45214" title="Pulpwood" label="Pulpwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302557" start="45217" end="45233" title="Reclaimed lumber" label="Reclaimed lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551539" start="45236" end="45250" title="Sawdust brandy" label="Sawdust brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q816713" start="45253" end="45260" title="Sawdust" label="Sawdust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419877" start="45263" end="45286" title="Thermally modified wood" label="Thermally modified wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="45289" end="45303" title="Timber framing" label="Timber framing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635874" start="45306" end="45320" title="Timber pilings" label="Timber pilings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804677" start="45323" end="45339" title="Timber recycling" label="Timber recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q143518" start="45342" end="45348" title="Tinder" label="Tinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480332" start="45351" end="45359" title="Wood ash" label="Wood ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q130318113" start="45362" end="45378" title="Wood degradation" label="Wood degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625767" start="45381" end="45392" title="Wood drying" label="Wood drying"/>
<link wikidata="Q995609" start="45395" end="45407" title="Wood economy" label="Wood economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032306" start="45410" end="45422" title="Wood lagging" label="Wood lagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625709" start="45425" end="45442" title="Wood preservation" label="Wood preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q96415492" start="45445" end="45463" title="Wood stabilization" label="Wood stabilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032321" start="45466" end="45478" title="Wood warping" label="Wood warping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625803" start="45481" end="45490" title="Wood wool" label="Wood wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q281331" start="45493" end="45510" title="Wood-decay fungus" label="Wood-decay fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516449" start="45513" end="45523" title="Wooden box" label="Wooden box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273959" start="45526" end="45548" title="Wood-plastic composite" label="Wood-plastic composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q278156" start="45551" end="45562" title="Woodturning" label="Woodturning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770794" start="45565" end="45573" title="Woodworm" label="Woodworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201372" start="45576" end="45584" title="Xylology" label="Xylology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851532" start="45587" end="45596" title="Xylophagy" label="Xylophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130278655" start="45599" end="45609" title="Xylotheque" label="Xylotheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045551" start="45612" end="45620" title="Xylotomy" label="Xylotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567648" start="45629" end="45637" title="Yakisugi" label="Yakisugi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33554" wikidata="Q448349" url="?curid=33554" title="Widget">
<text>Widget may refer to:

* Widget, a male child of a gremlin.
* Widget (beer), a device placed in cans and bottles of beer to aid in the generation of froth
* Widget (economics), a placeholder name for an unnamed, unspecified, or hypothetical manufactured good or product
* Software widget, a generic type of software application comprising portable code intended for one or more different software platforms
**Widget (GUI), an element of interaction in a graphical user interface, such as a button or a scroll bar
** Widget toolkit, a software library containing a collection of GUI widgets that collaborate when used in the construction of applications
** Web widget, an applet intended to be used within web pages
* E-9A Widget, a turboprop airliner
* Widget (Marvel Comics), a comic book character, an alternate version of Shadowcat from the Days of Future Past timeline
* &quot;Widget&quot; (TV series) or &quot;Widget the World Watcher&quot;, a 1990s animated television series
**&quot;Widget&quot; (video game), based on the TV series
* Widget, a character on the &quot;Wow! Wow! Wubbzy!&quot; cartoon
* Widget, a character on the &quot;Cyberchase&quot; cartoon
* Widget drive, a hard drive used only in the Apple Lisa computer system
* &quot;The Widget&quot;, nickname of &quot;New York World Journal Tribune&quot;

==See also==
* &quot;Widget Workshop&quot;, a science-based computer game developed by Maxis
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q448349" start="0" end="6" title="Widget" label="Widget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412790" start="24" end="30" title="Gremlin" label="Widget"/>
<link wikidata="Q360625" start="61" end="74" title="Widget (beer)" label="Widget (beer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467478" start="156" end="174" title="Widget (economics)" label="Widget (economics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068192" start="271" end="286" title="Software widget" label="Software widget"/>
<link wikidata="Q605117" start="408" end="420" title="Widget (GUI)" label="Widget (GUI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193246" start="515" end="529" title="Widget toolkit" label="Widget toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q901543" start="655" end="665" title="Web widget" label="Web widget"/>
<link wikidata="Q131535505" start="716" end="727" title="E-9A Widget" label="E-9A Widget"/>
<link wikidata="Q547306" start="752" end="774" title="Widget (Marvel Comics)" label="Widget (Marvel Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q729036" start="874" end="904" title="Widget (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Widget&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998722" start="983" end="1014" title="Widget (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Widget&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813966" start="1074" end="1091" title="Wow! Wow! Wubbzy!" label="Wow! Wow! Wubbzy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576777" start="1141" end="1151" title="Cyberchase" label="Cyberchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q371482" start="1212" end="1222" title="Apple Lisa" label="Apple Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13436628" start="1283" end="1313" title="New York World Journal Tribune" label="New York World Journal Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998721" start="1342" end="1357" title="Widget Workshop" label="Widget Workshop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33555" wikidata="Q446" url="?curid=33555" title="Wheel">
<text>A wheel is a rotating component (typically circular in shape) that is intended to turn on an axle bearing. The wheel is one of the key components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. Wheels, in conjunction with axles, allow heavy objects to be moved easily facilitating movement or transportation while supporting a load, or performing labor in machines. Wheels are also used for other purposes, such as a ship&#x27;s wheel, steering wheel, potter&#x27;s wheel, and flywheel.

Common examples can be found in transport applications. A wheel reduces friction by facilitating motion by rolling together with the use of axles. In order for wheels to rotate, a moment needs to be applied to the wheel about its axis, either by way of gravity or by the application of another external force or torque.

==Terminology==
The English word &quot;wheel&quot; comes from the Old English word , from Proto-Germanic , from Proto-Indo-European , an extended form of the root . Cognates within Indo-European include Icelandic , Greek , and Sanskrit , the last two both meaning or .

==History==
Mesopotamian civilization was credited with the invention of the wheel by several, mainly old sources. Research in the 2000s suggests that the wheel was invented independently in Eastern Europe, with the oldest potter&#x27;s wheel and oldest wheels for vehicles found in the Cucuteni–Trypillia culture, which predates Mesopotamia finds by several hundred years. In 2024, a team of researchers reported what may be the earliest evidence of wheel-like stones in what is now Israel, being 12,000 years old.

The invention of the solid wooden disk wheel falls into the late Neolithic, and may be seen in conjunction with other technological advances that gave rise to the early Bronze Age. This implies the passage of several wheel-less millennia after the invention of agriculture and of pottery, during the Aceramic Neolithic.

* 4500–3300 BCE (Copper Age): invention of the potter&#x27;s wheel; earliest solid wooden wheels (disks with a hole for the axle); earliest wheeled vehicles
* 3300–2200 BCE (Early Bronze Age)
* 2200–1550 BCE (Middle Bronze Age): invention of the spoked wheel and the chariot; domestication of the horse

The Halaf culture of 6500–5100 BCE is sometimes credited with the earliest depiction of a wheeled vehicle, but there is no evidence of Halafians using either wheeled vehicles or pottery wheels. Potter&#x27;s wheels are thought to have been used in the 4th millennium BCE in the Middle East. The oldest surviving example of a potter&#x27;s wheel was thought to be one found in Ur (modern day Iraq) dating to approximately 3100 BCE. However, a potter&#x27;s wheel found in western Ukraine, of the Cucuteni–Trypillia culture, dates to the middle of the 5th millennium BCE which pre-dates the earliest use of the potter&#x27;s wheel in Mesopotamia. Wheels of uncertain dates have been found in the Indus Valley civilization of the late 4th millennium BCE covering areas of present-day India and Pakistan.

The oldest indirect evidence of wheeled movement was found in the form of miniature clay wheels north of the Black Sea before 4000BCE. From the middle of the 4th millennium BCE onward, the evidence is condensed throughout Europe in the form of toy cars, depictions, or ruts, with the oldest find in Northern Germany dating back to around 3400BCE. In Mesopotamia, depictions of wheeled wagons found on clay tablet pictographs at the Eanna district of Uruk, in the Sumerian civilization are dated to c.3500–3350BCE. In the second half of the 4thmillennium BCE, evidence of wheeled vehicles appeared near-simultaneously in the Northern (Maykop culture) and South Caucasus and Eastern Europe (Cucuteni-Trypillian culture).

Depictions of a wheeled vehicle appeared between 3631 and 3380 BCE in the Bronocice clay pot excavated in a Funnelbeaker culture settlement in southern Poland. In nearby Olszanica, a 2.2m wide door was constructed for wagon entry; this barn was 40m long with three doors, dated to 5000 BCE, and belonged to the neolithic Linear Pottery culture. Surviving evidence of a wheel-axle combination, from Stare Gmajne near Ljubljana in Slovenia (Ljubljana Marshes Wooden Wheel), is dated within two standard deviations to 3340–3030 BCE, the axle to 3360–3045 BCE. Two types of early Neolithic European wheel and axle are known: a circumalpine type of wagon construction (the wheel and axle rotate together, as in Ljubljana Marshes Wheel), and that of the Baden culture in Hungary (axle does not rotate). They both are dated to c.3200–3000 BCE. Some historians believe that there was a diffusion of the wheeled vehicle from the Near East to Europe around the mid-4th millennium BCE.
Early wheels were simple wooden disks with a hole for the axle. Some of the earliest wheels were made from horizontal slices of tree trunks. Because of the uneven structure of wood, a wheel made from a horizontal slice of a tree trunk will tend to be inferior to one made from rounded pieces of longitudinal boards.

The spoked wheel was invented more recently and allowed the construction of lighter and swifter vehicles. The earliest known examples of wooden spoked wheels are in the context of the Sintashta culture, dating to c.2000 BCE (Krivoye Lake). Soon after this, horse cultures of the Caucasus region used horse-drawn spoked-wheel war chariots for the greater part of three centuries. They moved deep into the Greek peninsula where they joined with the existing Mediterranean peoples to give rise, eventually, to classical Greece after the breaking of Minoan dominance and consolidations led by pre-classical Sparta and Athens. Celtic chariots introduced an iron rim around the wheel in the 1stmillennium BCE.

In China, wheel tracks dating to around 2200BCE have been found at Pingliangtai, a site of the Longshan Culture. Similar tracks were also found at Yanshi, a city of the Erlitou culture, dating to around 1700 BCE. The earliest evidence of spoked wheels in China comes from Qinghai, in the form of two wheel hubs from a site dated between 2000 and 1500BCE. Wheeled vehicles were introduced to China from the west.

In Britain, a large wooden wheel, measuring about in diameter, was uncovered at the Must Farm site in East Anglia in 2016. The specimen, dating from 1,100 to 800 BCE, represents the most complete and earliest of its type found in Britain. The wheel&#x27;s hub is also present. A horse&#x27;s spine found nearby suggests the wheel may have been part of a horse-drawn cart. The wheel was found in a settlement built on stilts over wetland, indicating that the settlement had some sort of link to dry land.
Although large-scale use of wheels did not occur in the Americas prior to European contact, numerous small wheeled artifacts, identified as children&#x27;s toys, have been found in Mexican archeological sites, some dating to approximately 1500 BCE. Some argue that the primary obstacle to large-scale development of the wheel in the Americas was the absence of domesticated large animals that could be used to pull wheeled carriages. The closest relative of cattle present in Americas in pre-Columbian times, the American bison, is difficult to domesticate and was never domesticated by Native Americans; several horse species existed until about 12,000 years ago, but ultimately became extinct. The only large animal that was domesticated in the Western hemisphere, the llama, a pack animal, was not physically suited to use as a draft animal to pull wheeled vehicles, and use of the llama did not spread far beyond the Andes by the time of the arrival of Europeans.

On the other hand, Mesoamericans never developed the wheelbarrow, the potter&#x27;s wheel, nor any other practical object with a wheel or wheels. Although present in a number of toys, very similar to those found throughout the world and still made for children today (&quot;pull toys&quot;), the wheel was never put into practical use in Mesoamerica before the 16th century. Possibly the closest the Mayas came to the utilitarian wheel is the spindle whorl, and some scholars believe that these toys were originally made with spindle whorls and spindle sticks as &quot;wheels&quot; and &quot;axes&quot;.

Aboriginal Australians traditionally used circular discs rolled along the ground for target practice.

Nubians from after about 400BCE used wheels for spinning pottery and as water wheels. It is thought that Nubian waterwheels may have been ox-driven. It is also known that Nubians used horse-drawn chariots imported from Egypt.

Starting from the 18th century in West Africa, wheeled vehicles were mostly used for ceremonial purposes in places like Dahomey. The wheel was barely used for transportation, with the exception of Ethiopia and Somalia in Sub-Saharan Africa well into the 19th century. 

The spoked wheel was in continued use without major modification until the 1870s, when wire-spoked wheels and pneumatic tires were invented. Pneumatic tires can greatly reduce rolling resistance and improve comfort. Wire spokes are under tension, not compression, making it possible for the wheel to be both stiff and light. Early radially-spoked wire wheels gave rise to tangentially-spoked wire wheels, which were widely used on cars into the late 20th century. Cast alloy wheels are now more commonly used; forged alloy wheels are used when weight is critical.

The invention of the wheel has also been important for technology in general, important applications including the water wheel, the cogwheel (see also antikythera mechanism), the spinning wheel, and the astrolabe or torquetum. More modern descendants of the wheel include the propeller, the jet engine, the flywheel (gyroscope) and the turbine.

==Mechanics and function==
A wheeled vehicle requires much less work to move than simply dragging the same weight. The low resistance to motion is explained by the fact that the frictional work done is no longer at the surface that the vehicle is traversing, but in the bearings. In the simplest and oldest case the bearing is just a round hole through which the axle passes (a &quot;plain bearing&quot;). Even with a plain bearing, the frictional work is greatly reduced because:
* The normal force at the sliding interface is same as with simple dragging.
* The sliding distance is reduced for a given distance of travel.
* The coefficient of friction at the interface is usually lower.

Example:
* If a 100 kg object is dragged for 10 m along a surface with the coefficient of friction &quot;μ&quot; = 0.5, the normal force is 981 N and the work done (required energy) is (work=force x distance) 981 × 0.5 × 10 = 4905 joules.
* Now give the object 4 wheels. The normal force between the 4 wheels and axles is the same (in total) 981 N. Assume, for wood, &quot;μ&quot; = 0.25, and say the wheel diameter is 1000 mm and axle diameter is 50 mm. So while the object still moves 10 m the sliding frictional surfaces only slide over each other a distance of 0.5 m. The work done is 981 × 0.25 × 0.5 = 123 joules; the work done has reduced to 1/40 of that of dragging.

Additional energy is lost from the wheel-to-road interface. This is termed rolling resistance which is predominantly a deformation loss. It depends on the nature of the ground, of the material of the wheel, its inflation in the case of a tire, the net torque exerted by the eventual engine, and many other factors.

A wheel can also offer advantages in traversing irregular surfaces if the wheel radius is sufficiently large compared to the irregularities.

The wheel alone is not a machine, but when attached to an axle in conjunction with bearing, it forms the wheel and axle, one of the simple machines. A driven wheel is an example of a wheel and axle. Wheels pre-date driven wheels by about 6000 years, themselves an evolution of using round logs as rollers to move a heavy load—a practice going back in pre-history so far that it has not been dated.

==Construction==
=== Rim ===
The rim is the &quot;outer edge of a wheel, holding the tire&quot;. It makes up the outer circular design of the wheel on which the inside edge of the tire is mounted on vehicles such as automobiles. For example, on a bicycle wheel the rim is a large hoop attached to the outer ends of the spokes of the wheel that holds the tire and tube.

In the 1st millennium BCE an iron rim was introduced around the wooden wheels of chariots.

===Hub===
The hub is the center of the wheel, and typically houses a bearing, and is where the spokes meet.

A hubless wheel (also known as a rim-rider or centerless wheel) is a type of wheel with no center . More specifically, the hub is actually almost as big as the wheel itself. The axle is hollow, following the wheel at very close tolerances.

=== Spokes ===

A &quot;spoke&quot; is one of some number of rods radiating from the center of a wheel (the hub where the axle connects), connecting the hub with the round traction surface. The term originally referred to portions of a log which had been split lengthwise into four or six sections. The radial members of a wagon wheel were made by carving a spoke (from a log) into their finished shape. A spokeshave is a tool originally developed for this purpose. Eventually, the term spoke was more commonly applied to the finished product of the wheelwright&#x27;s work, than to the materials used.

====Wire====

The rims of &quot;wire wheels&quot; (or &quot;wire spoked wheels&quot;) are connected to their hubs by wire spokes. Although these wires are generally stiffer than a typical wire rope, they function mechanically the same as tensioned flexible wires, keeping the rim true while supporting applied loads.

Wire wheels are used on most bicycles and still used on many motorcycles. They were invented by aeronautical engineer George Cayley and first used in bicycles by James Starley. A process of assembling wire wheels is described as wheelbuilding.

===Tire===
A tire (American English and Canadian English) or tyre (Commonwealth English) is a ring-shaped covering that fits around a wheel rim to protect it and enable better vehicle performance by providing a flexible cushion that absorbs shock while keeping the wheel in close contact with the ground. The word itself may be derived from the word &quot;tie&quot;, which refers to the outer steel ring part of a wooden cart wheel that ties the wood segments together (see Etymology above).

The fundamental materials of modern tires are synthetic rubber, natural rubber, fabric, and wire, along with other compound chemicals. They consist of a tread and a body. The tread provides traction while the body ensures support. Before rubber was invented, the first versions of tires were simply bands of metal that fitted around wooden wheels to prevent wear and tear. Today, the vast majority of tires are pneumatic inflatable structures, comprising a doughnut-shaped body of cords and wires encased in rubber and generally filled with compressed air to form an inflatable cushion. Pneumatic tires are used on many types of vehicles, such as cars, bicycles, motorcycles, trucks, earthmovers, and aircraft.

===Protruding or covering attachments===
Extreme off-road conditions have resulted in the invention of several types of wheel cover, which may be constructed as removable attachments or as permanent covers. Wheels like this are no longer necessarily round, or have panels that make the ground-contact area flat.

Examples include:
*Snow chains - Specially designed chain assemblies that wrap around the tire to provide increased grip, designed for deep snow.
*Dreadnaught wheel - A type of permanently attached hinged panels for general extreme off-road use. These are not connected directly to the wheels, but to each other.
*Pedrail wheel - A system of rails that holds panels that hold the vehicle. These do not necessarily have to be built as a circle (wheel) and are thus also a form of Continuous track.
*A version of the above examples (name unknown to the writer) was commonly used on heavy artillery during World War I. Specific examples: Cannone da 149/35 A and the Big Bertha. These were panels that were connected to each other by multiple hinges and could be installed over a contemporary wheel.
*Continuous track - A system of linked and hinged chains/panels that cover multiple wheels in a way that allows the vehicles mass to be distributed across the space between wheels that are positioned in front of / behind other wheels.
*&quot;Tire totes&quot; - A bag designed to cover a tire to improve traction in deep snow.
Truck and bus wheels may block (stop rotating) under certain circumstances, such as brake system failure. To help detect this, they sometimes feature &quot;wheel rotation indicators&quot;: colored strips of plastic attached to the rim and protruding out from it, such that they can be seen by the driver in the side-view mirrors. These devices were invented and patented in 1998 by a Canadian truck shop owner.

==Alternatives==
While wheels are very widely used for ground transport, there are alternatives, some of which are suitable for terrain where wheels are ineffective. Alternative methods for ground transport without wheels include:

*Maglev
*Sled, ski or travois
*Hovercraft and ekranoplans
*Walking pedestrian, Litter (vehicle) or a walking machine
*Horse riding
*Caterpillar tracks (operated by wheels)
*Pedrail wheels, using aspects of both wheel and caterpillar track
*Spheres, as used by Dyson vacuum cleaners and hamster balls
*Screw-propelled vehicle
==Symbolism==
The wheel has also become a strong cultural and spiritual metaphor for a cycle or regular repetition (see chakra, reincarnation, Yin and Yang among others). As such and because of the difficult terrain, wheeled vehicles were forbidden in old Tibet. The wheel in ancient China is seen as a symbol of health and strength and used by some villages as a tool to predict future health and success. The diameter of the wheel is indicator of one&#x27;s future health. The Kalachakra or wheel of time is also a subject in some forms of Buddhism, along with the dharmachakra.

The winged wheel is a symbol of progress, seen in many contexts including the coat of arms of Panama, the logo of the Ohio State Highway Patrol and the State Railway of Thailand. The wheel is also the prominent figure on the flag of India. The wheel in this case represents law (dharma). It also appears in the flag of the Romani people, hinting to their nomadic history and their Indian origins.

The introduction of spoked (chariot) wheels in the Middle Bronze Age appears to have carried somewhat of a prestige. The sun cross appears to have a significance in Bronze Age religion, replacing the earlier concept of a solar barge with the more &#x27;modern&#x27; and technologically advanced solar chariot. The wheel was also a solar symbol for the Ancient Egyptians.

In modern usage, the &#x27;invention of the wheel&#x27; can be considered as a symbol of one of the first technologies of early civilization, alongside farming and metalwork, and thus be used as a benchmark to grade the level of societal progress.

Some Neopagans such as Wiccans have adopted the Wheel of the Year into their religious practices.

==See also==
* Types: Alloy wheel, Artillery wheel, Ball transfer unit, Bicycle wheel, Caster, Cogwheel, Dreadnaught wheel, Driving wheel, Flywheel, Hubless wheel, Inline skate wheel, Mansell wheel, Mecanum wheel, Motorcycle wheel, Omni wheel, Pedrail wheel, Pressed Steel wheel, Skateboard wheel, Square wheel, Stairclimber wheel, Steering wheel (Ship&#x27;s wheel), Train wheel, Tweel, Wagon wheel, Wire wheel
* Components: Axle, Bogie/Truck, Differential, Drive shaft, Drivetrain, Rim, Snow chains, Spoke, Tire, Wheelset
* Related technologies and concepts: Archimedes screw, Barrel, Breaking wheel, Color wheel, Compact disc, Ferris wheel, Pottery wheel, Propeller, Reinventing the wheel, Spindle whorl, Trackball, Wagon-wheel effect, Water wheel, Wheelbarrow, Wheelie, Wheel of Fortune, Wheelwright, Windlass, Windmill
* Alternatives: Air cushion, Continuous track, Counter-rotating screws, Leg mechanism, Magnetic levitation, Wing-in-ground-effect
* History: History of the wheel in Africa, &quot;The Horse, The Wheel and Language&quot;, Rotating locomotion in living systems, Terrestrial locomotion in animals: Rolling, Robot locomotion
* Theory: Rolling resistance, Rotational energy, Torque, Wheel and axle (simple machine), Wheel sizing

==References==

==External links==
* University of Kiel. &quot;3400 BC: The oldest evidence for the use of the wheel and wagon originates from Northern Germany&quot;. Online: April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2022.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="2" end="7" title="Wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="93" end="97" title="axle" label="axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190100" start="98" end="105" title="Bearing (mechanical)" label="bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q592289" start="153" end="167" title="wheel and axle" label="wheel and axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186713" start="188" end="207" title="Simple machine" label="six simple machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980202" start="432" end="449" title="ship&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="ship&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q679300" start="451" end="465" title="steering wheel" label="steering wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="467" end="486" title="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183576" start="492" end="500" title="flywheel" label="flywheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="535" end="544" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="575" end="583" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192732" start="610" end="617" title="rolling" label="rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="643" end="647" title="axle" label="axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222844" start="683" end="689" title="Moment (physics)" label="moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="815" end="821" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="863" end="868" title=":wikt:wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="890" end="901" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="914" end="928" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="936" end="955" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="1027" end="1036" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1039" end="1044" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="1051" end="1059" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1106" end="1117" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1285" end="1299" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162419" start="1381" end="1407" title="Cucuteni–Trypillia culture" label="Cucuteni–Trypillia culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1578" end="1584" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1676" end="1685" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1780" end="1790" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="1859" end="1883" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="invention of agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="1891" end="1898" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047444" start="1911" end="1929" title="Aceramic Neolithic" label="Aceramic Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="1949" end="1959" title="Chalcolithic" label="Copper Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="1979" end="1998" title="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2106" end="2122" title="Early Bronze Age" label="Early Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2141" end="2158" title="Middle Bronze Age" label="Middle Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q845671" start="2178" end="2183" title="spoke" label="spoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="2199" end="2206" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q468739" start="2208" end="2234" title="domestication of the horse" label="domestication of the horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142541" start="2240" end="2245" title="Halaf" label="Halaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="2612" end="2614" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="2627" end="2631" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729457" start="2707" end="2722" title="western Ukraine" label="western Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162419" start="2731" end="2757" title="Cucuteni–Trypillia culture" label="Cucuteni–Trypillia culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="2930" end="2955" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3027" end="3035" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3196" end="3214" title="4th millennium BCE" label="4th millennium BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3260" end="3266" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="3388" end="3399" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="3423" end="3428" title="wagon" label="wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570005" start="3439" end="3450" title="clay tablet" label="clay tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="3451" end="3462" title="pictographs" label="pictographs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3470" end="3484" title="Uruk#Eanna District" label="Eanna district"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="3488" end="3492" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="3501" end="3506" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257373" start="3672" end="3686" title="Maykop culture" label="Maykop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="3698" end="3706" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="3711" end="3725" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162419" start="3727" end="3754" title="Cucuteni-Trypillian culture" label="Cucuteni-Trypillian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q592166" start="3832" end="3850" title="Bronocice pot" label="Bronocice clay pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q875115" start="3866" end="3886" title="Funnelbeaker culture" label="Funnelbeaker culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="3910" end="3916" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488693" start="3928" end="3937" title="Zwierzyniec (Kraków)" label="Olszanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="4069" end="4078" title="neolithic" label="neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q806348" start="4079" end="4101" title="Linear Pottery culture" label="Linear Pottery culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660938" start="4197" end="4227" title="Ljubljana Marshes Wooden Wheel" label="Ljubljana Marshes Wooden Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="4250" end="4269" title="standard deviations" label="standard deviations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580" start="4381" end="4393" title="Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps" label="circumalpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q687230" start="4506" end="4519" title="Baden culture" label="Baden culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="4523" end="4530" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="4678" end="4687" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="4909" end="4913" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q845671" start="5054" end="5059" title="spoke" label="spoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q656393" start="5234" end="5251" title="Sintashta culture" label="Sintashta culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107544" start="5275" end="5287" title="Krivoye Lake" label="Krivoye Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="5329" end="5337" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="5379" end="5386" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="5596" end="5602" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="5653" end="5659" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="5664" end="5670" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="5672" end="5676" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="5702" end="5706" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5758" end="5763" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057935" start="5850" end="5866" title="Longshan Culture" label="Longshan Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337479" start="5902" end="5908" title="Yanshi" label="Yanshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051663" start="5924" end="5939" title="Erlitou culture" label="Erlitou culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6010" end="6015" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="6027" end="6034" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q22047654" start="6252" end="6261" title="Must Farm" label="Must Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="6724" end="6762" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="the Americas prior to European contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="7130" end="7136" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="7185" end="7199" title="American bison" label="American bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q42569" start="7443" end="7448" title="llama" label="llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="7593" end="7598" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="7660" end="7671" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q175334" start="7694" end="7705" title="wheelbarrow" label="wheelbarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="7711" end="7730" title="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474386" start="8084" end="8097" title="spindle whorl" label="spindle whorl"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="8246" end="8268" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="8349" end="8354" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="8406" end="8413" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="8421" end="8433" title="water wheels" label="water wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8568" end="8573" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q468814" start="8696" end="8703" title="Dahomey" label="Dahomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="8773" end="8781" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="8786" end="8793" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="8797" end="8815" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746628" start="8933" end="8950" title="wire-spoked wheel" label="wire-spoked wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="8956" end="8970" title="pneumatic tire" label="pneumatic tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269291" start="9315" end="9327" title="alloy wheels" label="alloy wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="9466" end="9476" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="9526" end="9537" title="water wheel" label="water wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="9543" end="9551" title="cogwheel" label="cogwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182324" start="9562" end="9583" title="antikythera mechanism" label="antikythera mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58966" start="9590" end="9604" title="spinning wheel" label="spinning wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="9614" end="9623" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372190" start="9627" end="9636" title="torquetum" label="torquetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="9687" end="9696" title="propeller" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="9702" end="9712" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q183576" start="9718" end="9726" title="flywheel" label="flywheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="9728" end="9737" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q130760" start="9747" end="9754" title="turbine" label="turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="9935" end="9950" title="friction" label="frictional work"/>
<link wikidata="Q190100" start="10027" end="10035" title="bearing (mechanical)" label="bearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18830" start="10141" end="10154" title="plain bearing" label="plain bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="10522" end="10545" title="coefficient of friction" label="coefficient of friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q541008" start="10571" end="10583" title="normal force" label="normal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="10591" end="10592" title="Newton (unit)" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q42213" start="10601" end="10605" title="Mechanical work" label="work"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="10621" end="10627" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="10678" end="10683" title="joule" label="joule"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="10854" end="10862" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q914921" start="11198" end="11216" title="rolling resistance" label="rolling resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="11639" end="11643" title="axle" label="axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q592289" start="11686" end="11700" title="wheel and axle" label="wheel and axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186713" start="11713" end="11727" title="simple machine" label="simple machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="12160" end="12164" title="tire" label="tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="12196" end="12206" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q161798" start="12227" end="12240" title="bicycle wheel" label="bicycle wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54278667" start="12245" end="12248" title="rim (wheel)" label="rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="12379" end="12383" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="12431" end="12438" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q190100" start="12511" end="12518" title="bearing (mechanical)" label="bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028546" start="12553" end="12566" title="hubless wheel" label="hubless wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="12729" end="12733" title="axle" label="axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q950292" start="12779" end="12789" title="Engineering tolerance" label="tolerances"/>
<link wikidata="Q161798" start="12900" end="12903" title="Bicycle hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="12914" end="12918" title="axle" label="axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304176" start="13198" end="13208" title="spokeshave" label="spokeshave"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="13214" end="13218" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q833418" start="13342" end="13353" title="wheelwright" label="wheelwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q54278667" start="13414" end="13418" title="Rim (wheel)" label="rims"/>
<link wikidata="Q845671" start="13518" end="13523" title="spoke" label="spoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q551997" start="13541" end="13545" title="wire" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q552034" start="13584" end="13593" title="wire rope" label="wire rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="13634" end="13643" title="tension (physics)" label="tensioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="13743" end="13750" title="bicycle" label="bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="13775" end="13786" title="motorcycles" label="motorcycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q319362" start="13832" end="13845" title="George Cayley" label="George Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202936" start="13876" end="13889" title="James Starley" label="James Starley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992053" start="13943" end="13956" title="wheelbuilding" label="wheelbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="13978" end="13994" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="13999" end="14015" title="Canadian English" label="Canadian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378587" start="14026" end="14046" title="English in the Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth English"/>
<link wikidata="Q54278667" start="14099" end="14102" title="Rim (wheel)" label="rim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14433" end="14442" title="#Terminology" label="Etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="14498" end="14514" title="synthetic rubber" label="synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="14516" end="14530" title="natural rubber" label="natural rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852039" start="14642" end="14650" title="Traction (engineering)" label="traction"/>
<link wikidata="Q211500" start="14863" end="14872" title="pneumatic" label="pneumatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162595" start="14873" end="14893" title="inflatable structure" label="inflatable structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="15099" end="15102" title="car" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="15105" end="15112" title="bicycle" label="bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="15115" end="15126" title="motorcycles" label="motorcycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="15128" end="15133" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q874311" start="15136" end="15147" title="Heavy equipment (construction)" label="earthmovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="15153" end="15161" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977220" start="15213" end="15221" title="Off-roading" label="off-road"/>
<link wikidata="Q747361" start="15496" end="15507" title="Snow chains" label="Snow chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q15841534" start="15624" end="15641" title="Dreadnaught wheel" label="Dreadnaught wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159369" start="15791" end="15804" title="Pedrail wheel" label="Pedrail wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="15956" end="15972" title="Continuous track" label="Continuous track"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="16063" end="16072" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16080" end="16091" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165258" start="16112" end="16131" title="Cannone da 149/35 A" label="Cannone da 149/35 A"/>
<link wikidata="Q168706" start="16140" end="16150" title="Big Bertha (howitzer)" label="Big Bertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="16274" end="16290" title="Continuous track" label="Continuous track"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271736" start="16910" end="16926" title="side-view mirror" label="side-view mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q160047" start="17244" end="17250" title="Maglev" label="Maglev"/>
<link wikidata="Q181388" start="17252" end="17256" title="Sled" label="Sled"/>
<link wikidata="Q172226" start="17258" end="17261" title="ski" label="ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q949220" start="17265" end="17272" title="travois" label="travois"/>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="17274" end="17284" title="Hovercraft" label="Hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q309398" start="17289" end="17299" title="ekranoplan" label="ekranoplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537379" start="17302" end="17309" title="Walking" label="Walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q221488" start="17310" end="17320" title="pedestrian" label="pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q476850" start="17322" end="17338" title="Litter (vehicle)" label="Litter (vehicle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672498" start="17344" end="17359" title="Walker (machine)" label="walking machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="17361" end="17373" title="Horse riding" label="Horse riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="17375" end="17393" title="Continuous track" label="Caterpillar tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159369" start="17416" end="17423" title="Pedrail" label="Pedrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="17483" end="17489" title="Sphere" label="Sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q621429" start="17503" end="17508" title="Dyson (company)" label="Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503737" start="17529" end="17541" title="hamster ball" label="hamster ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525831" start="17544" end="17567" title="Screw-propelled vehicle" label="Screw-propelled vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180720" start="17688" end="17694" title="chakra" label="chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="17696" end="17709" title="reincarnation" label="reincarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="17711" end="17723" title="Yin and yang" label="Yin and Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q521263" start="17820" end="17829" title="history of Tibet" label="old Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="17852" end="17857" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="17979" end="17987" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q831837" start="18047" end="18057" title="Kalachakra" label="Kalachakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="18110" end="18118" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q665056" start="18135" end="18147" title="dharmachakra" label="dharmachakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20191349" start="18154" end="18166" title="winged wheel" label="winged wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q242985" start="18228" end="18250" title="coat of arms of Panama" label="coat of arms of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080918" start="18268" end="18293" title="Ohio State Highway Patrol" label="Ohio State Highway Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165702" start="18302" end="18327" title="State Railway of Thailand" label="State Railway of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q41673" start="18375" end="18388" title="flag of India" label="flag of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="18429" end="18435" title="dharma" label="dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q524521" start="18461" end="18486" title="flag of the Romani people" label="flag of the Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="18576" end="18583" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756136" start="18669" end="18678" title="sun cross" label="sun cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q16767693" start="18713" end="18732" title="Bronze Age religion (disambiguation)" label="Bronze Age religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q636041" start="18769" end="18780" title="solar barge" label="solar barge"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="18843" end="18856" title="solar chariot" label="solar chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="18900" end="18913" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="19174" end="19183" title="Modern Paganism" label="Neopagans"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="19192" end="19197" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567509" start="19217" end="19234" title="Wheel of the Year" label="Wheel of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269291" start="19290" end="19301" title="Alloy wheel" label="Alloy wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801153" start="19303" end="19318" title="Artillery wheel" label="Artillery wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851283" start="19320" end="19338" title="Ball transfer unit" label="Ball transfer unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q161798" start="19340" end="19353" title="Bicycle wheel" label="Bicycle wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534874" start="19355" end="19361" title="Caster" label="Caster"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="19363" end="19371" title="Gear" label="Cogwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15841534" start="19373" end="19390" title="Dreadnaught wheel" label="Dreadnaught wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q284786" start="19392" end="19405" title="Driving wheel" label="Driving wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183576" start="19407" end="19415" title="Flywheel" label="Flywheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028546" start="19417" end="19430" title="Hubless wheel" label="Hubless wheel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19432" end="19450" title="Inline skates#Wheels" label="Inline skate wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751589" start="19452" end="19465" title="Mansell wheel" label="Mansell wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q490154" start="19467" end="19480" title="Mecanum wheel" label="Mecanum wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20127901" start="19482" end="19498" title="Motorcycle wheel" label="Motorcycle wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649463" start="19500" end="19510" title="Omni wheel" label="Omni wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159369" start="19512" end="19525" title="Pedrail wheel" label="Pedrail wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282926" start="19527" end="19546" title="Disteel" label="Pressed Steel wheel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19548" end="19564" title="Skateboard#Wheels" label="Skateboard wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556708" start="19566" end="19578" title="Square wheel" label="Square wheel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19580" end="19598" title="Stairclimber#Stairclimber wheels" label="Stairclimber wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q679300" start="19600" end="19614" title="Steering wheel" label="Steering wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980202" start="19616" end="19633" title="Ship&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="Ship&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280719" start="19636" end="19647" title="Train wheel" label="Train wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q381706" start="19649" end="19654" title="Tweel" label="Tweel"/>
<link wikidata="Q833418" start="19656" end="19667" title="Wagon wheel (transportation)" label="Wagon wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746628" start="19669" end="19679" title="Wire wheel" label="Wire wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188209" start="19694" end="19698" title="Axle" label="Axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q217421" start="19700" end="19705" title="Bogie" label="Bogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15783" start="19706" end="19711" title="Skateboard truck" label="Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q193137" start="19713" end="19725" title="Differential (mechanical device)" label="Differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304756" start="19727" end="19738" title="Drive shaft" label="Drive shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786258" start="19740" end="19750" title="Drivetrain" label="Drivetrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54278667" start="19752" end="19755" title="Rim (wheel)" label="Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q747361" start="19757" end="19768" title="Snow chains" label="Snow chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q845671" start="19770" end="19775" title="Spoke" label="Spoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="19777" end="19781" title="Tire" label="Tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771137" start="19783" end="19791" title="Wheelset (rail transport)" label="Wheelset"/>
<link wikidata="Q189155" start="19829" end="19845" title="Archimedes screw" label="Archimedes screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289" start="19847" end="19853" title="Barrel" label="Barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q692003" start="19855" end="19869" title="Breaking wheel" label="Breaking wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q373853" start="19871" end="19882" title="Color wheel" label="Color wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="19884" end="19896" title="Compact disc" label="Compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q202570" start="19898" end="19910" title="Ferris wheel" label="Ferris wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="19912" end="19925" title="Pottery wheel" label="Pottery wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="19927" end="19936" title="Propeller" label="Propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738807" start="19938" end="19959" title="Reinventing the wheel" label="Reinventing the wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474386" start="19961" end="19974" title="Spindle whorl" label="Spindle whorl"/>
<link wikidata="Q20140" start="19976" end="19985" title="Trackball" label="Trackball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959642" start="19987" end="20005" title="Wagon-wheel effect" label="Wagon-wheel effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="20007" end="20018" title="Water wheel" label="Water wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q175334" start="20020" end="20031" title="Wheelbarrow" label="Wheelbarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620156" start="20033" end="20040" title="Wheelie" label="Wheelie"/>
<link wikidata="Q20760054" start="20042" end="20058" title="Wheel of Fortune (disambiguation)" label="Wheel of Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q833418" start="20060" end="20071" title="Wheelwright" label="Wheelwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373406" start="20073" end="20081" title="Windlass" label="Windlass"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="20083" end="20091" title="Windmill" label="Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="20108" end="20119" title="Hovercraft" label="Air cushion"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="20121" end="20137" title="Continuous track" label="Continuous track"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525831" start="20139" end="20162" title="Screw-propelled vehicle" label="Counter-rotating screws"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910654" start="20164" end="20177" title="Leg mechanism" label="Leg mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061251" start="20179" end="20198" title="Magnetic levitation" label="Magnetic levitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q309398" start="20200" end="20221" title="Wing-in-ground-effect" label="Wing-in-ground-effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q115822441" start="20233" end="20263" title="History of the wheel in Africa" label="History of the wheel in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844818" start="20271" end="20304" title="The Horse, The Wheel and Language" label="The Horse, The Wheel and Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370296" start="20312" end="20349" title="Rotating locomotion in living systems" label="Rotating locomotion in living systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20351" end="20393" title="Terrestrial locomotion in animals#Rolling" label="Terrestrial locomotion in animals: Rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353391" start="20395" end="20411" title="Robot locomotion" label="Robot locomotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q914921" start="20422" end="20440" title="Rolling resistance" label="Rolling resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140940" start="20442" end="20459" title="Rotational energy" label="Rotational energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="20461" end="20467" title="Torque" label="Torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q592289" start="20469" end="20500" title="Wheel and axle" label="Wheel and axle (simple machine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26961728" start="20502" end="20514" title="Wheel sizing" label="Wheel sizing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33557" wikidata="Q42767" url="?curid=33557" title="Whaling">
<text>Whaling is the hunting of whales for their products such as meat and blubber, which can be turned into a type of oil that was important in the Industrial Revolution. Whaling was practiced as an organized industry as early as 875 AD. By the 16th century, it had become the principal industry in the Basque coastal regions of Spain and France. The whaling industry spread throughout the world and became very profitable in terms of trade and resources. Some regions of the world&#x27;s oceans, along the animals&#x27; migration routes, had a particularly dense whale population and became targets for large concentrations of whaling ships, and the industry continued to grow well into the 20th century. The depletion of some whale species to near extinction led to the banning of whaling in many countries by 1969 and to an international cessation of whaling as an industry in the late 1980s.
Archaeological evidence suggests the earliest known forms of whaling date to at least 3000 BC, practiced by the Inuit and other peoples in the North Atlantic and North Pacific. Coastal communities around the world have long histories of subsistence use of cetaceans, by dolphin drive hunting and by harvesting drift whales. Widespread commercial whaling emerged with organized fleets of whaling ships in the 17th century; competitive national whaling industries in the 18th and 19th centuries; and the introduction of factory ships and explosive harpoons along with the concept of whale harvesting in the first half of the 20th century. By the late 1930s, more than 50,000 whales were killed annually. In 1982, the International Whaling Commission (IWC) decided that there should be a pause on commercial whaling on all whale species from 1986 onwards because of the extreme depletion of most of the whale stocks.

Contemporary whaling for whale meat is subject to intense debate. Iceland, Japan, Norway, First Nations people in Canada, Native Americans in the USA, and the Danish dependencies of the Faroe Islands and Greenland continue to hunt in the 21st century. The IWC ban on commercial whaling has been very successful, with only Iceland, Japan and Norway still engaging in and supporting commercial hunting. They also support having the IWC moratorium lifted on certain whale stocks for hunting. Anti-whaling countries and environmental activists oppose lifting the ban. Under the terms of the IWC moratorium, aboriginal whaling is allowed to continue on a subsistence basis. Over the past few decades, whale watching has become a significant industry in many parts of the world; in some countries it has replaced whaling, but in a few others the two business models exist in an uneasy tension. The live capture of cetaceans for display in aquaria (e.g., captive killer whales) continues.

== History ==

Whaling began in prehistoric times in coastal waters. The earliest depictions of whaling are the Neolithic Bangudae Petroglyphs in Korea, which may date back to 6000 BC. These images are the earliest evidence for whaling. Although prehistoric hunting and gathering is generally considered to have had little ecological impact, early whaling in the Arctic may have altered freshwater ecology.

Early whaling affected the development of widely disparate cultures on different continents. The Basques were the first to catch whales commercially and dominated the trade for five centuries, spreading to the far corners of the North Atlantic and even reaching the South Atlantic. The development of modern whaling techniques was spurred in the 19th century by the increase in demand for whale oil, sometimes known as &quot;train oil&quot;, and in the 20th century by a demand for margarine and later whale meat.

== Modernity ==

The primary species hunted are minke whales,
belugas, narwhals,
and pilot whales, which are some of the smallest species of whales. There are also smaller numbers killed of gray whales, sei whales, fin whales, bowhead whales, Bryde&#x27;s whales, sperm whales and humpback whales.

Recent scientific surveys estimate a population of 103,000 minkes in the northeast Atlantic. With respect to the populations of Antarctic minke whales, as of January 2010, the IWC states that it is &quot;unable to provide reliable estimates at the present time&quot; and that a &quot;major review is underway by the Scientific Committee.&quot;

Whale oil is used little today, and modern whaling is primarily done for food: for pets, fur farms, sled dogs and humans, and for making carvings of tusks, teeth and vertebrae. Both meat and blubber (muktuk) are eaten from narwhals, belugas and bowheads. From commercially hunted minkes, meat is eaten by humans or animals, and blubber is rendered down mostly to cheap industrial products such as animal feed or, in Iceland, as a fuel supplement for whaling ships.

International cooperation on whaling regulation began in 1931 and culminated in the signing of the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling (ICRW) in 1946. Its aim is to:

:provide for the proper conservation of whale stocks and thus make possible the orderly development of the whaling industry.

=== International Whaling Commission ===

The International Whaling Commission (IWC) was set up under the ICRW to decide hunting quotas and other relevant matters based on the findings of its Scientific Committee. Non-member countries are not bound by its regulations and conduct their own management programs. It regulates hunting of 13 species of great whales and has not reached consensus on whether it may regulate smaller species.

The IWC voted on July 23, 1982, to establish a moratorium on commercial whaling of great whales beginning in the 1985–86 season. Since 1992, the IWC&#x27;s Scientific Committee has requested that it be allowed to give quota proposals for some whale stocks, but this has so far been refused by the Plenary Committee.

At the 2010 meeting in Morocco, representatives of the 88 member states discussed whether to lift the 24-year ban on commercial whaling. Japan, Norway and Iceland urged the organisation to lift the ban. A coalition of anti-whaling nations offered a compromise plan that would allow these countries to continue whaling but with smaller catches and under close supervision. Their plan would also completely ban whaling in the Southern Ocean. More than 200 scientists and experts have opposed the compromise proposal for lifting the ban and have also opposed allowing whaling in the Southern Ocean, which was declared a whale sanctuary in 1994. Opponents of the compromise plan want to see an end to all commercial whaling but are willing to allow subsistence-level catches by indigenous peoples.

=== Whaling catches by location ===
These totals include great whales: counts from IWC and WDC
and IWC Summary Catch Database version 6.1, July 2016.

The IWC database is supplemented by Faroese catches of pilot whales,
Greenland&#x27;s and Canada&#x27;s catches of narwhals (data 1954–2014), belugas from multiple sources shown in the Beluga whale article, Indonesia&#x27;s catches of sperm whales, and bycatch in Korea.

Most of the whale species in the table are not considered endangered by the IUCN (&quot;least concern&quot; or &quot;data deficient&quot;). Only the sei whale is classified as &quot;endangered&quot;, and the fin whale is classified as &quot;vulnerable&quot; by the IUCN.

== Ongoing debate ==

Key elements of the debate over whaling include sustainability, ownership, national sovereignty, cetacean intelligence, suffering during hunting, health risks, the value of &#x27;lethal sampling&#x27; to establish catch quotas, the value of controlling whales&#x27; impact on fish stocks and the rapidly approaching extinction of a few whale species.

=== Sustainability ===


The World Wide Fund for Nature says that 90% of all northern right whales killed by human activities are from ship collisions, calling for restrictions on the movement of shipping in certain areas. Noise pollution threatens the existence of cetaceans. Large ships and boats make a tremendous amount of noise that falls into the same frequency range of many whales. Bycatch also kills more animals than hunting. Some scientists believe pollution to be a factor. Moreover, since the IWC moratorium, there have been several instances of illegal whale hunting by IWC nations. In 1994, the IWC reported evidence from genetic testing of whale meat and blubber for sale on the open market in Japan in 1993. In addition to the legally permitted minke whale, the analyses showed that 10–25% of tissues sampled came from non-minke baleen whales. Further research in 1995 and 1996 showed a significant drop of non-minke baleen whales sampled to 2.5%. In a separate paper, Baker stated that &quot;many of these animals certainly represent a bycatch (incidental entrapment in fishing gear)&quot; and stated that DNA monitoring of whale meat is required to adequately track whale products.

It was revealed in 1994 that the Soviet Union had been systematically undercounting its catch. For example, from 1948 to 1973, the Soviet Union caught 48,477 humpback whales rather than the 2,710 it officially reported to the IWC. On the basis of this new information, the IWC stated that it would have to rewrite its catch figures for the last 40 years. According to Ray Gambell, then-Secretary of the IWC, the organization had raised its suspicions with the former Soviet Union, but it did not take further action because it could not interfere with national sovereignty.

=== Health risks ===

Whales are long-lived predators, so their tissues build up concentrations of methylmercury from their prey. Mercury concentrations reach levels that are hazardous to humans who consume too much too often, since mercury also bioaccumulates in humans. High levels have been found in the Caribbean (where people are advised not to exceed one serving every three weeks), in the Faroe Islands, and in Japan.

=== Effects on global carbon cycles ===
Scientists have analyzed the ability of the oceans to sequester atmospheric carbon before industrial whaling and in modern times, hundreds of years after the most active whaling periods. Focusing on the amount of carbon stored in baleen whales, scientists determined that large marine mammals hold over 9 million less tons of carbon in the ocean than during the pre whaling era (9.1 x 10^6 tons).

Whales play an important role in the carbon cycle in life and death. Living whales cycle carbon and nitrogen throughout the water column via whale feces where it can contribute to primary productivity at the surface. In death, their carcasses can become part of a whale fall and sink to the bottom, bringing their carbon with them to help form a temporary ecosystem at the ocean floor. Despite rebounding whale numbers after the international ban on whaling, climate change and rising carbon levels continue to hinder the amount of carbon sequestered by whales.

== By country ==
=== Australia ===
Whaling was a major maritime industry in Australia from 1791 until its final cessation in 1978. At least 45 whaling stations operated in Tasmania during the 19th century, and bay whaling was conducted out of other mainland centres. Modern whaling using harpoon guns and iron hulled catchers was conducted in the 20th century from shore-based stations in Western Australia, South Australia, New South Wales and Queensland, also in Norfolk Island. Overfishing saw the closure of some whaling stations before a government ban on the industry was introduced in 1978 after a major campaign by conservationists.

=== Canada ===
Canadians kill about 600 narwhals per year. They kill 100 belugas per year in the Beaufort Sea,
300 in northern Quebec (Nunavik), and an unknown number in Nunavut. The total annual kill in Beaufort and Quebec areas varies between 300 and 400 belugas per year. Numbers are not available for Nunavut since 2003, when the Arviat area, with about half Nunavut&#x27;s hunters, killed 200–300 belugas, though the authors say hunters resist giving complete numbers.

Harvested meat is sold through shops and supermarkets in northern communities where whale meat is a component of the traditional diet. Hunters in Hudson Bay rarely eat beluga meat. They give a little to dogs and leave the rest for wild animals. Other areas may dry the meat for later consumption by humans. An average of one or two vertebrae and one or two teeth per beluga or narwhal are carved and sold. One estimate of the annual gross value received from Beluga hunts in Hudson Bay in 2013 was for 190 belugas, or per beluga, and for 81 narwhals, or per narwhal. However the net income, after subtracting costs in time and equipment, was a loss of per person for belugas and per person for narwhals. Hunts receive subsidies, but they continue as a tradition rather than for the money, and the economic analysis noted that whale watching may be an alternate revenue source. Of the gross income, was for beluga skin and meat, to replace beef, pork and chickens which would otherwise be bought, was received for carved vertebrae and teeth. was for narwhal skin and meat, was received for tusks, and carved vertebrae and teeth of males, and was received for carved vertebrae and teeth of female narwhals.

The Whale and Dolphin Conservation says: &quot;Canada has pursued a policy of marine mammal management which appears to be more to do with political expediency rather than conservation.&quot;

Canada left the IWC in 1982, and the only IWC-regulated species currently harvested by the Canadian Inuit is the bowhead whale. As of 2004, the limit on bowhead whale hunting allows for the hunt of one whale every two years from the Hudson Bay-Foxe Basin population, and one whale every 13 years from the Baffin Bay-Davis Strait population. 

=== Denmark ===
==== Faroe Islands ====

The traditional whale hunt, known as &quot;grindadráp&quot;, is regulated by Faroese authorities but not by the IWC, which does not claim jurisdiction over small cetaceans. Around 800 long-finned pilot whales (&quot;Globicephala melaena&quot;) are caught each year, mainly during the summer. Other species are not hunted, though occasionally Atlantic white-sided dolphin can be found among the pilot whales. 

==== Greenland ====
The Inuit mastered the art of whaling around the 11 century AD in the Bering Strait. The technique consisted of spearing a whale with a spear connected to an inflated seal bladder. The bladder would float and exhaust the whale when diving, and when it surfaced the Inuit hunters would spear it again, further exhausting the animal until they were able to kill it. Vikings in Greenland also ate whale meat, but archaeologists believe they never hunted them on the sea.

Greenlandic Inuit whalers catch around 175 large whales per year, mostly minke whales, as well as 360 narwhals, 200 belugas, 190 pilot whales and 2,300 porpoises. The government of Greenland sets limits for narwhals and belugas. There are no limits on pilot whales and porpoises.

The IWC treats the west and east coasts of Greenland as two separate population areas and sets separate quotas for each coast. The far more densely populated west coast accounts for over 90% of the catch. The average per year from 2012 to 2016 was around 150 minke and 17 fin whales and humpback whales taken from west coast waters and around 10 minke from east coast waters. In April 2009 Greenland landed its first bowhead whale in nearly 40 years. It landed three bowheads each year in 2009 and 2010, one each in 2011 and 2015.

In 2021 the Sermersooq municipal council banned whaling in Nuup Kangerlua, one of the largest fjords in inhabited areas of Greenland. The council did not want hunting to kill the humpback whales seen by the local tourism industry. Before local humpback hunting resumed in 2010 there had been nine humpbacks in the fjord during summer. When hunting resumed some were killed and others left. Sermersooq has not banned whaling elsewhere in the municipality, which is the world&#x27;s largest municipality, at 200,000 square miles on both coasts. 

=== Germany ===
Originally one of the most successful whaling nations, German whaling vessels started from Hamburg and other smaller cities on the Elbe River, hunting for whales around Greenland and Spitsbergen. While 1770 is recorded to have been the most successful year of German whaling, German whaling went into steep decline with the beginning of the Napoleonic Wars and never really recovered. After the Napoleonic Wars, Germany tried but could never re-establish a successful whaling industry. 

German whaling ships in the mid to late 19th century would generally not be staffed with experienced sailors but rather with members of more wealthy farming communities, going for short trips to Scandinavia during the end of spring and beginning of summer, when their labor was not required on the fields. This kind of whaling was ineffective. Many journeys would not lead to any whales caught, instead seal- and polar bear skins were brought back to shore. Communities often paid more for equipping the vessels in the first place than making money with the goods brought back to shore. Today, local historians believe that German whaling in the late 19th century was more a rite of passage for the sons of wealthy farmers from northern German islands than an action undertaken for true commercial reason. German whaling was abandoned in 1872. 

Prior to the First World War, the newly established German Empire attempted to re-establish large scale German whaling. This was undertaken with ships either going from Germany to Iceland or from the newly established German colonies to African waters. These attempts never were commercially successful and quickly given up. Only in the 1930s could Germany—with mainly Norwegian personnel—re-establish a large and successful whaling industry. More than 15,000 whales were caught between 1930 and 1939. With the beginning of the Second World War, German whaling was abandoned completely. In the early 1950s, Germany maintained one whaling vessel for testing purpose as it considered re-establishing a German whaling fleet, but abandoned these plans in 1956. The last remaining German whalers worked for Dutch vessels in the 1950s and 1960s. 

=== Iceland ===

Iceland is one of a handful of countries which still host a (privately owned) whaling fleet. One company (Hvalur hf.) concentrates on hunting fin whales, largely for export to Japan, while the only other one hunts minke whales for domestic consumption, as the meat is popular with tourists. Iceland has its own whale watching sector, which exists in uneasy tension with the whaling industry.

Iceland did not object to the 1986 IWC moratorium. Between 1986 and 1989 around 60 animals per year were taken under a scientific permit. However, under strong pressure from anti-whaling countries, who viewed scientific whaling as a circumvention of the moratorium, Iceland ceased whaling in 1989. Following the IWC&#x27;s 1991 refusal to accept its Scientific Committee&#x27;s recommendation to allow sustainable commercial whaling, Iceland left the IWC in 1992.

Iceland rejoined the IWC in 2002 with a reservation to the moratorium. Iceland presented a feasibility study to the 2003 IWC meeting for catches in 2003 and 2004. The primary aim of the study was to deepen the understanding of fish–whale interactions. Amid disagreement within the IWC Scientific Committee about the value of the research and its relevance to IWC objectives, no decision on the proposal was reached. However, under the terms of the convention the Icelandic government issued permits for a scientific catch. In 2003 Iceland resumed scientific whaling which continued in 2004 and 2005.

Iceland resumed commercial whaling in 2006. Its annual quota was 30 minke whales (out of an estimated 174,000 animals in the central and north-eastern North Atlantic) and nine fin whales (out of an estimated 30,000 animals in the central and north-eastern North Atlantic). For the 2012 commercial whaling season, starting in April and lasting six months, the quota was set to 216 minke whales, of which 52 were caught. Iceland did not hunt any whales in 2019, and it is reported that demand for whale meat decreased in that year.

=== Indonesia ===

Lamalera, on the south coast of the island of Lembata, and Lamakera on neighbouring Solor, are the two remaining Indonesian whaling communities. The hunters obey religious taboos that ensure that they use every part of the animal. About half of the catch is kept in the village; the rest is bartered in local markets.

In 1973, the United Nations&#x27;s Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) sent a whaling ship and a Norwegian whaler to modernize their hunt. This effort lasted three years and was not successful. According to the FAO report, the Lamalerans &quot;have evolved a method of whaling which suits their natural resources, cultural tenets and style.&quot; Lamalerans say they returned the ship because they immediately caught five sperm whales, too many to butcher and eat without refrigeration. Since these communities only hunt whales for noncommercial purposes, it is categorized as &#x27;aboriginal subsistence hunters&#x27; by the IWC.

The Lamalerans hunt for several species of whales but catching sperm whales are preferable, while other whales, such as baleen whales, are considered taboo to hunt. They caught five sperm whales in 1973; they averaged about 40 per year from the 1960s through the mid 1990s, 13 total from 2002 to 2006, 39 in 2007, an average of 20 per year 2008 through 2014, and caught 3 in 2015.

Traditional Lamaleran whaling used wooden fishing boats built by a group of local craftsmen clan called &quot;ata molã,&quot; and the fishermen will mourn the &quot;death&quot; of their ships for two months. These days, the Lamalerans use a motor engine to power their boats; however, their tradition dictates that once a whale has been caught, fishermen will have to row their boats and the whale back to the shore. The traditional practices made whaling a dangerous hunt. In one case, a boat was pulled approximately 120 km away towards Timor (see Nantucket sleighride), while in another case, the hunted whale capsized the boat and forced the fishermen to swim for 12 hours back to the shore.

=== Japan ===
When the commercial whaling moratorium was introduced by the IWC in 1982, Japan lodged an official objection. However, in response to US threats to cut Japan&#x27;s fishing quota in US territorial waters under the terms of the Packwood-Magnuson Amendment, Japan withdrew its objection in 1987. According to the BBC, the US went back on this promise, effectively destroying the deal. Since Japan could not resume commercial whaling, it began whaling on a purported scientific-research basis. Australia, Greenpeace, the Australian Marine Conservation Society, Sea Shepherd Conservation Society and other groups dispute the Japanese claim of research &quot;as a disguise for commercial whaling, which is banned.&quot; The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society has attempted to disrupt Japanese whaling in the Antarctic since 2003 but eventually ceased this activity in 2017 due to little achievement in creating change. Other NGOs such as the Australian Marine Conservation Society and Humane Society International continued to campaign against Japan&#x27;s scientific whaling program and block votes at IWC to bring back commercial whaling.

The stated purpose of the research program is to establish the size and dynamics of whale populations. The Japanese government wishes to resume whaling in a sustainable manner under the oversight of the IWC, both for whale products (meat, etc.) and to help preserve fishing resources by culling whales. Anti-whaling organizations claim that the research program is a front for commercial whaling, that the sample size is needlessly large and that equivalent information can be obtained by non-lethal means, for example by studying samples of whale tissue (such as skin) or feces. The Japanese government sponsored Institute of Cetacean Research (ICR), which conducts the research, disagrees, stating that the information obtainable from tissue and/or feces samples is insufficient and that the sample size is necessary in order to be representative.

Japan&#x27;s scientific whaling program is controversial in anti-whaling countries. Countries opposed to whaling have passed non-binding resolutions in the IWC urging Japan to stop the program. Japan claims that whale stocks for some species are sufficiently large to sustain commercial hunting and blame filibustering by the anti-whaling side for the continuation of scientific whaling. Deputy whaling commissioner, Joji Morishita, told BBC News:The reason for the moratorium [on commercial whaling] was scientific uncertainty about the number of whales. ... It was a moratorium for the sake of collecting data and that is why we started scientific whaling. We were asked to collect more data.This collusive relationship between the whaling industry and the Japanese government is sometimes criticized by pro-whaling activists who support local, small-scale coastal whaling such as the Taiji dolphin drive hunt.

In September 2018, Japan chaired the 67th IWC meeting in Brazil and attempted to pass a motion to lift the moratorium on commercial whaling. Japan did not receive enough votes and the IWC rejected the motion. Subsequently, on 26 December 2018, Japan announced that it would withdraw its membership from the IWC, because in its opinion, the IWC had failed its duty to promote sustainable hunting as the culture within the IWC moved towards an anti-whaling, pro-conservation agenda. Japanese officials also announced they will resume commercial hunting within its territorial waters and its 200-mile exclusive economic zones starting in July 2019, but it will cease whaling activities in the Antarctic Ocean, the northwest Pacific Ocean, and the Australian Whale Sanctuary.

In 2019, the Australian Marine Conservation Society and International Fund for Animal Welfare commissioned legal opinion, which concluded that Japan&#x27;s commercial whaling program within its territorial waters breaks international convention and law and that Japan makes itself vulnerable to potential international legal action.

=== Norway ===

Norway registered an objection to the International Whaling Commission moratorium and is thus not bound by it. Commercial whaling ceased for a five-year period to allow a small scientific catch for gauging the stock&#x27;s sustainability; whaling subsequently resumed in 1993. Minke whales are the only legally hunted species. Catches have fluctuated between 487 animals in 2000 to 592 in 2007. For the year 2011 the quota is set at 1,286 minke whales. The catch is made solely from the Northeast Atlantic minke whale population, which is estimated at 102,000.

=== Philippines ===

Whaling in the Philippines has been illegal since 1997 since the Fisheries Administrative Order 185 of 1991 was amended. The order initially only made illegal the catching, selling, or transporting of dolphins but the 1997 amendment widened the scope of the ban to include all cetaceans including whales. The calls for ban on whaling and dolphin hunting in the Philippines were raised by both domestic and international groups after local whaling and dolphin hunting traditions of residents of Pamilacan in Bohol were featured in newspapers in the 1990s. As compromise for residents of Pamilacan who were dependent on whaling and dolphin hunting, whale and dolphin watching is being promoted in the island as a source of tourism income. Despite the ban, it is believed that the whaling industry in the Philippines did not cease to exist but went underground.

=== Russia ===

USSR had a significant whaling hunt of orcas and dolphins along with Iceland and Japan. The Soviet Union&#x27;s harvest of over 534,000 whales between the 1930s and the 1980s has been called &quot;one of the most senseless environmental crimes of the 20th century&quot; by Charles Homans of the &quot;Pacific Standard&quot;. In 1970, a study published by Bigg M.A. following photographic recognition of orcas found a significant difference in the suspected ages of whale populations and their actual ages. Following this evidence, the Soviet Union and then Russia continued a scientific whale hunt, though the verisimilitude of the intentions of the hunt over the last 40 years are questioned.

The Soviet Union&#x27;s intensive illegal whaling program from 1948 to 1973 was controlled and managed by the central government. In Soviet society, whaling was perceived to be a glamorous and well-paid job. Whalers were esteemed as well-traveled adventurers, and their return to land was often celebrated elaborately such as with fanfare and parades. In regard to economics, the Soviet Union transformed from a &quot;rural economy into an industrial giant&quot; by disregarding the sustainability of a resource to fill high production targets. The government had controlled all industries, including fisheries, and whaling was not constrained by the need for sustainability through profits. Managers&#x27; and workers&#x27; production was incentivized with salary bonuses of 25%-60% and various other benefits, awards, and privileges. Many industries, whaling included, became a &quot;manic numbers game&quot;.

Currently, the indigenous Chukchi people in Chukotka Autonomous Okrug in the Russian Far East are permitted under IWC regulation to take up to 140 gray whales from the North-East Pacific population each year. About 40 beluga whales are caught in the Sea of Okhotsk each year.
There are no recent data on catches in the Arctic Ocean or Bering Sea, where about 60 belugas per year were caught in the early 1980s.

=== Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ===

Natives of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on the island of Bequia have a quota from the International Whaling Commission of up to four humpback whales per year.
Their quota allows up to four humpback whales per year using only traditional hunting methods of hand-thrown harpoons in small, open sailboats. The limit is rarely met, with no catch some years.
Its classification as aboriginal, and therefore permissible, is highly contested. In the 2012 meeting of the IWC, delegates from several anti-whaling countries, and environmental groups, spoke out against it, calling it &quot;artisanal whaling out of control&quot;.

The meat is sold commercially and 82% of Bequia residents consume it at least occasionally, though it is subject to high levels of methyl mercury.

Residents of the town of Barrouallie hunt and sell meat from short-finned pilot whales and several dolphin species, including killer whales and false killer whales. 92% of people from the town, and high fractions from nearby towns, eat this meat at least occasionally. Sellers call this meat &quot;black fish&quot; without regard to species. Its levels of methyl mercury mean that consumption needs to be less than a serving every three weeks. However the mercury danger is not well known in the country. As of 2020 the government is considering banning the hunt of killer whales.

=== South Korea ===

Commercial whaling was banned in 1986 in South Korea in keeping with the IWC issued global moratorium on whale hunting. In early July 2012, during IWC discussions in Panama, South Korea said it would undertake scientific whaling as allowed despite the global moratorium on whaling. Due to a loud global outcry, South Korea abandoned this plan and has not resumed any form of whaling program.

There is still a loophole in South Korean laws that allows fishermen to keep any bycatch including whales. All whales caught accidentally must be reported and is then inspected for harpoon injuries. The meat from these whales can then be sold, which can be very lucrative for fishermen who can earn up to 200 million won ($150,000 US) per minke whale. This loophole has led to high numbers of whale, dolphin and other cetacean deaths. In 2023, the number was 866 recorded deaths, which is a sizable reduction from a high of 2,014 cases in 2019 and 1,066 in 2022, but is still worryingly high. Fishermen who abuse this loophole have been arrested and prosecuted, but activists have spoken out against this loophole, and demanded more protections for whales and better accounting for those caught and killed.

Due to their concern, and the higher than the global average numbers of bycatch cetacean deaths,15 members of the Korean Parliament put forward a bill in 2023 to ban the consumption of whale meat and to have a more rigorous inspection of all whale carcasses by Coast Guards. Activists also want to have a database created that would help authorities spot more easily those who are using the loophole to illegally hunt whales.

The Bill raises hopes for better protections for whales but it will have to face a culture with deep historical, geographical and cultural ties to whale meat, and opposition from the commercial fishing industry.

=== United Kingdom ===
=== United States ===

In the United States, beluga whaling is widely carried out, catching about 300 belugas per year,
monitored by the Alaska Beluga Whale Committee. The annual catch ranges between 250 and 600 per year.

Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale is carried out by nine different indigenous Alaskan communities, and is managed by the Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission which reports to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The hunt takes around 50 bowhead whales a year from a population of about 10,500 in Alaskan waters. Conservationists fear this hunt is not sustainable, though the IWC Scientific Committee, the same group that provided the above population estimate, projects a population growth of 3.2% per year. Bowhead whales weigh approximately 5–10 times as much as minke whales. The hunt also took an average of one or two gray whales each year until 1996. The quota was reduced to zero in that year due to sustainability concerns. A future review may result in the gray whale hunt being resumed.

The Makah tribe in Washington state also reinstated whaling in 1999, despite protests from animal rights groups. They are currently seeking to resume whaling of the gray whale, a right recognized in the Treaty of Neah Bay, within limits (Article 4 of the Treaty).

== See also ==
* Harpoon
* Flensing, processing of caught whales
* Sperm whaling
* Dolphin drive hunting

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Jakobina Arch, &quot;Bringing Whales Ashore: Oceans and the Environment of Early Modern Japan.&quot; Weyerhaeuser Environmental Books. (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2018)
* D. Graham Burnett, &quot;The Sounding of the Whale&quot; (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2013)
* Mark Cioc, &quot;The Game of Conservation: International Treaties to Protect the World&#x27;s Migratory Species&quot; (Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 2009), Chapter 3 &quot;The Antarctic Whale Massacre&quot;, pp. 104–147
* Kurkpatrick Dorsey, &quot;National Sovereignty, the International Whaling Commission, and the Save the Whales Movement,&quot; in &quot;Nation-States and the Global Environment. New Approaches to International Environmental History&quot;, Erika Marie Bsumek, David Kinkela and Mark Atwood Lawrence, eds., (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 43–61
* Kurkpatrick Dorsey, &quot;Whales and Nations: Environmental Diplomacy on the High Seas&quot; (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2014)
* Charlotte Epstein, &quot;The Power of Words in International Relations: Birth of an Anti-Whaling Discourse&quot; (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005)
* Anna-Katharina Wöbse, &quot;Weltnaturschutz: Umweltdiplomatie in Völkerbund und Vereinten Nationen, 1920–1950&quot; (Frankfurt: Campus, 2011), Chapter 6 Der Reichtum der Meere, pp. 171–245
* Frank Zelko, &quot;Make It a Green Peace!: The Rise of Countercultural Environmentalism&quot; (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), Chapters 7–9, pp. 161–231
* Lyubomir Ivanov and Nusha Ivanova. Whaling period. In: &quot;The World of Antarctica&quot;. Generis Publishing, 2022. pp. 91–94. 

== External links ==

* Digital version of The Grand Panorama of a Whaling Voyage &#x27;Round the World – The history and narratives of Purrington and Russell&#x27;s Grand Panorama.
* Into the Deep: America, Whaling &amp; the World  – An American Experience Documentary
* &quot;Old Whaling Days&quot;, &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot;, November 1930
* &quot;The Cruise of the Cachalot&quot; by Frank T. Bullen is a book published in 1899 which gives a good background to whaling of the times. 
* &quot;On the Water: Fishing for a Living &quot; – Online museum exhibition on maritime history from the Smithsonian&#x27;s National Museum of American History
* Whaling – Australian Marine Conservation Society Whaling
* Whaling depicted in ship logbooks&#x27; art</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="0" end="7" title="Whaling" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="15" end="22" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="26" end="31" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653150" start="60" end="64" title="Whale meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q885539" start="69" end="76" title="blubber" label="blubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053334" start="103" end="116" title="Whale oil" label="a type of oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="143" end="164" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="298" end="304" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="1003" end="1008" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="1128" end="1139" title="hunter-gatherer" label="subsistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="1147" end="1155" title="cetacean" label="cetacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635295" start="1161" end="1182" title="dolphin drive hunting" label="dolphin drive hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610012" start="1201" end="1212" title="drift whale" label="drift whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q973740" start="1278" end="1290" title="whaling ship" label="whaling ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q431858" start="1409" end="1421" title="factory ship" label="factory ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421443" start="1427" end="1444" title="explosive harpoon" label="explosive harpoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="1606" end="1638" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774497" start="2295" end="2307" title="Anti-whaling" label="Anti-whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="2322" end="2344" title="environmental activist" label="environmental activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668398" start="2409" end="2427" title="aboriginal whaling" label="aboriginal whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801210" start="2456" end="2473" title="Subsistence fishing" label="subsistence basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366963" start="2502" end="2516" title="whale watching" label="whale watching"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036946" start="2754" end="2775" title="Captive orcas" label="captive killer whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q483714" start="2911" end="2931" title="Bangudae Petroglyphs" label="Bangudae Petroglyphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3047" end="3068" title="Hunter-gatherer" label="hunting and gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="3152" end="3158" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3294" end="3301" title="History of the Basque people#Basque sailors" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="3426" end="3440" title="North Atlantic" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="3463" end="3477" title="South Atlantic" label="South Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053334" start="3586" end="3595" title="whale oil" label="whale oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287" start="3679" end="3688" title="margarine" label="margarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653150" start="3699" end="3709" title="whale meat" label="whale meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612407" start="3760" end="3771" title="minke whale" label="minke whale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3774" end="3781" title="Beluga whale#Beluga catches by location" label="belugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q159426" start="3783" end="3791" title="narwhals" label="narwhals"/>
<link wikidata="Q459616" start="3797" end="3808" title="pilot whale" label="pilot whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="3902" end="3912" title="gray whale" label="gray whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q185097" start="3915" end="3924" title="sei whale" label="sei whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q179020" start="3927" end="3936" title="fin whale" label="fin whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q174652" start="3939" end="3952" title="bowhead whale" label="bowhead whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q221056" start="3955" end="3973" title="Bryde&amp;#x27;s whale" label="Bryde&amp;#x27;s whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="3976" end="3987" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="3993" end="4007" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q940033" start="4556" end="4562" title="muktuk" label="muktuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667878" start="4921" end="4975" title="International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling" label="International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="5180" end="5212" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5483" end="5495" title="Cetacea#Taxonomy" label="great whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q730469" start="5618" end="5628" title="Moratorium (law)" label="moratorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354" start="6312" end="6326" title="Southern Ocean" label="Southern Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885152" start="6505" end="6520" title="Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary" label="whale sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="6662" end="6680" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6870" end="6877" title="Whaling in the Faroe Islands#Catch statistics" label="Faroese"/>
<link wikidata="Q132072" start="7019" end="7031" title="Beluga whale" label="Beluga whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q185097" start="7255" end="7264" title="sei whale" label="sei whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q179020" start="7314" end="7323" title="fin whale" label="fin whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q592525" start="7497" end="7518" title="cetacean intelligence" label="cetacean intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q459426" start="7520" end="7529" title="Animal welfare" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="7781" end="7807" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031565" start="7829" end="7849" title="northern right whale" label="northern right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q814689" start="8142" end="8149" title="Bycatch" label="Bycatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="8389" end="8404" title="genetic testing" label="genetic testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q168366" start="8598" end="8610" title="baleen whale" label="baleen whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8987" end="8999" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q414075" start="9628" end="9641" title="methylmercury" label="methylmercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="10049" end="10077" title="Carbon sequestration" label="sequester atmospheric carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q167751" start="10430" end="10442" title="carbon cycle" label="carbon cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395805" start="10517" end="10529" title="water column" label="water column"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379114" start="10534" end="10545" title="whale feces" label="whale feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q515905" start="10573" end="10593" title="Primary production" label="primary productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937985" start="10657" end="10667" title="whale fall" label="whale fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="11128" end="11136" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="11345" end="11362" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="11364" end="11379" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="11381" end="11396" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="11401" end="11411" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="11421" end="11435" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q131274" start="11695" end="11707" title="Beaufort Sea" label="Beaufort Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074865" start="11733" end="11740" title="Nunavik" label="Nunavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="11768" end="11775" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11781" end="11798" title="Beluga whale#Beluga catches by location" label="total annual kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q643346" start="11932" end="11938" title="Arviat" label="Arviat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="12219" end="12229" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566447" start="13283" end="13313" title="Whale and Dolphin Conservation" label="Whale and Dolphin Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207744" start="14040" end="14063" title="long-finned pilot whale" label="long-finned pilot whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q216435" start="14198" end="14226" title="Atlantic white-sided dolphin" label="Atlantic white-sided dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="14356" end="14369" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q16488964" start="14650" end="14670" title="Vikings in Greenland" label="Vikings in Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q695387" start="15580" end="15590" title="Sermersooq" label="Sermersooq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274745" start="15627" end="15641" title="Nuup Kangerlua" label="Nuup Kangerlua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="16220" end="16227" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="16260" end="16264" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21162" start="16312" end="16323" title="Spitsbergen" label="Spitsbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="16470" end="16485" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="16812" end="16823" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17476" end="17491" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="17515" end="17528" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499554" start="17681" end="17696" title="List of former German colonies" label="German colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17991" end="18007" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q113480557" start="18428" end="18438" title="Hvalur hf." label="Hvalur hf."/>
<link wikidata="Q2143224" start="18590" end="18611" title="Tourism in Iceland" label="popular with tourists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366963" start="18633" end="18647" title="whale watching" label="whale watching"/>
<link wikidata="Q771493" start="20377" end="20384" title="Lembata" label="Lembata"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223981" start="20390" end="20398" title="Lamakera" label="Lamakera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421494" start="20415" end="20420" title="Solor" label="Solor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="20663" end="20677" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="20685" end="20718" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q83067" start="22208" end="22213" title="Timor" label="Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964383" start="22219" end="22239" title="Nantucket sleighride" label="Nantucket sleighride"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="22454" end="22459" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q888183" start="22607" end="22615" title="Bob Packwood" label="Packwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="22691" end="22694" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="22871" end="22880" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="22882" end="22892" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824412" start="22898" end="22936" title="Australian Marine Conservation Society" label="Australian Marine Conservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q731200" start="22938" end="22971" title="Sea Shepherd Conservation Society" label="Sea Shepherd Conservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q731200" start="23099" end="23132" title="Sea Shepherd Conservation Society" label="Sea Shepherd Conservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q21108884" start="23359" end="23387" title="Humane Society International" label="Humane Society International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665150" start="24130" end="24160" title="Institute of Cetacean Research" label="Institute of Cetacean Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774497" start="24427" end="24439" title="anti-whaling" label="anti-whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="24805" end="24813" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343060" start="25254" end="25278" title="Taiji dolphin drive hunt" label="Taiji dolphin drive hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q126052248" start="25656" end="25675" title="sustainable hunting" label="sustainable hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="25879" end="25902" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824798" start="26025" end="26051" title="Australian Whale Sanctuary" label="Australian Whale Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666594" start="26110" end="26147" title="International Fund for Animal Welfare" label="International Fund for Animal Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="26404" end="26410" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612407" start="26843" end="26854" title="minke whale" label="minke whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="27264" end="27271" title="cetacea" label="cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q120736417" start="27481" end="27490" title="Pamilacan" label="Pamilacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="27955" end="27967" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122703" start="28164" end="28180" title="Pacific Standard" label="Pacific Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q106991" start="29497" end="29511" title="Chukchi people" label="Chukchi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984" start="29515" end="29540" title="Chukotka Autonomous Okrug" label="Chukotka Autonomous Okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="29548" end="29564" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="29618" end="29628" title="gray whale" label="gray whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q132072" start="29689" end="29701" title="beluga whale" label="beluga whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q757" start="29936" end="29968" title="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines" label="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q257857" start="29986" end="29992" title="Bequia" label="Bequia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="30062" end="30076" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885705" start="30723" end="30734" title="Barrouallie" label="Barrouallie"/>
<link wikidata="Q414075" start="31054" end="31068" title="methyl mercury" label="methyl mercury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33337" end="33349" title="Beluga whale#Beluga catches by location" label="annual catch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344666" start="33388" end="33428" title="Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale" label="Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="33570" end="33617" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q174652" start="33644" end="33657" title="bowhead whale" label="bowhead whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612407" start="33972" end="33983" title="minke whale" label="minke whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886240" start="34209" end="34214" title="Makah people" label="Makah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="34224" end="34240" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington state"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="34370" end="34380" title="gray whale" label="gray whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886240" start="34408" end="34426" title="Treaty of Neah Bay" label="Treaty of Neah Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q207574" start="34487" end="34494" title="Harpoon" label="Harpoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458667" start="34497" end="34505" title="Flensing" label="Flensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961370" start="34537" end="34550" title="Sperm whaling" label="Sperm whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635295" start="34553" end="34574" title="Dolphin drive hunting" label="Dolphin drive hunting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34617" end="34630" title="Jakobina Arch" label="Jakobina Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q97585738" start="34638" end="34660" title="Bringing Whales Ashore" label="Bringing Whales Ashore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201486" start="34802" end="34819" title="D. Graham Burnett" label="D. Graham Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35139" end="35157" title="Kurkpatrick Dorsey" label="Kurkpatrick Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35496" end="35514" title="Kurkpatrick Dorsey" label="Kurkpatrick Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="36510" end="36529" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33559" wikidata="Q3562761" url="?curid=33559" title="Wipe (transition)">
<text>In filmmaking, a wipe is a type of film transition where one shot replaces another by travelling from one side of the frame to another or with a special shape. If the wipe proceeds from two opposite edges of the screen toward the center or vice versa, it is known as a barn door wipe (named for its similarity to a pair of doors opening or closing).

The following are some specific styles of wipes:

* An [[Iris shot|iris slow]] is a wipe that takes the shape of a growing or shrinking circle. It has been frequently used in animated short films, such as those in the &quot;Looney Tunes&quot; and &quot;Merrie Melodies&quot; cartoon series, to signify the end of a story. When used in this manner, the iris wipe may be centered on a certain focal point and may be used as a device for a &quot;parting shot&quot; joke, a fourth wall-breaching wink by a character, or other purposes. Optional graphic (i.e. rips) occasionally overlay it to achieve a certain effect like an iris tearing transition.
* A star wipe is a wipe that takes the shape of a growing or shrinking star and is used to impart a sense of &quot;extra specialness&quot; or &quot;added value&quot;. An example of the &quot;star wipe&quot; can be seen in the &quot;Guiding Light&quot; opening sequences of the 1980s. This convention was considered overused during that time period and is now generally thought to be somewhat out-of-date. The use was parodied in &quot;Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters&quot; and &quot;The Simpsons&quot;.
* A heart wipe is a wipe that takes the shape of a growing or shrinking heart, and is used to impart a sense of &quot;love&quot; or &quot;friendship&quot;. The heart wipe is still used in wedding, graduation, and bar mitzvah videos, among others, as it has now passed from stylistic into the realm of standard convention, though many people consider it tacky.
* A matrix wipe is a patterned transition between two images. The matrix wipe can be various patterns such as a grid, stars, etc.
* A clock wipe is a wipe that sweeps a radius around the center point of the frame to reveal the subsequent shot, like the sweeping hands of an analog clock. Because of this similarity, it is often used to indicate that time has passed between the previous shot and the next shot. One of the TV shows that used the effect is &quot;Regular Show&quot;. &quot;The Red Green Show&quot; also makes frequent use of this wipe style, featuring an animated roll of duct tape, and accompanied by the loud &quot;yanking tape off a roll&quot; sound effect.
* The most common uses of the wipe effect is the invisible wipe where a camera follows a person into another room by tracking parallel to the actor. As the wall passes in front of the camera, the editor has the option of using a wipe to be able to choose any other matching take of the same scene. It is also commonly used in quick camera pans in action sequences, to make a cut invisible. Such wipes can be impossible to see in the finished film. A good example of this wipe can be seen in the movie &quot;Das Boot&quot; when director Wolfgang Petersen uses it to pan between two occupied U-boat pens, even though they had only one U-boat for filming.
* Some extremely effective (and expensive) wipes were used in the otherwise very low-budget Laurel and Hardy short film &quot;Thicker than Water&quot;. For each of the scene changes in this film, either Laurel or Hardy or both of them would seize a curtain or some other object at the edge of the frame and move it across the screen. The opening frames of the next scene were optically printed onto this object, so that—when the object entirely filled the screen—the movie had &quot;wiped&quot; the last shot of the previous scene and begun the first shot of the next.

The earliest known example of a wipe was George Albert Smith&#x27;s film &quot;Mary Jane&#x27;s Mishap&quot; of 1903.

George Lucas made sweeping use of wipes in his &quot;Star Wars&quot; films, inspired by a similar use of wipes by Akira Kurosawa.

Since at least the 1980s, the American game show &quot;The Price is Right&quot; has made extensive use of wipes, usually from contestants to prizes. In the early-to-mid 1980s, an iris slow was used twice during the opening sequence, transitioning from the shot of the host entrance to the camera panning down from the studio lights, and then from that camera shot to one of the host. Around 1987, this was changed to a star wipe, which the show would end up using for years until 2010.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="3" end="13" title="filmmaking" label="filmmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562761" start="17" end="21" title="Wipe (transition)" label="wipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129855" start="35" end="50" title="film transition" label="film transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q260899" start="61" end="65" title="Shot (filmmaking)" label="shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q795160" start="118" end="123" title="Film frame" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562761" start="269" end="283" title="Wipe (transition)" label="barn door wipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562761" start="406" end="429" title="Wipe (transition)" label="[[Iris shot|iris slow]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="526" end="545" title="animated short film" label="animated short film"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="575" end="587" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750628" start="604" end="619" title="Merrie Melodies" label="Merrie Melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q741726" start="821" end="832" title="fourth wall" label="fourth wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562761" start="1001" end="1010" title="Wipe (transition)" label="star wipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="1229" end="1242" title="Guiding Light" label="Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234068" start="1432" end="1484" title="Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters" label="Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="1501" end="1513" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562761" start="1525" end="1535" title="Wipe (transition)" label="heart wipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q75673" start="1734" end="1745" title="bar mitzvah" label="bar mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562761" start="1885" end="1896" title="Wipe (transition)" label="matrix wipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562761" start="2015" end="2025" title="Wipe (transition)" label="clock wipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="2162" end="2167" title="clock" label="clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q82617" start="2342" end="2354" title="Regular Show" label="Regular Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522460" start="2368" end="2386" title="The Red Green Show" label="The Red Green Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562761" start="2605" end="2619" title="Wipe (transition)" label="invisible wipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q62730" start="3063" end="3071" title="Das Boot" label="Das Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q65321" start="3092" end="3109" title="Wolfgang Petersen" label="Wolfgang Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="3146" end="3152" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q33497" start="3301" end="3317" title="Laurel and Hardy" label="Laurel and Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740107" start="3335" end="3353" title="Thicker than Water (1935 film)" label="Thicker than Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q768790" start="3820" end="3846" title="George Albert Smith (inventor)" label="George Albert Smith&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850478" start="3858" end="3881" title="Mary Jane&amp;#x27;s Mishap" label="Mary Jane&amp;#x27;s Mishap"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="3898" end="3910" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="3951" end="3960" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006" start="4012" end="4026" title="Akira Kurosawa" label="Akira Kurosawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231565" start="4084" end="4102" title="The Price is Right (U.S. game show)" label="The Price is Right"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33560" wikidata="Q121515150" url="?curid=33560" title="The Wizard of Speed and Time">
<text>The Wizard of Speed and Time is a 1988 American feature film written by, directed by, and starring animator Mike Jittlov, as well as a 1979 16 mm short film, also by Jittlov.

==1979 short film==
In the original short film, a young man in a green wizard costume runs throughout America at super speed, much like the superhero The Flash. Along the way, he gives a hitchhiking woman (Toni Handcock) a swift lift to another city and gives golden stars to other women who want a trip themselves. He then slips on a banana peel and comically crashes into a film stage, which he then brings to life in magical ways.
Jittlov is a special effects technician, and he produced all of the special effects in the film himself, many through stop motion animation.

This short film originally was shown as a segment of an episode of &quot;The Wonderful World of Disney&quot;. The episode was called &quot;Major Effects&quot; and was aired to coincide with the release of Disney&#x27;s &quot;The Black Hole&quot; in 1979.

The film segment then began to be shown at science fiction conventions around the country, gaining popularity, prompting Jittlov to eventually create a (semi-)fictionalized account, in the form of a feature film, of how this short film came to be.

==1988 feature film==
Years later, Jittlov was able to remake the short, as well as incorporate portions of some of his other short films (such as &quot;Time Tripper&quot; and &quot;Animato&quot;), into a feature-length 35 mm film. The feature version recounts the exploits of a special effects &quot;wizard&quot; (played by Jittlov) trying to fulfill his dream of making a full-length movie. The tricks of movie magic are exposed; but so are the tribulations of the independent moviemaker working around the heavily unionized Hollywood film industry.

Straeker: There are your film cans, but you can&#x27;t move them.
Jittlov: Why? Are they stuck to the floor?
Straeker: No, to the system!

Many scenes in the movie turned out to be only too prophetic, according to Jittlov. In the film, a director, Lucky Straeker (Steve Brodie), and a producer, Harvey Bookman (Richard Kaye), bet over whether Jittlov can actually complete a major effects assignment, and Bookman does everything in his power to thwart Jittlov.

Richard Kaye produced the film and starred as one of the main characters, Harvey Bookman, also a producer. Richard Kaye&#x27;s daughter Lauri Kaye, at the age of 16, was the production secretary of &quot;The Wizard of Speed and Time&quot; and performed in the film as a voice-over artist and a hand model.

The feature film is also filled with subliminal messages, many hidden in single frames during the &quot;Wizard Run&quot; sequence (which was remade and expanded from the original short film), or hidden in electrical sparks generated by various happenings in the film.

The feature film was filmed in 1983 to 1986, released to theaters in 1989 (though it was never widely distributed), and was later released on VHS and laserdisc. Although there is no official DVD release yet, Jittlov&#x27;s fans have (with Jittlov&#x27;s knowledge and at least tacit approval) created a DVD image file, and made it available for free on peer-to-peer networks until such time as an official release is realized.

*Cameos in the film include science fiction and film industry personalities (Forrest J. Ackerman, Angelique Pettyjohn, Ward Kimball, Will Ryan, and a pre-&quot;Miami Vice&quot; Philip Michael Thomas) as well as composer John Massari. The only &quot;lookalike&quot; used in the film was a Woody Allen impersonator who appears in two scenes when Mike is being chased by the Keystone Cops through the studio lot.
*The two &quot;real&quot; police characters played by Philip Michael Thomas and Lynda Aldon are named Mickey (Polanko) and Minnie (Smith), respectively, in the film and the police dog&#x27;s name is Pluto.
*When asked by television producers if he had ever played a police officer, Philip Michael Thomas replied &quot;Yes, I was a cop in a feature film.&quot; This led to his being cast in &quot;Miami Vice&quot;.
*Two characters are given names related to cigarettes: Lucky Straeker, Bookman&#x27;s director and Dora Belair, an assistant to a competing show&#x27;s producer. According to Mike Jittlov, &quot;Everyone in Hollywood gets burned.&quot;
*Jittlov&#x27;s mother and brother appear as themselves.
*A special birthday song, &quot;Merry Birthday to You&quot;, was composed to avoid potential licensing issues for the traditional &quot;Happy Birthday to You&quot;.
*Some parts of &quot;The Wizard&#x27;s Run&quot; have been changed, mostly reflecting Paige Moore&#x27;s starring role.
*In the stunt driving shots from the car-chase scene, Pluto, the police dog in the back seat, was played by Jittlov wearing a coat over his head.
*As shown in the film, Mike Jittlov avoids shaking hands as he is telepathic.
*Over 1000 subliminals are embedded throughout the film.
*The poster for the film was done by artist Kelly Freas, who put a number of subliminal images into the painting; Freas also printed the faux film titles seen on the producers&#x27; bulletin board.
*The fans in the climactic theater scene provided their own costumes.
*The opening credits read &quot;Directed By The Man In The Green Jacket&quot;. Mike Jittlov wears a green jacket throughout the film.
*The scenes in which Mike speaks to the Union representatives were all shot at the same desk in the same room, with veteran voice-over artist Will Ryan playing all the representatives. The film union seal shows a vulture with a twisted strip of film in its talons.
*Cinematographer Russell Carpenter later worked on such films as &quot;The Lawnmower Man&quot;, &quot;The Indian in the Cupboard&quot;, &quot;Titanic&quot; (for which he won an Academy Award), &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot; (and the sequel &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels: Full Throttle&quot;), &quot;Shallow Hal&quot; and &quot;Monster-in-Law&quot;.
*Composer John Massari later worked on such films as &quot;Killer Klowns from Outer Space&quot;, &quot;Skeletons&quot;, &quot;Retro Puppet Master&quot;, and such television shows as &quot;POV Murder&quot; and &quot;Prison Break: Proof of Innocence&quot;.
*The film&#x27;s musical score that plays during &quot;the Wizard&#x27;s Run&quot; was recently used in a trailer for the &quot;Toy Story 3&quot; videogame.
*A Spanish language dubbed version was released onto VHS under the title &quot;El Mago de la Velocidad y el Tiempo&quot;.

==Production==
Mike Jittlov spent 14 years trying to get the film made independently, as he didn&#x27;t want to compromise his artistic vision for the film (as would&#x27;ve been the case with a studio production). Much like he had done with his short films, Jittlov sprinkled subliminal messages throughout the feature length version of &quot;The Wizard of Speed and Time&quot; that pushed words associated with positivity and fulfillment.

==Legacy==
In the November 2019 Marvel comic book &quot;Loki&quot;, issue 5, the title character states that &quot;The Wizard of Speed and Time&quot; is his favorite film.

==References==
==External links==
* Mike Jittlov official website
* , uploaded with the permission of Jittlov
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6847402" start="108" end="120" title="Mike Jittlov" label="Mike Jittlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q194383" start="140" end="145" title="16 mm film" label="16 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="146" end="156" title="short film" label="short film"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="247" end="253" title="Magician (fantasy)" label="wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="316" end="325" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q180784" start="326" end="335" title="Flash (DC Comics character)" label="The Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="511" end="517" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="623" end="638" title="special effects" label="special effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="728" end="739" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="740" end="749" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247718" start="825" end="854" title="The Wonderful World of Disney" label="The Wonderful World of Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q304029" start="977" end="991" title="The Black Hole" label="The Black Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765100" start="1410" end="1422" title="Time Tripper" label="Time Tripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765100" start="1439" end="1446" title="Animato" label="Animato"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="1462" end="1469" title="feature film" label="feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q226528" start="1477" end="1482" title="35mm movie film" label="35 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926817" start="1736" end="1746" title="MovieMaker" label="moviemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="1784" end="1807" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498868" start="2074" end="2086" title="Steve Brodie (actor)" label="Steve Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="2990" end="2993" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="2998" end="3007" title="laserdisc" label="laserdisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="3039" end="3042" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="3201" end="3213" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="3277" end="3283" title="Cameo appearance" label="Cameos"/>
<link wikidata="Q18227" start="3353" end="3372" title="Forrest J. Ackerman" label="Forrest J. Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q301362" start="3374" end="3393" title="Angelique Pettyjohn" label="Angelique Pettyjohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118269" start="3395" end="3407" title="Ward Kimball" label="Ward Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629205" start="3409" end="3418" title="Will Ryan" label="Will Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="3436" end="3446" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q528839" start="3453" end="3474" title="Philip Michael Thomas" label="Philip Michael Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182009" start="3496" end="3508" title="John Massari" label="John Massari"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="3564" end="3575" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="4082" end="4092" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q753556" start="4155" end="4169" title="Lucky Strike" label="Lucky Straeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q167545" start="4529" end="4550" title="Happy Birthday to You" label="Happy Birthday to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q830043" start="4867" end="4880" title="handshake" label="shaking hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q310661" start="4913" end="4924" title="subliminal message" label="subliminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q176560" start="5003" end="5014" title="Kelly Freas" label="Kelly Freas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="5485" end="5495" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196384" start="5697" end="5714" title="The Lawnmower Man (film)" label="The Lawnmower Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194561" start="5728" end="5754" title="The Indian in the Cupboard (film)" label="The Indian in the Cupboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="5768" end="5775" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131520" start="5803" end="5816" title="Academy Award for Best Cinematography" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q229599" start="5825" end="5846" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels (2000 film)" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5875" end="5911" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels: Full Throttle" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels: Full Throttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140935" start="5926" end="5937" title="Shallow Hal" label="Shallow Hal"/>
<link wikidata="Q682904" start="5954" end="5968" title="Monster-in-Law" label="Monster-in-Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182009" start="5986" end="5998" title="John Massari" label="John Massari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171744" start="6035" end="6065" title="Killer Klowns from Outer Space" label="Killer Klowns from Outer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q129068" start="6102" end="6121" title="Retro Puppet Master" label="Retro Puppet Master"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6191" end="6223" title="Prison Break: Proof of Innocence" label="Prison Break: Proof of Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q187278" start="6359" end="6370" title="Toy Story 3" label="Toy Story 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="6391" end="6407" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="6985" end="6991" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33563" wikidata="Q8034369" url="?curid=33563" title="Word problem for groups">
<text>In mathematics, especially in the area of abstract algebra known as combinatorial group theory, the word problem for a finitely generated group formula_1 is the algorithmic problem of deciding whether two words in the generators represent the same element of formula_1. The word problem is a well-known example of an undecidable problem.

If formula_3 is a finite set of generators for formula_1, then the word problem is the membership problem for the formal language of all words in formula_3 and a formal set of inverses that map to the identity under the natural map from the free monoid with involution on formula_3 to the group formula_1. If formula_8 is another finite generating set for formula_1, then the word problem over the generating set formula_8 is equivalent to the word problem over the generating set formula_3. Thus one can speak unambiguously of the decidability of the word problem for the finitely generated group formula_1.

The related but different uniform word problem for a class formula_13 of recursively presented groups is the algorithmic problem of deciding, given as input a presentation formula_14 for a group formula_1 in the class formula_13 and two words in the generators of formula_1, whether the words represent the same element of formula_1. Some authors require the class formula_13 to be definable by a recursively enumerable set of presentations.

== History ==

Throughout the history of the subject, computations in groups have been carried out using various normal forms. These usually implicitly solve the word problem for the groups in question. In 1911 Max Dehn proposed that the word problem was an important area of study in its own right, together with the conjugacy problem and the group isomorphism problem. In 1912 he gave an algorithm that solves both the word and conjugacy problem for the fundamental groups of closed orientable two-dimensional manifolds of genus greater than or equal to 2. Subsequent authors have greatly extended Dehn&#x27;s algorithm and applied it to a wide range of group theoretic decision problems.

It was shown by Pyotr Novikov in 1955 that there exists a finitely presented group formula_1 such that the word problem for formula_1 is undecidable. It follows immediately that the uniform word problem is also undecidable. A different proof was obtained by William Boone in 1958.

The word problem was one of the first examples of an unsolvable problem to be found not in mathematical logic or the theory of algorithms, but in one of the central branches of classical mathematics, algebra. As a result of its unsolvability, several other problems in combinatorial group theory have been shown to be unsolvable as well.

The word problem is in fact solvable for many groups formula_1. For example, polycyclic groups have solvable word problems since the normal form of an arbitrary word in a polycyclic presentation is readily computable; other algorithms for groups may, in suitable circumstances, also solve the word problem, see the Todd–Coxeter algorithm and the Knuth–Bendix completion algorithm. On the other hand, the fact that a particular algorithm does not solve the word problem for a particular group does not show that the group has an unsolvable word problem. For instance Dehn&#x27;s algorithm does not solve the word problem for the fundamental group of the torus. However this group is the direct product of two infinite cyclic groups and so has a solvable word problem.

== A more concrete description ==

In more concrete terms, the uniform word problem can be expressed as a rewriting question, for literal strings. For a presentation formula_14 of a group formula_1, formula_14 will specify a certain number of generators

:formula_26

for formula_1. We need to introduce one letter for formula_28 and another (for convenience) for the group element represented by formula_29. Call these letters (twice as many as the generators) the alphabet formula_30 for our problem. Then each element in formula_1 is represented in &quot;some way&quot; by a product

:formula_32

of symbols from formula_30, of some length, multiplied in formula_1. The string of length 0 (null string) stands for the identity element formula_35 of formula_1. The crux of the whole problem is to be able to recognise &quot;all&quot; the ways formula_35 can be represented, given some relations.

The effect of the &quot;relations&quot; in formula_1 is to make various such strings represent the same element of formula_1. In fact the relations provide a list of strings that can be either introduced where we want, or cancelled out whenever we see them, without changing the &#x27;value&#x27;, i.e. the group element that is the result of the multiplication.

For a simple example, consider the group given by the presentation formula_40. Writing formula_3 for the inverse of formula_42, we have possible strings combining any number of the symbols formula_42 and formula_3. Whenever we see formula_45, or formula_46 or formula_47 we may strike these out. We should also remember to strike out formula_48; this says that since the cube of formula_42 is the identity element of formula_1, so is the cube of the inverse of formula_42. Under these conditions the word problem becomes easy. First reduce strings to the empty string, formula_42, formula_53, formula_3 or formula_55. Then note that we may also multiply by formula_45, so we can convert formula_3 to formula_53 and convert formula_55 to formula_42. The result is that the word problem, here for the cyclic group of order three, is solvable.

This is not, however, the typical case. For the example, we have a canonical form available that reduces any string to one of length at most three, by decreasing the length monotonically. In general, it is not true that one can get a canonical form for the elements, by stepwise cancellation. One may have to use relations to expand a string many-fold, in order eventually to find a cancellation that brings the length right down.

The upshot is, in the worst case, that the relation between strings that says they are equal in formula_1 is an &quot;Undecidable problem&quot;.

==Examples==

The following groups have a solvable word problem:
*Automatic groups, including:
**Finite groups
**Negatively curved (aka. hyperbolic) groups
**Euclidean groups
**Coxeter groups
**Braid groups
**Geometrically finite groups
*Finitely generated free groups
*Finitely generated free abelian groups
*Polycyclic groups
*Finitely generated recursively absolutely presented groups, including:
**Finitely presented simple groups.
*Finitely presented residually finite groups
*One relator groups (this is a theorem of Magnus), including:
**Fundamental groups of closed orientable two-dimensional manifolds.
*Combable groups
*Autostackable groups

Examples with unsolvable word problems are also known:
*Given a recursively enumerable set formula_3 of positive integers that has insoluble membership problem, formula_63 is a finitely generated group with a recursively enumerable presentation whose word problem is insoluble
*Every finitely generated group with a recursively enumerable presentation and insoluble word problem is a subgroup of a finitely presented group with insoluble word problem
*The number of relators in a finitely presented group with insoluble word problem may be as low as 14 or even 12.
*An explicit example of a reasonable short presentation with insoluble word problem is given in Collins 1986:
:formula_64

==Partial solution of the word problem==

The word problem for a recursively presented group can be partially solved in the following sense:

::Given a recursive presentation formula_65 for a group formula_1, define:
:::formula_67
::then there is a partial recursive function formula_68 such that:
:::formula_69

More informally, there exists an algorithm that halts if formula_70, but does not do so otherwise.

It follows that to solve the word problem for formula_14 it is sufficient to construct a recursive function formula_72 such that:
::formula_73

However formula_70 in formula_1 if and only if formula_76 in formula_1. It follows that to solve the word problem for formula_14 it is sufficient to construct a recursive function formula_79 such that:
::formula_80

===Example===
The following will be proved as an example of the use of this technique:

:: Theorem: A finitely presented residually finite group has solvable word problem.

&quot;Proof:&quot; Suppose formula_81 is a finitely presented, residually finite group.

Let formula_82 be the group of all permutations of the natural numbers formula_83 that fixes all but finitely many numbers. Then:
# formula_82 is locally finite and contains a copy of every finite group.
# The word problem in formula_82 is solvable by calculating products of permutations.
# There is a recursive enumeration of all mappings of the finite set formula_86 into formula_82.
# Since formula_1 is residually finite, if formula_89 is a word in the generators formula_86 of formula_1 then formula_92 in formula_1 if and only if some mapping of formula_86 into formula_82 induces a homomorphism such that formula_92 in formula_82.

Given these facts, the algorithm defined by the following pseudocode:

 For every mapping of X into S
 If every relator in R is satisfied in S
 If w ≠ 1 in S
 return 0
 End if
 End if
 End for

defines a recursive function formula_79 such that:

::formula_99

This shows that formula_1 has solvable word problem.

==Unsolvability of the uniform word problem==

The criterion given above, for the solvability of the word problem in a single group, can be extended by a straightforward argument. This gives the following criterion for the uniform solvability of the word problem for a class of finitely presented groups:

::To solve the uniform word problem for a class formula_13 of groups, it is sufficient to find a recursive function that takes a finite presentation formula_14 for a group formula_1 and a word in the generators of formula_1, such that whenever formula_105:
:::formula_106

:: Boone-Rogers Theorem: There is no uniform partial algorithm that solves the word problem in all finitely presented groups with solvable word problem.

In other words, the uniform word problem for the class of all finitely presented groups with solvable word problem is unsolvable. This has some interesting consequences. For instance, the Higman embedding theorem can be used to construct a group containing an isomorphic copy of every finitely presented group with solvable word problem. It seems natural to ask whether this group can have solvable word problem. But it is a consequence of the Boone-Rogers result that:

:: Corollary: There is no universal solvable word problem group. That is, if formula_1 is a finitely presented group that contains an isomorphic copy of every finitely presented group with solvable word problem, then formula_1 itself must have unsolvable word problem.

Remark: Suppose formula_81 is a finitely presented group with solvable word problem and formula_110 is a finite subset of formula_1. Let formula_112, be the group generated by formula_110. Then the word problem in formula_114 is solvable: given two words formula_115 in the generators formula_110 of formula_114, write them as words in formula_86 and compare them using the solution to the word problem in formula_1. It is easy to think that this demonstrates a uniform solution of the word problem for the class formula_13 (say) of finitely generated groups that can be embedded in formula_1. If this were the case, the non-existence of a universal solvable word problem group would follow easily from Boone-Rogers. However, the solution just exhibited for the word problem for groups in formula_13 is not uniform. To see this, consider a group formula_123; in order to use the above argument to solve the word problem in formula_124, it is first necessary to exhibit a mapping formula_125 that extends to an embedding formula_126. If there were a recursive function that mapped (finitely generated) presentations of groups in formula_13 to embeddings into formula_1, then a uniform solution of the word problem in formula_13 could indeed be constructed. But there is no reason, in general, to suppose that such a recursive function exists. However, it turns out that, using a more sophisticated argument, the word problem in formula_124 can be solved &quot;without&quot; using an embedding formula_131. Instead an &quot;enumeration of homomorphisms&quot; is used, and since such an enumeration can be constructed uniformly, it results in a uniform solution to the word problem in formula_13.

===Proof that there is no universal solvable word problem group===
Suppose formula_1 were a universal solvable word problem group. Given a finite presentation formula_65 of a group formula_110, one can recursively enumerate all homomorphisms formula_136 by first enumerating all mappings formula_137. Not all of these mappings extend to homomorphisms, but, since formula_138 is finite, it is possible to distinguish between homomorphisms and non-homomorphisms, by using the solution to the word problem in formula_1. &quot;Weeding out&quot; non-homomorphisms gives the required recursive enumeration: formula_140.

If formula_110 has solvable word problem, then at least one of these homomorphisms must be an embedding. So given a word formula_89 in the generators of formula_110:

::formula_144
::formula_145

Consider the algorithm described by the pseudocode:

 Let &quot;n&quot; = 0
 Let &quot;repeatable&quot; = TRUE
 while (&quot;repeatable&quot;)
 increase &quot;n&quot; by 1
 if (solution to word problem in &quot;G&quot; reveals &quot;hn&quot;(&quot;w&quot;) ≠ 1 in &quot;G&quot;)
 Let &quot;repeatable&quot; = FALSE
 output 0.

This describes a recursive function:

::formula_146

The function formula_147 clearly depends on the presentation formula_14. Considering it to be a function of the two variables, a recursive function has been constructed that takes a finite presentation formula_14 for a group formula_110 and a word formula_89 in the generators of a group formula_1, such that whenever formula_1 has soluble word problem:

::formula_154

But this uniformly solves the word problem for the class of all finitely presented groups with solvable word problem, contradicting Boone-Rogers. This contradiction proves formula_1 cannot exist.

==Algebraic structure and the word problem==
There are a number of results that relate solvability of the word problem and algebraic structure. The most significant of these is the Boone-Higman theorem:

::A finitely presented group has solvable word problem if and only if it can be embedded in a simple group that can be embedded in a finitely presented group.

It is widely believed that it should be possible to do the construction so that the simple group itself is finitely presented. If so one would expect it to be difficult to prove as the mapping from presentations to simple groups would have to be non-recursive.

The following has been proved by Bernhard Neumann and Angus Macintyre:

::A finitely presented group has solvable word problem if and only if it can be embedded in every algebraically closed group.

What is remarkable about this is that the algebraically closed groups are so wild that none of them has a recursive presentation.

The oldest result relating algebraic structure to solvability of the word problem is Kuznetsov&#x27;s theorem:

::A recursively presented simple group formula_82 has solvable word problem.

To prove this let formula_157 be a recursive presentation for formula_82. Choose a nonidentity element formula_159, that is, formula_160 in formula_82.

If formula_89 is a word on the generators formula_86 of formula_82, then let:

::formula_165

There is a recursive function formula_166 such that:

::formula_167

Write:

::formula_168

Then because the construction of formula_147 was uniform, this is a recursive function of two variables.

It follows that: is recursive. By construction:

::formula_170

Since formula_82 is a simple group, its only quotient groups are itself and the trivial group. Since formula_160 in formula_82, we see formula_174 in formula_175 if and only if formula_175 is trivial if and only if formula_92 in formula_82. Therefore:

::formula_179

The existence of such a function is sufficient to prove the word problem is solvable for formula_82.

This proof does not prove the existence of a uniform algorithm for solving the word problem for this class of groups. The non-uniformity resides in choosing a non-trivial element of the simple group. There is no reason to suppose that there is a recursive function that maps a presentation of a simple groups to a non-trivial element of the group. However, in the case of a finitely presented group we know that not all the generators can be trivial (Any individual generator could be, of course). Using this fact it is possible to modify the proof to show:

:The word problem is uniformly solvable for the class of finitely presented simple groups.

==See also==
* Combinatorics on words
* SQ-universal group
* Word problem (mathematics)
* Reachability problem
* Nested stack automata (have been used to solve the word problem for groups)

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
*
* 
* 
*
* 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="42" end="58" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526736" start="68" end="94" title="combinatorial group theory" label="combinatorial group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034369" start="100" end="112" title="Word problem for groups" label="word problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q21083858" start="119" end="143" title="finitely generated group" label="finitely generated group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502995" start="317" end="336" title="undecidable problem" label="undecidable problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q734209" start="371" end="381" title="Generating set of a group" label="generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="453" end="468" title="formal language" label="formal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449422" start="580" end="607" title="free monoid with involution" label="free monoid with involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034369" start="975" end="995" title="Word problem for groups" label="uniform word problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q915906" start="1108" end="1120" title="presentation of a group" label="presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q676835" start="1346" end="1368" title="recursively enumerable" label="recursively enumerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051809" start="1505" end="1517" title="Normal form (abstract rewriting)" label="normal forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q61732" start="1603" end="1611" title="Max Dehn" label="Max Dehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161137" start="1710" end="1727" title="conjugacy problem" label="conjugacy problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611242" start="1736" end="1761" title="group isomorphism problem" label="group isomorphism problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q662830" start="1848" end="1865" title="fundamental group" label="fundamental group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1992" end="2013" title="Small cancellation theory#Dehn&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Dehn&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="2064" end="2080" title="decision problem" label="decision problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q982580" start="2100" end="2113" title="Pyotr Novikov" label="Pyotr Novikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502995" start="2221" end="2232" title="Undecidable problem" label="undecidable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005704" start="2342" end="2355" title="William Boone (mathematician)" label="William Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="2457" end="2475" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q844718" start="2483" end="2503" title="theory of algorithms" label="theory of algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="2566" end="2573" title="abstract algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658427" start="2782" end="2798" title="polycyclic group" label="polycyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q690505" start="3020" end="3042" title="Todd–Coxeter algorithm" label="Todd–Coxeter algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835803" start="3051" end="3084" title="Knuth–Bendix completion algorithm" label="Knuth–Bendix completion algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="3358" end="3363" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668499" start="3579" end="3588" title="rewriting" label="rewriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736519" start="3603" end="3617" title="literal string" label="literal string"/>
<link wikidata="Q670834" start="4166" end="4177" title="Empty string" label="null string"/>
<link wikidata="Q185813" start="4194" end="4210" title="identity element" label="identity element"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="5535" end="5547" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152398" start="5645" end="5659" title="canonical form" label="canonical form"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502995" start="6128" end="6147" title="Undecidable problem" label="Undecidable problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826571" start="6222" end="6237" title="Automatic group" label="Automatic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057968" start="6253" end="6265" title="Finite group" label="Finite group"/>
<link wikidata="Q81194" start="6269" end="6310" title="Negatively curved group" label="Negatively curved (aka. hyperbolic) group"/>
<link wikidata="Q852195" start="6314" end="6329" title="Euclidean group" label="Euclidean group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874246" start="6333" end="6346" title="Coxeter group" label="Coxeter group"/>
<link wikidata="Q220409" start="6350" end="6361" title="Braid group" label="Braid group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535482" start="6365" end="6391" title="Geometrically finite group" label="Geometrically finite group"/>
<link wikidata="Q431078" start="6413" end="6423" title="free group" label="free group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454111" start="6445" end="6463" title="free abelian group" label="free abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658427" start="6466" end="6482" title="Polycyclic group" label="Polycyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669826" start="6516" end="6542" title="Absolute presentation of a group" label="absolutely presented group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777935" start="6612" end="6629" title="residually finite" label="residually finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664682" start="8677" end="8691" title="locally finite group" label="locally finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q360812" start="10109" end="10126" title="partial algorithm" label="partial algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029787" start="10406" end="10430" title="Higman embedding theorem" label="Higman embedding theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14593" end="14613" title="Boone-Higman theorem" label="Boone-Higman theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q571124" start="14710" end="14722" title="simple group" label="simple group"/>
<link wikidata="Q72078" start="15071" end="15087" title="Bernhard Neumann" label="Bernhard Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q544512" start="15092" end="15107" title="Angus Macintyre" label="Angus Macintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724025" start="15208" end="15234" title="algebraically closed group" label="algebraically closed group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985058" start="17103" end="17125" title="Combinatorics on words" label="Combinatorics on words"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392719" start="17128" end="17146" title="SQ-universal group" label="SQ-universal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406273" start="17149" end="17175" title="Word problem (mathematics)" label="Word problem (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141570" start="17178" end="17198" title="Reachability problem" label="Reachability problem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17201" end="17222" title="Nested stack automaton#Properties" label="Nested stack automata"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33569" wikidata="Q657903" url="?curid=33569" title="Waring's problem">
<text>In number theory, Waring&#x27;s problem asks whether each natural number &quot;k&quot; has an associated positive integer &quot;s&quot; such that every natural number is the sum of at most &quot;s&quot; natural numbers raised to the power &quot;k&quot;. For example, every natural number is the sum of at most 4 squares, 9 cubes, or 19 fourth powers. Waring&#x27;s problem was proposed in 1770 by Edward Waring, after whom it is named. Its affirmative answer, known as the Hilbert–Waring theorem, was provided by Hilbert in 1909. Waring&#x27;s problem has its own Mathematics Subject Classification, 11P05, &quot;Waring&#x27;s problem and variants&quot;.

==Relationship with Lagrange&#x27;s four-square theorem==
Long before Waring posed his problem, Diophantus had asked whether every positive integer could be represented as the sum of four perfect squares greater than or equal to zero. This question later became known as Bachet&#x27;s conjecture, after the 1621 translation of Diophantus by Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac, and it was solved by Joseph-Louis Lagrange in his four-square theorem in 1770, the same year Waring made his conjecture. Waring sought to generalize this problem by trying to represent all positive integers as the sum of cubes, integers to the fourth power, and so forth, to show that any positive integer may be represented as the sum of other integers raised to a specific exponent, and that there was always a maximum number of integers raised to a certain exponent required to represent all positive integers in this way.

==The number &quot;g&quot;(&quot;k&quot;)==
For every formula_1, let formula_2 denote the minimum number formula_3 of formula_1th powers of naturals needed to represent all positive integers. Every positive integer is the sum of one first power, itself, so formula_5. Some simple computations show that 7 requires 4 squares, 23 requires 9 cubes, and 79 requires 19 fourth powers; these examples show that formula_6, formula_7, and formula_8. Waring conjectured that these lower bounds were in fact exact values.

Lagrange&#x27;s four-square theorem of 1770 states that every natural number is the sum of at most four squares. Since three squares are not enough, this theorem establishes formula_9. Lagrange&#x27;s four-square theorem was conjectured in Bachet&#x27;s 1621 edition of Diophantus&#x27;s &quot;Arithmetica&quot;; Fermat claimed to have a proof, but did not publish it.

Over the years various bounds were established, using increasingly sophisticated and complex proof techniques. For example, Liouville showed that formula_10 is at most 53. Hardy and Littlewood showed that all sufficiently large numbers are the sum of at most 19 fourth powers.

That formula_11 was established from 1909 to 1912 by Wieferich and A. J. Kempner, formula_12 in 1986 by R. Balasubramanian, F. Dress, and J.-M. Deshouillers, formula_13 in 1964 by Chen Jingrun, and formula_14 in 1940 by Pillai.

Let formula_15 and formula_16 respectively denote the integral and fractional part of a positive real number formula_17. Given the number formula_18, only formula_19 and formula_20 can be used to represent formula_21; the most economical representation requires 
formula_22 terms of formula_19 and formula_24 terms of formula_20. It follows that formula_2 is at least as large as formula_27. This was noted by J. A. Euler, the son of Leonhard Euler, in about 1772. 

The Ideal Waring Theorem would be an unconditional strengthening of Euler&#x27;s observation: 

: Define: g*(k) formula_28. Then g(k) = g*(k).

Work by Dickson and Pillai in 1936, Rubugunday in 1942, Niven in 1944 and many others has proved that

: formula_29

Dickson&#x27;s 1936 proof applies when k &gt; 6, and Pillai&#x27;s when k &gt; 7, leaving g(4), g(5), and g(6) to be resolved as documented above.

No value of formula_1 is known for which formula_31. Mahler proved that there can only be a finite number of such formula_1, and Kubina and Wunderlich have shown that any such formula_1 must satisfy formula_34, extending work of Stemmler. Thus it is conjectured that this never happens, that is, formula_35 for every positive integer formula_1.

The first few values of formula_2 are:
: 1, 4, 9, 19, 37, 73, 143, 279, 548, 1079, 2132, 4223, 8384, 16673, 33203, 66190, 132055, 263619, 526502, 1051899, ... .

==The number &quot;G&quot;(&quot;k&quot;)==
From the work of Hardy and Littlewood, the related quantity &quot;G&quot;(&quot;k&quot;) was studied with &quot;g&quot;(&quot;k&quot;). &quot;G&quot;(&quot;k&quot;) is defined to be the least positive integer &quot;s&quot; such that every sufficiently large integer (i.e. every integer greater than some constant) can be represented as a sum of at most &quot;s&quot; positive integers to the power of &quot;k&quot;. Clearly, &quot;G&quot;(1) = 1. Since squares are congruent to 0, 1, or 4 (mod 8), no integer congruent to 7 (mod 8) can be represented as a sum of three squares, implying that . Since for all &quot;k&quot;, this shows that . Davenport showed that in 1939, by demonstrating that any sufficiently large number congruent to 1 through 14 mod 16 could be written as a sum of 14 fourth powers (Vaughan in 1986 and 1989 reduced the 14 biquadrates successively to 13 and 12). The exact value of &quot;G&quot;(&quot;k&quot;) is unknown for any other &quot;k&quot;, but there exist bounds.

===Lower bounds for &quot;G&quot;(&quot;k&quot;)===
The number &quot;G&quot;(&quot;k&quot;) is greater than or equal to

In the absence of congruence restrictions, a density argument suggests that &quot;G&quot;(&quot;k&quot;) should equal .

===Upper bounds for &quot;G&quot;(&quot;k&quot;)===

&quot;G&quot;(3) is at least 4 (since cubes are congruent to 0, 1 or −1 mod 9); for numbers less than 1.3, is the last to require 6 cubes, and the number of numbers between &quot;N&quot; and 2&quot;N&quot; requiring 5 cubes drops off with increasing &quot;N&quot; at sufficient speed to have people believe that ; the largest number now known not to be a sum of 4 cubes is , and the authors give reasonable arguments there that this may be the largest possible. The upper bound is due to Linnik in 1943. (All nonnegative integers require at most 9 cubes, and the largest integers requiring 9, 8, 7, 6 and 5 cubes are conjectured to be 239, 454, 8042, and , respectively.)

 is the largest number to require 17 fourth powers (Deshouillers, Hennecart and Landreau showed in 2000 that every number between and 10245 required at most 16, and Kawada, Wooley and Deshouillers extended Davenport&#x27;s 1939 result to show that every number above 10220 required at most 16). Numbers of the form 31·16&quot;n&quot; always require 16 fourth powers.

 is the last known number that requires 9 fifth powers (Integer sequence S001057, Tony D. Noe, Jul 04 2017), is the last number less than 1.3 that requires 10 fifth powers, and is the last number less than 1.3 that requires 11.

The upper bounds on the right with are due to Vaughan and Wooley.

Using his improved Hardy–Ramanujan–Littlewood method, I. M. Vinogradov published numerous refinements leading to
: formula_38
in 1947 and, ultimately,
: formula_39
for an unspecified constant &quot;C&quot; and sufficiently large &quot;k&quot; in 1959.

Applying his &quot;p&quot;-adic form of the Hardy–Ramanujan–Littlewood–Vinogradov method to estimating trigonometric sums, in which the summation is taken over numbers with small prime divisors, Anatolii Alexeevitch Karatsuba obtained in 1985 a new estimate, for formula_40:

: formula_41

Further refinements were obtained by Vaughan in 1989.

Wooley then established that for some constant &quot;C&quot;,
: formula_42

Vaughan and Wooley&#x27;s survey article from 2002 was comprehensive at the time.

==See also==
* Fermat polygonal number theorem, that every positive integer is a sum of at most &quot;n&quot; of the &quot;n&quot;-gonal numbers
* Waring–Goldbach problem, the problem of representing numbers as sums of powers of primes
* Subset sum problem, an algorithmic problem that can be used to find the shortest representation of a given number as a sum of powers
* Pollock&#x27;s conjectures
* Sums of three cubes, discusses what numbers are the sum of three &quot;not necessarily positive&quot; cubes
* Sums of four cubes problem, discusses whether every integer is the sum of four cubes of integers

==Notes==

==References==
* G. I. Arkhipov, V. N. Chubarikov, A. A. Karatsuba, &quot;Trigonometric sums in number theory and analysis&quot;. Berlin–New-York: Walter de Gruyter, (2004).
* G. I. Arkhipov, A. A. Karatsuba, V. N. Chubarikov, &quot;Theory of multiple trigonometric sums&quot;. Moscow: Nauka, (1987).
* Yu. V. Linnik, &quot;An elementary solution of the problem of Waring by Schnirelman&#x27;s method&quot;. &quot;Mat. Sb., N. Ser.&quot; 12 (54), 225–230 (1943).
* R. C. Vaughan, &quot;A new iterative method in Waring&#x27;s problem&quot;. &quot;Acta Mathematica&quot; (162), 1–71 (1989).
* I. M. Vinogradov, &quot;The method of trigonometrical sums in the theory of numbers&quot;. &quot;Trav. Inst. Math. Stekloff&quot; (23), 109 pp. (1947).
* I. M. Vinogradov, &quot;On an upper bound for &quot;G&quot;(&quot;n&quot;)&quot;. &quot;Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat.&quot; (23), 637–642 (1959).
* I. M. Vinogradov, A. A. Karatsuba, &quot;The method of trigonometric sums in number theory&quot;, &quot;Proc. Steklov Inst. Math.&quot;, 168, 3–30 (1986); translation from Trudy Mat. Inst. Steklova, 168, 4–30 (1984).
* Survey, contains the precise formula for &quot;G&quot;(&quot;k&quot;), a simplified version of Hilbert&#x27;s proof and a wealth of references.
* Has an elementary proof of the existence of &quot;G&quot;(&quot;k&quot;) using Schnirelmann density.
* Has proofs of Lagrange&#x27;s theorem, the polygonal number theorem, Hilbert&#x27;s proof of Waring&#x27;s conjecture and the Hardy–Littlewood proof of the asymptotic formula for the number of ways to represent &quot;N&quot; as the sum of &quot;s&quot; &quot;k&quot;th powers.
* Hans Rademacher and Otto Toeplitz, &quot;The Enjoyment of Mathematics&quot; (1933) (). Has a proof of the Lagrange theorem, accessible to high-school students.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="3" end="16" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q657903" start="18" end="39" title="Waring&amp;#x27;s problem" label="Waring&amp;#x27;s problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="58" end="72" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="105" end="121" title="positive integer" label="positive integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q323028" start="397" end="410" title="Edward Waring" label="Edward Waring"/>
<link wikidata="Q657903" start="473" end="495" title="Waring&amp;#x27;s problem" label="Hilbert–Waring theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="513" end="520" title="David Hilbert" label="Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q967960" start="564" end="598" title="Mathematics Subject Classification" label="Mathematics Subject Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q178217" start="752" end="762" title="Diophantus" label="Diophantus"/>
<link wikidata="Q756946" start="832" end="859" title="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s four-square theorem" label="sum of four perfect squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q371882" start="997" end="1030" title="Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac" label="Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="1053" end="1074" title="Joseph-Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph-Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q756946" start="1082" end="1101" title="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s four-square theorem" label="four-square theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q756946" start="2072" end="2107" title="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s four-square theorem" label="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s four-square theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q371882" start="2312" end="2318" title="Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac" label="Bachet"/>
<link wikidata="Q178217" start="2342" end="2352" title="Diophantus" label="Diophantus"/>
<link wikidata="Q668560" start="2366" end="2377" title="Arithmetica" label="Arithmetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q75655" start="2385" end="2391" title="Pierre de Fermat" label="Fermat"/>
<link wikidata="Q214549" start="2566" end="2575" title="Joseph Liouville" label="Liouville"/>
<link wikidata="Q184337" start="2614" end="2619" title="G. H. Hardy" label="Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q353426" start="2624" end="2634" title="John Edensor Littlewood" label="Littlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q73005" start="2773" end="2782" title="Arthur Wieferich" label="Wieferich"/>
<link wikidata="Q758514" start="2787" end="2800" title="Aubrey J. Kempner" label="A. J. Kempner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129894" start="2824" end="2842" title="Ramachandran Balasubramanian" label="R. Balasubramanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323950" start="2858" end="2876" title="Jean-Marc Deshouillers" label="J.-M. Deshouillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q715284" start="2900" end="2912" title="Chen Jingrun" label="Chen Jingrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q370251" start="2940" end="2946" title="Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai" label="Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="3003" end="3011" title="integral part" label="integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366982" start="3016" end="3031" title="fractional part" label="fractional part"/>
<link wikidata="Q556346" start="3359" end="3370" title="Johann Euler" label="J. A. Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="3383" end="3397" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q891058" start="3568" end="3575" title="Leonard Eugene Dickson" label="Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q370251" start="3580" end="3586" title="Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai" label="Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014965" start="3596" end="3606" title="R. K. Rubugunday" label="Rubugunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675580" start="3616" end="3621" title="Ivan M. Niven" label="Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q327167" start="3878" end="3884" title="Kurt Mahler" label="Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q184337" start="4394" end="4399" title="G. H. Hardy" label="Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q353426" start="4404" end="4414" title="John Edensor Littlewood" label="Littlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416789" start="4616" end="4634" title="sufficiently large" label="sufficiently large"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385023" start="5018" end="5027" title="Harold Davenport" label="Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531312" start="6985" end="6992" title="R. C. Vaughan" label="Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q451701" start="6997" end="7003" title="Trevor Wooley" label="Wooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543359" start="7025" end="7058" title="Hardy–Ramanujan–Littlewood circle method" label="Hardy–Ramanujan–Littlewood method"/>
<link wikidata="Q451330" start="7060" end="7076" title="Ivan Matveyevich Vinogradov" label="I. M. Vinogradov"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="7272" end="7290" title="p-adic" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-adic"/>
<link wikidata="Q487620" start="7454" end="7484" title="Anatolii Alexeevitch Karatsuba" label="Anatolii Alexeevitch Karatsuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146791" start="7778" end="7809" title="Fermat polygonal number theorem" label="Fermat polygonal number theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969441" start="7910" end="7933" title="Waring–Goldbach problem" label="Waring–Goldbach problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154420" start="8001" end="8019" title="Subset sum problem" label="Subset sum problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15663613" start="8136" end="8162" title="Pollock&amp;#x27;s conjectures" label="Pollock&amp;#x27;s conjectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q62035896" start="8165" end="8184" title="Sums of three cubes" label="Sums of three cubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074974" start="8275" end="8301" title="Sums of four cubes problem" label="Sums of four cubes problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q487620" start="8435" end="8450" title="Anatolii Alexeevitch Karatsuba" label="A. A. Karatsuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384632" start="8687" end="8700" title="Yu. V. Linnik" label="Yu. V. Linnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531312" start="8849" end="8862" title="R. C. Vaughan" label="R. C. Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q451330" start="8976" end="8992" title="Ivan Matveyevich Vinogradov" label="I. M. Vinogradov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482753" start="9723" end="9743" title="Schnirelmann density" label="Schnirelmann density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146791" start="9790" end="9814" title="polygonal number theorem" label="polygonal number theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q68554" start="10026" end="10041" title="Hans Rademacher" label="Hans Rademacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q61763" start="10046" end="10059" title="Otto Toeplitz" label="Otto Toeplitz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33571" wikidata="Q1424528" url="?curid=33571" title="Williams tube">
<text>The Williams tube, or the Williams–Kilburn tube named after inventors Freddie Williams and Tom Kilburn, is an early form of computer memory. It was the first random-access digital storage device, and was used successfully in several early computers.

The Williams tube works by displaying a grid of dots on a cathode-ray tube (CRT). Due to the way CRTs work, this creates a small charge of static electricity over each dot. The charge at the location of each of the dots is read by a thin metal sheet just in front of the display. Since the display faded over time, it was periodically refreshed. It operates faster than earlier acoustic delay-line memory, at the speed of the electrons inside the vacuum tube, rather than at the speed of sound. The system was adversely affected by nearby electrical fields, and required frequent adjustment to remain operational. Williams–Kilburn tubes were used primarily on high-speed computer designs.

Williams and Kilburn applied for British patents on 11 December 1946, and 2 October 1947, followed by United States patent applications on 10 December 1947, and 16 May 1949.

==Working principle==

The Williams tube depends on an effect called secondary emission that occurs on cathode-ray tubes (CRTs). When the electron beam strikes the phosphor that forms the display surface, it normally causes it to illuminate. If the beam energy is above a given threshold (depending on the phosphor mix) it also causes electrons to be struck out of the phosphor. These electrons travel a short distance before being attracted back to the CRT surface and falling on it a short distance away. The overall effect is to cause a slight positive charge in the immediate region of the beam where there is a deficit of electrons, and a slight negative charge around the dot where those electrons land. The resulting charge well remains on the surface of the tube for a fraction of a second while the electrons flow back to their original locations. The lifetime depends on the electrical resistance of the phosphor and the size of the well.

=== Writing ===
The process of creating the charge well is used as the write operation in a computer memory, storing a single binary digit, or bit. A positively charged dot is erased (filling the charge well) by drawing a second dot immediately adjacent to the one to be erased (most systems did this by drawing a short dash starting at the dot position, the extension of the dash erased the charge initially stored at the starting point). This worked because the negative halo around the second dot would fill in the positive center of the first dot. A collection of dots or spaces, often one horizontal row on the display, represents a computer word. Increasing beam energy made the dots bigger and last longer, but required them to be further apart, since nearby dots would erase each other.

The beam energy had to be large enough to produce dots with a usable lifetime. This places an upper limit on the memory density, and each Williams tube could typically store about 256 to 2560 bits of data.

Because the electron beam is essentially inertia-free and can be moved anywhere on the display, the computer can access any location, making it a random access memory. Typically, the computer would load the memory address as an X and Y pair into the driver circuitry and then trigger a time base generator that would sweep the selected locations, reading from or writing to the internal registers, normally implemented as flip-flops.

=== Reading ===
Reading the memory took place via a secondary effect caused by the writing operation. During the short period when the write takes place, the redistribution of charges in the phosphor creates an electrical current that induces voltage in any nearby conductors. This is read by placing a thin metal sheet just in front of the display side of the CRT. During a read operation, the beam first writes to the selected bit locations on the display. Those locations that were previously written to are already depleted of electrons, so no current flows, and no voltage appears on the plate. This allows the computer to determine there was a &quot;1&quot; in that location. If the location had not been written to previously, the write process will create a well and a pulse will be read on the sheet, indicating a &quot;0&quot;.

Reading a memory location creates a charge well whether or not one was previously there, thus destroying the original contents of that location. So any read has to be followed by a rewrite to reinstate the original data. In some systems this was accomplished using a second electron gun inside the CRT that could write to one location while the other was reading the next.

=== Refreshing ===
Since the display would fade over time, the entire display had to be periodically refreshed using the same basic method. As the data is read and then immediately rewritten, this operation can be carried out by external circuitry while the central processing unit (CPU) was busy carrying out other operations. This refresh operation is similar to the memory refresh cycles of DRAM in modern systems.

=== Erasing ===
Since the refresh process caused the same pattern to continually reappear on the display, there was a need to be able to erase previously written values. This was normally accomplished by writing to the display just beside the original location. The electrons released by this new write would fall into the previously written well, filling it. The original systems produced this effect by writing a small dash, which was easy to accomplish without changing the master timers and simply producing the write current for a slightly longer period. The resulting pattern was a series of dots and dashes. There was a considerable amount of research on more effective erasing systems, with some systems using out-of-focus beams or complex patterns.

=== Visibility of data ===
Some Williams tubes were made from radar-type cathode-ray tubes with a phosphor coating that made the data visible, while other tubes were purpose-built without such a coating. The presence or absence of this coating had no effect on the operation of the tube, and was of no importance to the operators, since the face of the tube was covered by the pickup plate. If a visible output was needed, a second tube connected in parallel with the storage tube, with a phosphor coating, but without a pickup plate, was used as a display device.

==Development==
Developed at the University of Manchester in England, it provided the program storage medium for the Manchester Baby, the first electronic stored-program computer, which first successfully ran a program on 21 June, 1948. Rather than the Williams tube memory being designed for the Baby, the Baby was a testbed to demonstrate the reliability of the memory. Tom Kilburn wrote a 17-instruction program to calculate the highest proper factor of numbers as large as 218. Tradition at the university has it that this was the only program Kilburn ever wrote.

Williams tubes tended to become unreliable with age, and most working installations had to be hand tuned. By contrast, mercury delay-line memory was slower and not random access, as the bits were presented serially, which complicated programming. Delay lines also needed hand tuning, but did not age as badly and enjoyed some success in early digital electronic computing despite their data rate, weight, cost, thermal and toxicity problems. The Manchester Mark 1, which used Williams tubes, was successfully commercialised as the Ferranti Mark 1. Some early computers in the United States also used Williams tubes, including the IAS machine (originally designed for Selectron tube memory), the UNIVAC 1103, IBM 701, IBM 702 and the Standards Western Automatic Computer (SWAC). Williams tubes were also used in the Soviet Strela-1 and in the Japan TAC (Tokyo Automatic Computer).

==See also==
*Atanasoff–Berry computer – Used a type of memory called &quot;regenerative capacitor memory&quot;
*Mellon optical memory
==References==
;Notes
;Bibliography
*
==Further reading==
*

==External links==

*The Williams Tube
*Manchester Baby and the birth of Computer Memory
*RCA 6571 Computer storage tube data sheet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1424528" start="4" end="17" title="Williams tube" label="Williams tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424528" start="26" end="47" title="Williams tube" label="Williams–Kilburn tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q238798" start="70" end="86" title="Frederic Calland Williams" label="Freddie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q92786" start="91" end="102" title="Tom Kilburn" label="Tom Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="124" end="139" title="computer memory" label="computer memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="158" end="171" title="Random-access memory" label="random-access"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="309" end="325" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q845744" start="390" end="408" title="static electricity" label="static electricity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="629" end="655" title="Delay-line memory#Acoustic delay lines" label="acoustic delay-line memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="730" end="744" title="speed of sound" label="speed of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q905140" start="1185" end="1203" title="secondary emission" label="secondary emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="1219" end="1235" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="1280" end="1288" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="1451" end="1459" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q761414" start="1840" end="1851" title="Potential well" label="charge well"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="2001" end="2022" title="Electrical resistance and conductance" label="electrical resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="2209" end="2212" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q337445" start="2975" end="2989" title="Areal density (computer storage)" label="memory density"/>
<link wikidata="Q835713" start="3276" end="3290" title="memory address" label="memory address"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513113" start="3355" end="3374" title="time base generator" label="time base generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q183406" start="3491" end="3500" title="flip-flop (electronics)" label="flip-flop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="3715" end="3733" title="electrical current" label="electrical current"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="3747" end="3754" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="3769" end="3779" title="Electrical conductor" label="conductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="4975" end="4998" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815755" start="5086" end="5100" title="memory refresh" label="memory refresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="5111" end="5115" title="Dynamic random-access memory" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="5957" end="5962" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="5993" end="6001" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q867530" start="6494" end="6518" title="Victoria University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="6522" end="6529" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="6547" end="6554" title="Computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q514818" start="6578" end="6593" title="Manchester Baby" label="Manchester Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134867" start="6616" end="6639" title="stored-program computer" label="stored-program computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318674" start="6779" end="6786" title="testbed" label="testbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q92786" start="6833" end="6844" title="Tom Kilburn" label="Tom Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="6901" end="6914" title="proper factor" label="proper factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778158" start="7157" end="7174" title="delay-line memory" label="delay-line memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463814" start="7476" end="7493" title="Manchester Mark 1" label="Manchester Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q675128" start="7561" end="7576" title="Ferranti Mark 1" label="Ferranti Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535967" start="7660" end="7671" title="IAS machine" label="IAS machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q583664" start="7697" end="7711" title="Selectron tube" label="Selectron tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q684957" start="7725" end="7736" title="UNIVAC 1103" label="UNIVAC 1103"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653104" start="7738" end="7745" title="IBM 701" label="IBM 701"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653097" start="7747" end="7754" title="IBM 702" label="IBM 702"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629241" start="7763" end="7799" title="SWAC (computer)" label="Standards Western Automatic Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q572955" start="7852" end="7860" title="Strela computer" label="Strela-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q522906" start="7925" end="7949" title="Atanasoff–Berry computer" label="Atanasoff–Berry computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813170" start="8024" end="8045" title="Mellon optical memory" label="Mellon optical memory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33573" wikidata="Q691528" url="?curid=33573" title="Wallace &amp; Gromit">
<text>Wallace &amp; Gromit is a British claymation comedy franchise created by Nick Park and produced by Aardman Animations. The series centres on Wallace, a good-natured, eccentric, cheese-loving inventor, and Gromit, his loyal and intelligent anthropomorphic beagle. It consists of four short films, two feature-length films, and numerous spin-offs and TV adaptations. The first short film, &quot;A Grand Day Out&quot;, was finished and released in 1989. Wallace has been voiced by Peter Sallis and Ben Whitehead. While Wallace speaks very often, Gromit is largely silent and has no dialogue, communicating through facial expressions and body language.

Because of their popularity, the characters have been described as positive international cultural icons of both modern British culture and British people in general. BBC News called them &quot;some of the best-known and best-loved stars to come out of the UK&quot;. &quot;Icons&quot; has said they have done &quot;more to improve the image of the English world-wide than any officially appointed ambassadors&quot;. 

Park has stated that he was inspired by his childhood through the 1950s and 1960s in Lancashire in Northern England. The setting is deliberately ambiguous: the overall style resembles the 1960s, but numerous anachronisms abound, such as the use of 21st-century technology. Although Wigan is seen at the end of Wallace&#x27;s alliterative home address on his letters, his accent comes from the Holme Valley of West Yorkshire and he is especially fond of Wensleydale cheese (from North Yorkshire).

Their films have been widely praised, with the first three short films, &quot;A Grand Day Out&quot; (1989), &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot; (1993) and &quot;A Close Shave&quot; (1995) earning 100% on &quot;Rotten Tomatoes&quot;; the feature film &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot; (2005) has also received acclaim. The film is the second-highest-grossing stop-motion animated film, outgrossed only by &quot;Chicken Run&quot; (2000), another creation of Park&#x27;s. A fourth short film, &quot;A Matter of Loaf and Death&quot;, was released in 2008. A second full-length feature film, &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit: Vengeance Most Fowl&quot; — marking the return of the penguin Feathers McGraw, the villain from &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot; — was released in 2024. The franchise has received numerous accolades, including five BAFTAs, three Academy Awards and a Peabody Award.

==History==

The first short film, &quot;A Grand Day Out&quot;, was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film in 1991. The short films &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot; and &quot;A Close Shave&quot; followed. The full-length feature &quot;The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot; was released in 2005. The latter three each earned Academy Awards.

In January 2007, a five-film deal with DreamWorks and Aardman fell through after three films, due to creative differences, as well as the box office failure of &quot;Flushed Away&quot;. Park said later that DreamWorks executives wanted to Americanise the very British Wallace and Gromit after test screenings, which would have tarnished some of the duo&#x27;s nostalgic charm. The fourth &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; short, &quot;A Matter of Loaf and Death&quot;, was Park&#x27;s first production since the end of the DreamWorks deal. It was the most-watched television programme in the UK in 2008. &quot;A Matter of Loaf and Death&quot; won the 2008 BAFTA Award for Best Short Animation and was nominated for an Academy Award in 2010. In 2013, Peter Lord stated that there were no plans at the moment for a new short film, and Park announced in the following year that the declining health of Wallace&#x27;s voice actor, Peter Sallis, had the possibility of preventing any future films despite the availability of Ben Whitehead.
In May 2017, Lord stated that more projects with the characters were likely while speaking at an animation event in Stuttgart, Germany. He said, &quot;When Nick [Park]&#x27;s not drawing cavemen, he&#x27;s drawing Wallace &amp; Gromit ... I absolutely assume he will do another, but not a feature. I think he found it was too much. I think he liked the half-hour format.&quot;

Sallis died on 2 June 2017. In 2018, Park said to &quot;Radio Times&quot;: &quot;[Sallis] was such a special one-off person with such unique qualities, it would be hard to fill his shoes but I think he&#x27;d want us to carry on and I&#x27;ve got more Wallace and Gromit ideas.&quot; In 2019, Park announced that a new &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; project is in development. &quot;I can&#x27;t give too much away because it would spoil it really, but it&#x27;s Wallace &amp; Gromit up to their old antics.&quot; In May 2020, Aardman announced the release of &quot;The Big Fix Up&quot;, a Wallace &amp; Gromit story in the form of an augmented reality (AR) mobile app. It features the voices of Miriam Margolyes, Isy Suttie and Jim Carter and was released on 18 January 2021.

In September 2021, a bronze bench statue of &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; was unveiled in Preston, Lancashire, Park&#x27;s home town. A statue of Feathers McGraw was later added as part of an extension in February 2025. In January 2022, a new film, &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit: Vengeance Most Fowl&quot;, was announced, which debuted first on the BBC on Christmas Day 2024, and was released worldwide 3 January 2025 on Netflix and has been nominated for an Academy Award for best animated feature film.

==Overview==

===Wallace===
Wallace lives, along with his pet dog Gromit, at 62 West Wallaby Street that is in a part of Wigan in Lancashire.

He usually wears brown woollen trousers, a white shirt with detachable sleeves, and a red tie under a green vee-necked knitted sleeveless sweater. He is fond of cheese, especially Wensleydale, with crackers.

Nick Park, his creator, said: &quot;He&#x27;s a very self-contained figure. A very homely sort who doesn&#x27;t mind the odd adventure.&quot; He is loosely based on Park&#x27;s father and Park has never made it clear as to whether Wallace is the character&#x27;s forename or surname, preferring to leave this ambiguous. 

Wallace was voiced by Peter Sallis until his retirement in 2010, being succeeded by Ben Whitehead since 2009.

Wallace is an inveterate inventor, creating elaborate contraptions that often do not work wholly as intended. Their appearance is similar to the illustrations of W. Heath Robinson and Rube Goldberg, where Nick Park has said of Wallace that all his inventions are designed around the principle of using a &quot;sledgehammer to crack a nut&quot;. Some of Wallace&#x27;s contraptions are based on real-life inventions. For example, his method of waking up in the morning uses a bed that tips up to wake up its owner, an invention that was exhibited at the Great Exhibition of 1851 by Theophilus Carter.

Wallace has had three romantic interests. The first was wool shop owner Wendolene Ramsbottom, which ended quickly when Wendolene told Wallace that she was allergic to cheese. The second was Lady Campanula Tottington in &quot;The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot;, whom Wallace fondly calls &quot;Totty&quot;. In &quot;A Matter of Loaf and Death&quot;, Wallace becomes engaged to Piella Bakewell, who turns out to be a serial killer of bakers.

===Gromit===

Gromit is a beagle, with a cream-coloured short-hair coat and oversized floppy dark brown ears, who is Wallace&#x27;s pet dog and best friend. He is very intelligent, having graduated from &quot;Dogwarts University&quot; (&quot;Dogwarts&quot; being a pun on &quot;Hogwarts&quot;, the wizard school from the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; books) with a double first in Engineering for Dogs. He likes knitting, playing chess, reading the newspaper, tea and cooking. His prized possessions include his alarm clock, dog bone, brush, and a framed photo of himself with Wallace. He is very handy with electronic equipment and an excellent aeroplane pilot. He often threatens the plans of the antagonists he and Wallace encounter in their adventures. Sometimes, Gromit ignores Wallace&#x27;s orders, such as in &quot;A Close Shave&quot; and &quot;Shopper 13&quot;, where Wallace orders him to get rid of Shaun but Gromit does not. Gromit&#x27;s birthday is 12 February. In &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot;, he is seen circling the date on a calendar.

Gromit has no visible mouth and expresses himself through facial expressions and body language. Peter Hawkins originally intended to voice Gromit, but Park dropped the idea when he realised how Gromit&#x27;s thoughts and feelings could be known through movement with some canine noises on rare occasions. Many critics believe that Gromit&#x27;s silence makes him the perfect straight man, with a pantomime expressiveness that drew favourable comparisons to Buster Keaton. He does at times make dog-like noises, such as yelps and growling. According to the fortieth anniversary documentary &quot;A Grand Night In: The Story of Aardman&quot;, Gromit was originally supposed to be a cat, but the idea was dropped as Park realised that animating a dog was easier.

Generally speaking, Gromit&#x27;s tastes are more in vogue than those of Wallace; this being one of the many ways they contrast with each other as characters. Gromit seems to have a significant interest in encyclopaedic, classical and philosophical literature, and popular culture, including film and music. &quot;Electronics for Dogs&quot; has been a firm favourite since &quot;A Grand Day Out&quot;, and in &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot; Gromit&#x27;s bookshelves feature titles such as &quot;Kites&quot;, &quot;Sticks&quot;, &quot;Sheep&quot;, &quot;Penguins&quot;, &quot;Rockets&quot;, &quot;Bones&quot; and &quot;Stars&quot;, while he is seen reading &quot;The Republic&quot;, by Pluto (a nod to the Disney character of the same name and a pun on Plato) and &quot;Crime and Punishment&quot;, by Fido Dogstoyevsky (a pun on Fyodor Dostoyevsky). Gromit&#x27;s various possessions make extensive use of puns: &quot;A Matter of Loaf and Death&quot; features &quot;&quot;Pup Fiction&quot; (&quot;Pulp Fiction&quot;), &quot;The Dogfather&quot; (&quot;The Godfather&quot;), &quot;Where Beagles Dare&quot; (&quot;Where Eagles Dare&quot;), &quot;Bite Club&quot; (&quot;Fight Club&quot;) and &quot;The Bone Identity&quot; (&quot;The Bourne Identity&quot;) all as book titles, and &quot;Citizen Canine&quot;&quot; (&quot;Citizen Kane&quot;) as a film poster. In &quot;Vengeance Most Fowl&quot;, he is shown reading &quot;A Room of One&#x27;s Own&quot;, by &quot;Virginia Woof&quot; (a pun on Virginia Woolf), and &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;, by &quot;John Stilton&quot; (a pun on John Milton). His taste in music has been shown to cover Bach (presumably punning on &quot;bark&quot;), &quot;Poochini&quot; (a play on Puccini), &quot;McFlea&quot; (McFly), &quot;The Beagles&quot; (the Beatles), &quot;Red Hot Chili Puppies&quot; (Red Hot Chili Peppers) and &quot;Walkies on the Wild Side&quot; by Rod Lead.

Gromit gains his own love interest in &quot;A Matter of Loaf and Death&quot;, when he becomes attached to Fluffles, a poodle.

NASA named one of its new prototype Mars explorer robots after Gromit in 2005. On 1 April 2007, HMV announced that Gromit would stand in for Nipper for a three-month period, promoting children&#x27;s DVDs in its UK stores.

===Location===

Although not overtly setting the series in any particular town, Nick Park had previously hinted that its milieu was inspired by thoughts of 1950s Wigan, reinforced by an &quot;A–Z Wigan&quot; being displayed on Wallace&#x27;s Anti-Pesto van in &quot;The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot;. In &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot;, Gromit picks up a letter at the Wallace &amp; Gromit residence addressed to &quot;62 West Wallaby Street, Wigan&quot;. The address includes a postcode of WG7 3FU, though this does not match any street in the United Kingdom; Wigan postcodes begin with the letters WN. This address can be seen in the &quot;Cracking Contraptions&quot; episode &quot;Shopper 13&quot;.

Wallace&#x27;s accent (voiced by Peter Sallis) comes from the Holme Valley of West Yorkshire.

In the &quot;Cracking Contraptions&quot; episode &quot;The Soccamatic&quot;, Wallace says to Gromit, &quot;How do you like my Preston North End soccamatic, Gromit?&quot;. The episode references famous English footballers of the 1950s and &#x27;60s, including Nobby Stiles, Tom Finney and Bill Shankly (all of whom played for Preston in their careers) as well as Geoff Hurst and Stanley Matthews.

The nostalgic quality of &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; world has been compared to 1950s Beanotown.

==Filmography==

=== Main series ===
=== Spin-off films ===
===Television series===
== Box office and reception ==

===Box office performance===
===Critical and public reception===
===Academy Awards===
==Production==

===Stop motion technique===
The &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; films are shot using the stop motion animation technique. After detailed storyboarding, set and plasticine model construction, the films are shot one frame at a time, moving the models of the characters slightly to give the impression of movement in the final film. As is common with other animation techniques, the stop motion animation in &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; may duplicate frames if there is little motion, and in action scenes sometimes multiple exposures per frame are used to produce a faux motion blur. Because a second of film constitutes 24 separate frames, even a short half-hour film like &quot;A Close Shave&quot; takes a great deal of time to animate. General quotes on the speed of animation of a &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; film put the filming rate at typically around 30 frames per day per animator.
Some effects, particularly the fire, smoke and floating bunnies in &quot;The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot;, proved impossible to create in stop motion and were rendered by computer animation specialists, MPC film. MPC film studied the set for three months to create clay-like animation to match the stop-motion production. By paying close attention to detail, MPC was able to make the animated bunnies blend in with the clay bunnies. Adding imperfections such as fingerprints along with texture to the animated bunnies helped enhance the effect. MPC&#x27;s collaboration resulted in over 700 effects to aid the film along with colouring to match the visuals.

Most models were destroyed in the 2005 Aardman studio fire, but some still exist, such as a small scale model for the Cooker from &quot;A Grand Day Out&quot; and Feathers McGraw whilst trapped in a bottle from &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot;. The set and several props from the museum featured in the latter short film survived as well, as they were being kept at the National Science and Media Museum in Bradford, West Yorkshire, before the fire occurred. Additionally, a set from &quot;A Matter of Loaf and Death&quot;, which was produced after the fire, is presently on display at the We The Curious science centre.

===Music===
The music featured in every film was written by British film composer Julian Nott. The theme song was used to wake up astronauts aboard space shuttle mission STS-132 in May 2010.

==Other media==

===Video games===
A &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; interactive CD-ROM game from 1996, named &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit Fun Pack&quot;, was released for the PC, containing the &quot;Crackin&#x27; Compendium&quot; with three mini-games based on the three original animated shorts as well as brief video clips. The other program in the Fun Pack the &quot;Customise-O-Matic&quot; contained wallpapers, screen savers and sounds that could be assigned as system sounds. A sequel &quot;Fun Pack 2&quot; was released in 2000 featuring enhanced graphics and two new games as well as a remake of the Great Train Game.

The characters were associated with a 144-issue fortnightly digest called Techno Quest, published by Eaglemoss Publications starting in 1997. It was designed to get children interested in science and technology.

In 1997, an animated screensaver themed video game entitled &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit Cracking Animator&quot; was released. Screensaver games were made by Dibase. Players could create their own multimedia animations through the collation of things like sound effects, sets, characters and props. Players could manipulate the facial movements of characters to synchronise their expressions with dialogue. Players could choose to make their finished creation their screensaver, or choose one of the pre-made screensaver games. The &quot;Boston Herald&quot; offered a rating of 2.5 stars, noting that creativity is limited.

In September 2003, &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit in Project Zoo&quot; was released for the PlayStation 2, Xbox, GameCube, and Microsoft Windows. This separate story sees the duo take on Feathers McGraw (of &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot;) again. Still obsessed with diamonds, he escapes from the penguin enclosure of West Wallaby Zoo, where he was &quot;imprisoned&quot; at the end of &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot;, and takes over the entire zoo, kidnapping young animals and forcing their parents to work for him, helping him turn the zoo into a diamond mine.

In 2005, a video game of &quot;The Curse of The Were-Rabbit&quot; was released for PlayStation 2 and Xbox, following the plot of the film as Wallace and Gromit work as vermin-catchers, protecting customers&#x27; vegetable gardens from rabbits, using a &quot;BunGun&quot;. Gameplay for the Project Zoo involve players exclusively controlling Gromit, as Wallace functions as a helper non-player character, but in &quot;The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot;, gameplay shifts between the two, and includes two-player cooperative play. Both games were developed by Frontier Developments with the assistance of Aardman, with Peter Sallis reprising his role as Wallace. &quot;Project Zoo&quot; was published by BAM! Entertainment, while &quot;The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot; was published by Konami.

In July 2008, developer Telltale Games announced a new series of episodic video games based on the characters, called &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&#x27;s Grand Adventures&quot;. The first episode in &quot;Grand Adventures&quot;, &quot;Fright of the Bumblebees&quot;, was released on 23 March 2009. The second episode, &quot;The Last Resort&quot;, was released on 5 May 2009. Two more episodes, &quot;Muzzled!&quot; and &quot;The Bogey Man&quot;, were released in later 2009. The four episodes have separately been released on Xbox Live Arcade for the Xbox 360.

On 25 July 2024, a &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot;-themed course was added to the virtual reality game &quot;Walkabout Mini Golf&quot; as downloadable content.
====List of video games====

There are also several interactive games on the official &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot;, &quot;Shaun the Sheep&quot; and &quot;Timmy Time&quot; websites.

===Comic===
British publisher Titan Magazines started producing a monthly &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; comic after the debut of &quot;Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot;. The characters still run Anti-Pesto, and both Shaun and Feathers McGraw have appeared in the comic.

The two characters appeared in the monthly &quot;BeanoMAX&quot; comic until its closure in June 2013, and now appear every four weeks in &quot;The Beano&quot;. They are heavily featured in &#x27;Aardmag&#x27;, the free online magazine that is unofficial but supported by Aardman Animations. Nick Park guest-edited the 70th birthday issue of &quot;The Beano&quot; weekly, and so this issue contained numerous &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; references.

On 17 May 2010, they began appearing daily in &quot;The Sun&quot;. It is credited to Titan and Aardman, with scripts written by Richy Chandler, Robert Etherington, Mike Garley, Ned Hartley, Rik Hoskin, David Leach, Luke Paton, J.P. Rutter, Rona Simpson and Gordon Volke, art by Sylvia Bennion, Jay Clarke, Jimmy Hansen, Viv Heath, Mychailo Kazybrid and Brian Williamson. It replaced &quot;George and Lynne&quot;. A graphic novel compiling all 311 daily strips was released on 8 October 2013, and a second volume followed on 4 November 2014. A third volume was released on 25 March 2015, and a fourth volume was released on 9 September 2015.

====List of comics====

;List of graphic novels
*&quot;The Lost Slipper&quot;, 1997
*&quot;The Lost Slipper and Curse of the Ramsbottoms&quot;, 1998
*&quot;Anoraknophobia&quot;, 1998
*&quot;Crackers in Space&quot;, 1999
*&quot;A Grand Day Out&quot;, 1999
*&quot;Catch of the Day&quot;, 2002
*&quot;The Whippet Vanishes&quot;, 2004
*&quot;A Pier Too Far&quot;, 2004
*&quot;The Bootiful Game&quot;, 2005
*&quot;Plots in Space&quot;, 2007
*&quot;A Grand Day Out&quot;, 2009
*&quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot;, 2010
*&quot;The Complete Newspaper Comic Strips Collection&quot;, 2013
*&quot;The Complete Newspaper Comic Strips Collection, Volume 2&quot;, 2014
*&quot;The Complete Newspaper Comic Strips Collection, Volume 3&quot;, 2015
*&quot;The Complete Newspaper Comic Strips Collection, Volume 4&quot;, 2015

===Theatre===
In November 1997 the characters appeared in a play called &quot;Wallace And Gromit™ Alive on Stage in a Grand Night Out&quot;. This show featured Feathers McGraw escaping prison and hypnotising Wendolene to assist in his planned revenge on the duo, culminating in a showdown involving Shaun the Sheep donning the Techno-Trousers.

On 9 March 2011, Shaun the Sheep made its live theatre début in &quot;Shaun&#x27;s Big Show&quot;. The 100-minute-long musical/dance show features all the regular characters, including Bitzer, Shirley and Timmy.

In 2015, Shaun starred in &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot; pantomime at Bristol Hippodrome.

==Additional crew==
==Promotional appearances==
In 2003, Aardman produced a cinematic commercial for the Renault Kangoo starring Wallace and Gromit. The commercial, entitled &quot;The Kangoo-matic&quot;, played in front of several summer blockbusters in top British cinemas. Later &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; commercials were made for Jacob&#x27;s Cream Crackers, energy supplier Npower and beverage PG Tips.

The duo were used to promote a Harvey Nichols store that opened in Bristol (where Aardman is based) in 2008. The pictures show them, and Lady Tottington from &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot;, wearing designer clothes and items. They were used to prevent a Wensleydale cheese factory from shutting down because of financial difficulties after a member of staff came up with the idea of using Wallace and Gromit as mascots, as Wensleydale is one of Wallace&#x27;s favourite cheeses.

On 28 March 2009, The Science Museum in London opened an exhibition called &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit present a World of Cracking Ideas&quot;. The family-orientated show, open until 1 November 2009, hoped to inspire children to be inventive. Wallace and Gromit were featured in many exhibition-exclusive videos, as well as one announcing the opening of the exhibition.
In December 2010, Wallace and Gromit featured on series of UK postage stamps issued by the Royal Mail for Christmas. The same month, Nick Park appeared on BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot; and announced that he was working with Blackpool Pleasure Beach to build a theme park ride based on the characters. Wallace &amp; Gromit&#x27;s Thrill-O-Matic dark ride was opened by Park at Blackpool Pleasure Beach in 2013.

Wallace and Gromit appeared in a one-minute special for the Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II called &quot;Jubilee Bunt-a-thon&quot;. In 2012, Wallace and Gromit featured on an advert saying &quot;Inventing For Britain&quot; which was part of a poster campaign to promote British trade and business aboard in the year they hosted the Olympics.

In August 2012, they presented an edition of The BBC Proms, &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&#x27;s Musical Marvels&quot;, as Prom 20 of the 2012 season. Because of its popularity, &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&#x27;s Musical Marvels&quot; became a full touring show in 2013. It premièred at The Plenary in Melbourne, Australia on 9 February 2013. It was performed at other venues throughout 2013, with &quot;A Matter of Loaf and Death&quot; screened at each performance.

In 2013 and 2014 the pair appeared in a nationwide TV, press and cinema campaign promoting the British government&#x27;s &quot;Holidays at Home are Great&quot; directive, called &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&#x27;s Great UK Adventure&quot;.

In December 2019, they appeared in a DFS Furniture advert created by Krow to celebrate their 30th anniversary. Helena Bonham Carter reprised her role as Lady Tottington with new dialogue for the advert.

From 29 November to 31 December 2024, a six-minute &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; animation was projected onto London&#x27;s Battersea Power Station every evening, as part of Apple&#x27;s Shot on iPhone marketing campaign.

In 2025, &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; entered into a partnership with gravy brand Bisto. Characters from the films featured on Bisto products, with consumers offered the chance to win a lab-grown blue diamond worth £1,500. A pop-up gravy restaurant called &quot;The Gravy Boat&quot; also opened in Paddington, London, offering a gravy-themed three course menu and &quot;meet and greet&quot; opportunites for diners to meet Wallace, Gromit and Feathers McGraw.

==Charity==

&quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; spearheaded the fundraising for two children&#x27;s charities, Wallace &amp; Gromit&#x27;s Children&#x27;s Foundation, which supports children&#x27;s hospices and hospitals in the United Kingdom, and Wallace &amp; Gromit&#x27;s Grand Appeal, the Bristol Children&#x27;s Hospital Charity. In July 2013, 80 giant fibreglass decorated sculptures of Gromit were distributed around Bristol as part of a Nick Park-inspired project to raise funds for the charity. The project is named Gromit Unleashed and sculptures were decorated by a range of artists and celebrities, including Joanna Lumley, Sir Peter Blake, Trevor Baylis and Jools Holland. A similar project featuring Shaun the Sheep called Shaun in the City was in 2015. A third was placed in 2018 called Gromit Unleashed 2, also featuring Wallace &amp; Shaun. In 2020 &quot;Gromit Unleashed: The Grand Adventure&quot; will be in The Mall, Cribbs Causeway featuring 15 sculptures of Wallace, Gromit, Shaun and Feathers. On 23 August 2023 a fourth trail was announced, the trail in Bristol will run in 2025.

==Theme park ride==

A theme park ride called &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&#x27;s Thrill-O-Matic&quot; opened at Blackpool Pleasure Beach on 29 April 2013 by creator Nick Park, Amanda Thompson, Nick Thompson, Nick Farmer and Merlin Crossingham.

The ride, which cost £5.25 million to make, was created by Blackpool Pleasure Beach design in association with Aardman Animations. The cars on the ride are designed on one of Wallace&#x27;s slippers, so that, when a rider is seated, it is as if they are sitting inside a large slipper. The ride lasts almost four minutes, and features scenes from &quot;A Grand Day Out&quot;, &quot;The Wrong Trousers&quot;, &quot;A Close Shave&quot;, &quot;The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot; and &quot;A Matter of Loaf and Death&quot; along with some archive audio and some newly recorded lines from Ben Whitehead as the voice of Wallace.

== Spin-offs ==
=== &quot;Shaun the Sheep&quot; (2007–present) ===

In 2007, a spin-off series &quot;Shaun the Sheep&quot; was created for the character of Shaun, first introduced in 1995&#x27;s &quot;A Close Shave&quot;. In the series, Shaun lives with his flock at Mossy Bottom Farm, a traditional small northern English farm. In each episode, their latest attempt to add excitement to their dull mundane life as livestock somehow snowballs into a fantastic sitcom-style escapade, most often with the help of their fascination with human doings and devices. This usually brings them into conflict—and often into partnership—with the farm sheepdog Bitzer, while they all are simultaneously trying to avoid discovery by the Farmer. Following the success of the series, two series of 1-minute shorts were created – &quot;Mossy Bottom Shorts&quot; and &quot;Championsheeps&quot;—followed by a television special &quot;The Farmer&#x27;s Llamas&quot; (2015) and two feature films, &quot;Shaun the Sheep Movie&quot; (2015) and &quot;A Shaun the Sheep Movie: Farmageddon&quot; (2019).

=== &quot;Timmy Time&quot; (2009–12) ===

In 2009, a spin-off of &quot;Shaun the Sheep&quot;, &quot;Timmy Time&quot;, was created centring on the character of the same name. In the series, Timmy and his friends have to learn to share, make friends and accept their mistakes. They are supervised by two teachers, Harriet the Heron and Osbourne the Owl. The show is aimed at pre-school-aged children which the company described as &quot;a natural step for Aardman&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*Wallace &amp; Gromit’s Children&#x27;s Charity</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q870889" start="34" end="44" title="claymation" label="claymation"/>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="52" end="61" title="media franchise" label="franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q336206" start="73" end="82" title="Nick Park" label="Nick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q301092" start="99" end="117" title="Aardman Animations" label="Aardman Animations"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="239" end="254" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102" start="255" end="261" title="beagle" label="beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="283" end="294" title="short films" label="short films"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="300" end="319" title="feature-length film" label="feature-length film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783701" start="393" end="408" title="A Grand Day Out" label="A Grand Day Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q739052" start="478" end="490" title="Peter Sallis" label="Peter Sallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886687" start="495" end="508" title="Ben Whitehead" label="Ben Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q327968" start="611" end="628" title="facial expression" label="facial expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q477298" start="634" end="647" title="body language" label="body language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="817" end="825" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="1153" end="1163" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="1167" end="1183" title="Northern England" label="Northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q208143" start="1350" end="1355" title="Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484495" start="1393" end="1405" title="alliterative" label="alliterative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636852" start="1461" end="1473" title="Holme Valley" label="Holme Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23083" start="1477" end="1491" title="West Yorkshire" label="West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972540" start="1521" end="1539" title="Wensleydale cheese" label="Wensleydale cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783701" start="1643" end="1658" title="A Grand Day Out" label="A Grand Day Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969617" start="1679" end="1697" title="The Wrong Trousers" label="The Wrong Trousers"/>
<link wikidata="Q400097" start="1721" end="1734" title="A Close Shave" label="A Close Shave"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="1770" end="1785" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1816" end="1866" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1923" end="1972" title="List of highest-grossing animated films#Stop motion animation" label="second-highest-grossing stop-motion animated film"/>
<link wikidata="Q156401" start="1999" end="2010" title="Chicken Run" label="Chicken Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q501348" start="2085" end="2111" title="A Matter of Loaf and Death" label="A Matter of Loaf and Death"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2182" end="2223" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: Vengeance Most Fowl" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: Vengeance Most Fowl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2266" end="2281" title="List of Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit characters#Feathers McGraw" label="Feathers McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2382" end="2400" title="Nick Park#Awards and nominations" label="numerous accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="2417" end="2423" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="BAFTAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="2431" end="2445" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="2452" end="2465" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783701" start="2509" end="2524" title="A Grand Day Out" label="A Grand Day Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q917808" start="2554" end="2596" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film" label="Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969617" start="2628" end="2646" title="The Wrong Trousers" label="The Wrong Trousers"/>
<link wikidata="Q400097" start="2663" end="2676" title="A Close Shave" label="A Close Shave"/>
<link wikidata="Q318428" start="2723" end="2751" title="The Curse of the Were-Rabbit" label="The Curse of the Were-Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192557" start="2865" end="2875" title="DreamWorks Pictures" label="DreamWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q752301" start="2992" end="3004" title="Flushed Away" label="Flushed Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q459318" start="3065" end="3076" title="Americanize" label="Americanise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12151852" start="3186" end="3195" title="nostalgic" label="nostalgic"/>
<link wikidata="Q501348" start="3260" end="3286" title="A Matter of Loaf and Death" label="A Matter of Loaf and Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="3481" end="3492" title="BAFTA Award" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975096" start="3575" end="3585" title="Peter Lord" label="Peter Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q739052" start="3752" end="3764" title="Peter Sallis" label="Peter Sallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886687" start="3845" end="3858" title="Ben Whitehead" label="Ben Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="3976" end="3985" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="4875" end="4892" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="4898" end="4908" title="mobile app" label="mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q234128" start="4936" end="4952" title="Miriam Margolyes" label="Miriam Margolyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089554" start="4954" end="4964" title="Isy Suttie" label="Isy Suttie"/>
<link wikidata="Q976829" start="4969" end="4979" title="Jim Carter (actor)" label="Jim Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="5111" end="5118" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5276" end="5317" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: Vengeance Most Fowl" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: Vengeance Most Fowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="5439" end="5446" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q208143" start="5645" end="5650" title="Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039666" start="5775" end="5785" title="v-neck" label="vee-necked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762432" start="5794" end="5812" title="sleeveless sweater" label="sleeveless sweater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972540" start="5847" end="5858" title="Wensleydale cheese" label="Wensleydale"/>
<link wikidata="Q336206" start="5876" end="5885" title="Nick Park" label="Nick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q739052" start="6220" end="6232" title="Peter Sallis" label="Peter Sallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886687" start="6282" end="6295" title="Ben Whitehead" label="Ben Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001969" start="6353" end="6375" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit&amp;#x27;s Cracking Contraptions" label="elaborate contraptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q731717" start="6471" end="6488" title="W. Heath Robinson" label="W. Heath Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q505850" start="6493" end="6506" title="Rube Goldberg" label="Rube Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q336206" start="6514" end="6523" title="Nick Park" label="Nick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="6862" end="6878" title="Great Exhibition" label="Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782287" start="6890" end="6907" title="Theophilus Carter" label="Theophilus Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102" start="7377" end="7383" title="beagle" label="beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="7418" end="7422" title="fur" label="coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q174097" start="7629" end="7637" title="Hogwarts" label="Hogwarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="7678" end="7690" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="7711" end="7723" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="double first"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969617" start="8331" end="8349" title="The Wrong Trousers" label="The Wrong Trousers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174587" start="8498" end="8511" title="Peter Hawkins" label="Peter Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332499" start="8777" end="8789" title="straight man" label="straight man"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="8798" end="8807" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q103949" start="8859" end="8872" title="Buster Keaton" label="Buster Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8997" end="9035" title="A Grand Night In: The Story of Aardman" label="A Grand Night In: The Story of Aardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783701" start="9542" end="9557" title="A Grand Day Out" label="A Grand Day Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969617" start="9578" end="9596" title="The Wrong Trousers" label="The Wrong Trousers"/>
<link wikidata="Q108732" start="9868" end="9901" title="Pluto (Disney)" label="Disney character of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="9915" end="9920" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="9991" end="10009" title="Fyodor Dostoyevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q501348" start="10080" end="10106" title="A Matter of Loaf and Death" label="A Matter of Loaf and Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q104123" start="10159" end="10171" title="Pulp Fiction" label="Pulp Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="10213" end="10226" title="The Godfather" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q392806" start="10273" end="10290" title="Where Eagles Dare" label="Where Eagles Dare"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="10328" end="10338" title="Fight Club" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q592078" start="10387" end="10406" title="The Bourne Identity (novel)" label="The Bourne Identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="10478" end="10490" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10525" end="10544" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: Vengeance Most Fowl" label="Vengeance Most Fowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="10649" end="10663" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="10735" end="10746" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="10792" end="10796" title="Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311" start="10871" end="10878" title="Puccini" label="Puccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q223768" start="10901" end="10906" title="McFly" label="McFly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="10934" end="10945" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="10983" end="11004" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454080" start="11010" end="11058" title="Walk on the Wild Side (Lou_Reed_song)" label="&amp;quot;Walkies on the Wild Side&amp;quot; by Rod Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q501348" start="11105" end="11131" title="A Matter of Loaf and Death" label="A Matter of Loaf and Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="11188" end="11192" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="11224" end="11228" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854572" start="11284" end="11287" title="HMV" label="HMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752846" start="11329" end="11335" title="Nipper" label="Nipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q208143" start="11574" end="11579" title="Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953721" start="12012" end="12014" title="WN postcode area" label="WN"/>
<link wikidata="Q739052" start="12148" end="12160" title="Peter Sallis" label="Peter Sallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636852" start="12177" end="12189" title="Holme Valley" label="Holme Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23083" start="12193" end="12207" title="West Yorkshire" label="West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001969" start="12265" end="12279" title="The Soccamatic" label="The Soccamatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612" start="12336" end="12353" title="Preston North End" label="Preston North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q344152" start="12469" end="12481" title="Nobby Stiles" label="Nobby Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q352338" start="12483" end="12493" title="Tom Finney" label="Tom Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q207457" start="12498" end="12510" title="Bill Shankly" label="Bill Shankly"/>
<link wikidata="Q212738" start="12572" end="12583" title="Geoff Hurst" label="Geoff Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q216140" start="12588" end="12604" title="Stanley Matthews" label="Stanley Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="12698" end="12707" title="Beanotown" label="Beanotown"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="13018" end="13029" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q840688" start="13089" end="13099" title="plasticine" label="plasticine"/>
<link wikidata="Q795160" start="13143" end="13148" title="Film frame" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q852589" start="13502" end="13513" title="motion blur" label="motion blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="14000" end="14018" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14522" end="14546" title="Aardman Animations#History" label="2005 Aardman studio fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054692" start="14855" end="14888" title="National Science and Media Museum" label="National Science and Media Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="14892" end="14900" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812263" start="15075" end="15089" title="We The Curious" label="We The Curious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354267" start="15189" end="15200" title="Julian Nott" label="Julian Nott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15277" end="15284" title="STS-132#Wake-up calls" label="STS-132"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="15474" end="15476" title="Personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="16676" end="16689" title="Boston Herald" label="Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542525" start="16788" end="16823" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit in Project Zoo" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit in Project Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="16851" end="16864" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="16866" end="16870" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="16872" end="16880" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="16886" end="16903" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17353" end="17381" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit (video game)" label="The Curse of The Were-Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="17405" end="17418" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="17423" end="17427" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="17704" end="17724" title="non-player character" label="non-player character"/>
<link wikidata="Q302251" start="17879" end="17900" title="Frontier Developments" label="Frontier Developments"/>
<link wikidata="Q795397" start="18023" end="18041" title="BAM! Entertainment" label="BAM! Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q45700" start="18107" end="18113" title="Konami" label="Konami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383563" start="18140" end="18154" title="Telltale Games" label="Telltale Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383567" start="18181" end="18200" title="episodic video game" label="episodic video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548088" start="18240" end="18284" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit&amp;#x27;s Grand Adventures" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit&amp;#x27;s Grand Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q49612" start="18640" end="18656" title="Xbox Live Arcade" label="Xbox Live Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="18665" end="18673" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q87741364" start="18759" end="18779" title="virtual reality game" label="virtual reality game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066707" start="18815" end="18835" title="downloadable content" label="downloadable content"/>
<link wikidata="Q66731094" start="19053" end="19068" title="Titan Magazines" label="Titan Magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822817" start="19343" end="19351" title="BeanoMAX" label="BeanoMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="19437" end="19446" title="The Beano" label="The Beano"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="19800" end="19807" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11831" start="21778" end="21821" title="Snow White" label="&amp;quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="21822" end="21831" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968925" start="21835" end="21853" title="Bristol Hippodrome" label="Bristol Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q301092" start="21913" end="21920" title="Aardman" label="Aardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="21961" end="21975" title="Renault Kangoo" label="Renault Kangoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118201" start="22196" end="22208" title="Jacob&amp;#x27;s" label="Jacob&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q829558" start="22241" end="22247" title="Npower (United Kingdom)" label="Npower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044120" start="22261" end="22268" title="PG Tips" label="PG Tips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088141" start="22302" end="22316" title="Harvey Nichols" label="Harvey Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22435" end="22485" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972540" start="22557" end="22575" title="Wensleydale cheese" label="Wensleydale cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="22801" end="22819" title="The Science Museum" label="The Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23201" end="23228" title="Great Britain commemorative stamps 2010–2019#2010" label="series of UK postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q638098" start="23243" end="23253" title="Royal Mail" label="Royal Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="23332" end="23351" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q578703" start="23397" end="23421" title="Blackpool Pleasure Beach" label="Blackpool Pleasure Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032883" start="23474" end="23516" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit&amp;#x27;s Thrill-O-Matic" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit&amp;#x27;s Thrill-O-Matic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934961" start="23517" end="23526" title="dark ride" label="dark ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191088" start="23644" end="23675" title="Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II" label="Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125280" start="23689" end="23708" title="Jubilee Bunt-a-thon" label="Jubilee Bunt-a-thon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="23972" end="23985" title="The BBC Proms" label="The BBC Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962726" start="23993" end="24036" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit&amp;#x27;s Musical Marvels" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit&amp;#x27;s Musical Marvels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24210" end="24221" title="Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre#Melbourne Convention Centre" label="The Plenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="24225" end="24234" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204927" start="24667" end="24680" title="DFS Furniture" label="DFS Furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="24741" end="24761" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q810953" start="24961" end="24984" title="Battersea Power Station" label="Battersea Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="25011" end="25016" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918509" start="25146" end="25151" title="Bisto" label="Bisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q751479" start="25250" end="25272" title="Synthetic diamond" label="lab-grown blue diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228945" start="25289" end="25312" title="pop-up restaurant" label="pop-up gravy restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q124230" start="25362" end="25372" title="Paddington" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="25374" end="25380" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969002" start="25817" end="25849" title="Bristol Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Bristol Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222173" start="26049" end="26065" title="Gromit Unleashed" label="Gromit Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q254886" start="26145" end="26158" title="Joanna Lumley" label="Joanna Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q504611" start="26160" end="26175" title="Peter Blake (artist)" label="Sir Peter Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387401" start="26177" end="26190" title="Trevor Baylis" label="Trevor Baylis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181991" start="26195" end="26208" title="Jools Holland" label="Jools Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q477959" start="26238" end="26253" title="Shaun the Sheep" label="Shaun the Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q21428021" start="26261" end="26278" title="Shaun in the City" label="Shaun in the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816535" start="26326" end="26344" title="Gromit Unleashed 2" label="Gromit Unleashed 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184889" start="26451" end="26476" title="The Mall, Cribbs Causeway" label="The Mall, Cribbs Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q578703" start="26740" end="26764" title="Blackpool Pleasure Beach" label="Blackpool Pleasure Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q14513233" start="26804" end="26819" title="Amanda Thompson (businesswoman)" label="Amanda Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27942279" start="26821" end="26834" title="Nick Thompson (businessman)" label="Nick Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q400097" start="27698" end="27711" title="A Close Shave" label="A Close Shave"/>
<link wikidata="Q21775883" start="28413" end="28437" title="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Llamas" label="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Llamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545272" start="28480" end="28501" title="Shaun the Sheep Movie" label="Shaun the Sheep Movie"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28525" end="28561" title="A Shaun the Sheep Movie: Farmageddon" label="A Shaun the Sheep Movie: Farmageddon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33578" wikidata="Q20445370" url="?curid=33578" title="1 World Trade Center (1971–2001)">
<text>The original One World Trade Center (also known as the North Tower, Tower 1, Building One, or 1 WTC) was one of the Twin Towers of the original World Trade Center complex in New York City. It was completed in 1972, stood at a height of , and was the tallest building in the world until 1973, when surpassed by the Sears Tower in Chicago.

It was distinguishable from its twin, the original 2 World Trade Center, also known as the South Tower, by the telecommunications antenna on its roof. Including the antenna, the building stood at a total height of . Other things that made the North Tower distinguishable from its twin was a canopy connected to the North Tower&#x27;s west facade on street level as well as two pedestrian walkways that extended from the west and south promenades of Three and Six World Trade Center to the North Tower&#x27;s north and south facades on plaza level, all of which the South Tower lacked. The building&#x27;s address was 1 World Trade Center, and the WTC complex had its own ZIP code (10048) due to its large size.

The original World Trade Center was destroyed in the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Struck by American Airlines Flight 11 at 8:46 a.m., the North Tower was the first of the Twin Towers to be hit by a hijacked aircraft, and the second to collapse, at 10:28 a.m. The North Tower stood for 102 minutes after the aircraft impact. Of the 2,977 victims killed in the attacks, around 1,700 were in the North Tower or on the ground.

The North Tower was succeeded by the present-day One World Trade Center tower, which was opened in November 2014 as the lead building of the redeveloped World Trade Center site. At the National September 11 Memorial &amp; Museum, the northern pool marks the spot where the North Tower once stood.

== History ==

=== Development ===

In 1961, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey agreed to build the World Trade Center on the site of the Hudson Terminal in Lower Manhattan, New York City. On , 1962, the Port Authority announced the selection of Minoru Yamasaki as lead architect and Emery Roth &amp; Sons as associate architects. Yamasaki devised the plan to incorporate twin towers. His original plan called for the towers to be 80 stories tall, but to meet the Port Authority&#x27;s requirement for of office space, the buildings would each have to be 110 stories tall. Yamasaki&#x27;s design for the World Trade Center, unveiled to the public on , 1964, called for a square plan approximately in dimension on each side.

In March 1965, the Port Authority began acquiring property at the World Trade Center site. Demolition work began on , 1966, and groundbreaking for the construction of the World Trade Center took place on , 1966. In January 1967, the Port Authority awarded $74 million in contracts to various steel suppliers. Construction work began on the North Tower in . The topping out ceremony for 1 WTC (the North Tower) took place on , 1970. The first tenants moved into the North Tower on , while it was still under construction, and a ribbon cutting ceremony took place on , 1973.

=== Operation ===
On February 13, 1975, a three-alarm fire broke out on the North Tower&#x27;s 11th floor, spreading to the 9th and 14th floors. At that time, the World Trade Center had no fire sprinkler systems. A disgruntled custodian was discovered to have deliberately started the fire and was criminally charged. Following the fire, in 1981, the Port Authority announced a $45 million plan to install sprinklers throughout the World Trade Center.

The first terrorist attack on the World Trade Center occurred on February 26, 1993, at 12:17 p.m. A Ryder truck filled with of explosives (planted by Ramzi Yousef) detonated in the North Tower&#x27;s underground garage. According to a presiding judge, the conspirators&#x27; chief aim at the time of the attack was to destabilize the North Tower and send it crashing into the South Tower, toppling both skyscrapers. Six people were killed and 1,042 others were injured in the attacks. Following the bombing, floors that were blown out needed to be repaired to restore structural support.

In February 2001, the Port Authority leased the entire World Trade Center complex to Vornado Realty Trust. However, Vornado insisted on last minute changes to the deal, and the next-highest bidder, Silverstein Properties, signed a lease for the complex on , 2001.

=== Destruction ===

At 8:46 a.m. (EDT) on September 11, 2001, five hijackers affiliated with al-Qaeda crashed American Airlines Flight 11 into the northern facade of the North Tower between the 93rd and 99th floors. Seventeen minutes later, at 9:03 a.m. (EDT), a second group of five terrorists crashed the hijacked United Airlines Flight 175 into the southern facade of the South Tower, striking between the 77th and 85th floors.

By 9:59 a.m. (EDT), the South Tower collapsed after burning for approximately 56 minutes. After burning for 102 minutes, the North Tower collapsed due to structural failure at 10:28 a.m. (EDT). When the North Tower collapsed, debris fell on the nearby 7 World Trade Center, damaging it and starting fires. The fires burned for hours, compromising the building&#x27;s structural integrity. Seven World Trade Center collapsed at 5:21 p.m. (EDT).

Together with a simultaneous attack on the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia, and a passenger revolt that resulted in a plane crash in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, the attacks resulted in the deaths of 2,996 people (2,507 civilians, 343 firefighters, 72 law enforcement officers, 55 military personnel, and the 19 hijackers). More than 90% of the workers and visitors who died in the towers had been at or above the points of impact. In the North Tower, 1,355 people at or above the point of impact were trapped, and died of smoke inhalation, fell, jumped from the tower to escape the smoke and flames, or were killed when the building eventually collapsed. One stairwell in the South Tower, Stairwell A, somehow avoided complete destruction, unlike the rest of the building. When Flight 11 hit, all three staircases in the North Tower&#x27;s impact zone were destroyed, making it impossible for anyone above the 91st floor to escape. 107 people below the point of impact also died.

==Architecture==
Minoru Yamasaki was the lead architect for the tower, and Emery Roth &amp; Sons were the associate architects. During the World Trade Center&#x27;s construction, the structural engineers ended up following draft versions of New York City&#x27;s 1968 building codes, which incorporated &quot;advanced techniques&quot; in building design. The Twin Towers used a tube-frame design, which required 40 percent less structural steel than conventional building designs. The structures were inspired by the architectural ethic of Le Corbusier and was the seminal expression of Yamasaki&#x27;s gothic modernist tendencies. Yamasaki was also inspired by Islamic architecture, elements of which he incorporated in the buildings&#x27; design, having previously designed Saudi Arabia&#x27;s Dhahran International Airport with the Saudi Binladin Group. 

When completed, the North Tower stood tall. It featured a telecommunications antenna or mast that was built on the roof in 1979 (upgraded in 1999 to accommodate DTV broadcasts). With this addition, the highest point of the North Tower reached . Each tower stood over high, and occupied about of the total of the site&#x27;s land.

=== Facade ===
The Twin Towers&#x27; facades were made of high-strength, load-bearing perimeter steel columns which acted as Vierendeel trusses. Although the columns themselves were lightweight, they were spaced closely together, forming a strong, rigid wall structure. There were 59 perimeter columns, narrowly spaced, on each side of the building. In all, the perimeter walls measured long on each side, and the corners were beveled. The perimeter structure was constructed of prefabricated modular pieces connected by plates. From the 7th floor to the ground level, and down to the foundation, the columns were spaced apart to accommodate doorways. All columns were placed on bedrock 65–85 feet (20–26 m) below the surface.

=== Structural features ===
The building&#x27;s core housed the elevator and utility shafts, restrooms, three stairwells, and other support spaces. The core of each tower was a rectangular area 87 by 135 feet (27 by 41 m), and contained 47 steel columns running from the bedrock to the top of the tower. The North Tower&#x27;s structural core was oriented with the long axis east to west. The core columns supported about half the towers&#x27; weight. All elevators were located in the core. Each building had three stairwells, also in the core, except on the mechanical floors. The large, column-free space between the perimeter and core was bridged by prefabricated floor trusses, which connected to the perimeter columns.

Hat trusses (or &quot;outrigger truss&quot;) located from the 107th floor to the top of the North and South towers were designed to support a tall communication antenna on top of each building. Only the North Tower actually had an antenna fitted, which was added in 1979. The framed-tube design using steel core and perimeter columns protected with sprayed-on fire resistant material created a relatively lightweight structure that would sway more in response to the wind. In designing the World Trade Center, Leslie Robertson considered the scenario of the impact of a jet airliner crashing into the building. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) found a three-page white paper that mentioned another aircraft impact analysis, involving impact of a jet at , was indeed considered, but NIST could not locate the documentary evidence of the aircraft impact analysis.

Sprayed-fire resistant materials (SFRMs), gypsum wallboard, and vermiculite were used to provide fireproofing to the interiors. More fireproofing was added after a fire in February 1975, but after the 1993 bombing, inspections found fireproofing to be deficient. The 1968 New York City building codes did not require sprinklers for high-rise buildings, except for underground spaces, but the entire complex was retrofitted by 2001.

==Tenants at the time of the attacks==
The tenant list below was compiled from the original list provided by CoStar Group (a provider of electronic commercial real estate information), quoted by CNN, and was sourced from UnBlinking.com. Cantor Fitzgerald&#x27;s corporate headquarters were located in 1 World Trade Center.


SOURCES: CoStar Group, CNN, and Unblinking.

Floor unknown: Alliance Global Finance, Associated Charter Marine, Carreden Group, CIF Agency, Dimetol International Trade, Eastern Capital Corporation, Falcon International Freight, First Pacific Rim, GAC Shipping, Garwood Financial, Globe Shipping Company, GSI Cargo Service, Hachijuni Bank, Hanil Securities, Lin Brothers International, Pluto Commodities, Port Newark

===92nd floor===
The 92nd floor, though technically the first floor below Flight 11&#x27;s impact zone, did not have any survivors. Sixty-nine people reported to work that morning, including 67 employees of Carr Futures, a tenant on the 92nd floor. The impact itself spared every single person on Floor 92 and did no damage to the floor directly. However, the force of the crash collapsed walls and inflicted nonstructural damage such as smashed windows, broken ceiling tiles and severed electrical wires, as well as causing knee-deep flooding throughout various rooms on the 92nd floor after the water pipes burst. Multiple calls were recorded from people trapped on the floor, the workers reporting that although the stairs on the 92nd floor had not been destroyed, they were walled off by fallen debris from Flight 11&#x27;s impact zone immediately above. In addition to the stairs being rendered impassable, the centralized impact into the North Tower&#x27;s core also interrupted elevator service in the skyscraper from its 50th floor and higher, severing all escape routes for anyone above the 91st floor.

Initially, conditions on the 92nd floor were likely not dissimilar to what they were on the 91st, from which everyone survived and escaped. The situation changed very quickly when flammable aviation fuel spilled down into the 92nd floor, igniting fires that rapidly began consuming its east side; within 12 minutes of the impact, the first known fatalities from the floor occurred over a three-minute period when eight workers were forced to jump from the northern end of the tower&#x27;s east side to escape a rapidly advancing wall of flames.
Those who remained made their way to an unoccupied area on the west side of the floor that was initially free of smoke and fire. However, images show that the blaze on the tower’s north face eventually spread westward to their safe haven in that section of the floor, making conditions there unsurvivable.

The last phone call from the North Tower came from Thomas McGinnis, a trader on the 92nd floor, when he got through to his wife Iliana at 10:18. McGinnis and a number of others had been confined to a conference room the entire time after the door jammed shut from the building buckling as the plane hit, separating them from everyone else on the floor. Most of the floor was engulfed in flames by the time McGinnis called, with extremely limited space for the group to avoid being burned.
Despite his wife&#x27;s attempts to reassure him, McGinnis did not believe they would survive. The South Tower had already collapsed, and McGinnis revealed to her that he could see people jumping from the floors above. The line went dead at 10:26, two minutes before the tower collapsed.

===Tenants that left prior to the attacks===
Between 1978 and 1995, the Consulate of Paraguay was located in Suite 1609 of 1 World Trade Center. Home Lines once occupied Suite 3969 from 1974 until 1988.

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* &quot;WTC Response Update: Governor Pataki Announces Partnership To Help New York City Businesses In Need Of Office Space&quot;. CoStar Group.
* List of World Trade Center tenants via CNN (Archive)
* World Trade Center Tenant Relocation Summary via TenantWise.com
* World Trade Center Tragedy: Information for Families, Friends and Colleagues – Marsh and McLennan Companies



 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20445370" start="13" end="35" title="1 World Trade Center (1971–2001)" label="One World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q20445370" start="55" end="66" title="1 World Trade Center (1971–2001)" label="North Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q20445370" start="68" end="75" title="1 World Trade Center (1971–2001)" label="Tower 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q20445370" start="77" end="89" title="1 World Trade Center (1971–2001)" label="Building One"/>
<link wikidata="Q20445370" start="94" end="99" title="1 World Trade Center (1971–2001)" label="1 WTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="144" end="162" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="174" end="187" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12234854" start="250" end="279" title="List of tallest buildings and structures in the world" label="tallest building in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="314" end="325" title="Willis Tower" label="Sears Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="329" end="336" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q20445008" start="390" end="410" title="List of tenants in 2 World Trade Center" label="2 World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q20445370" start="956" end="976" title="1 World Trade Center (1971–2001)" label="1 World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="1010" end="1018" title="ZIP code" label="ZIP code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692282" start="1020" end="1025" title="10048 (ZIP code)" label="10048"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1104" end="1143" title="September 11 attacks" label="terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694" start="1155" end="1182" title="American Airlines Flight 11" label="American Airlines Flight 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q62179" start="1298" end="1306" title="Collapse of the World Trade Center" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11245" start="1536" end="1558" title="One World Trade Center" label="One World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692282" start="1640" end="1663" title="World Trade Center site" label="World Trade Center site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136137" start="1672" end="1715" title="National September 11 Memorial &amp;amp; Museum" label="National September 11 Memorial &amp;amp; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q908666" start="1834" end="1875" title="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey" label="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="1896" end="1914" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918029" start="1934" end="1949" title="Hudson Terminal" label="Hudson Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="1953" end="1968" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q347215" start="2042" end="2057" title="Minoru Yamasaki" label="Minoru Yamasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q371506" start="2080" end="2101" title="Emery Roth" label="Emery Roth &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075723" start="2882" end="2893" title="topping out" label="topping out"/>
<link wikidata="Q123925193" start="3137" end="3153" title="1975 World Trade Center fire" label="three-alarm fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q220224" start="3284" end="3306" title="Fire sprinkler system" label="fire sprinkler systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178198" start="3648" end="3653" title="Ryder" label="Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q369998" start="3698" end="3710" title="Ramzi Yousef" label="Ramzi Yousef"/>
<link wikidata="Q368181" start="4222" end="4242" title="Vornado Realty Trust" label="Vornado Realty Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286590" start="4335" end="4357" title="Silverstein Properties" label="Silverstein Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="4437" end="4440" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="4445" end="4463" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="4496" end="4504" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694" start="4513" end="4540" title="American Airlines Flight 11" label="American Airlines Flight 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="4658" end="4661" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705" start="4719" end="4745" title="United Airlines Flight 175" label="United Airlines Flight 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="4849" end="4852" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="5023" end="5026" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030757" start="5087" end="5107" title="7 World Trade Center (1987–2001)" label="7 World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="5273" end="5276" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q463237" start="5294" end="5315" title="American Airlines Flight 77" label="a simultaneous attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="5319" end="5331" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="5335" end="5354" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q638603" start="5360" end="5409" title="United Airlines Flight 93" label="a passenger revolt that resulted in a plane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q648503" start="5413" end="5438" title="Shanksville, Pennsylvania" label="Shanksville, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489621" start="5478" end="5490" title="Casualties of the September 11 attacks" label="2,996 people"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="5513" end="5525" title="Firefighter" label="firefighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503343" start="5530" end="5554" title="Law enforcement officer" label="law enforcement officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47064" start="5559" end="5577" title="military personnel" label="military personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709182" start="5583" end="5599" title="Hijackers in the September 11 attacks" label="the 19 hijackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q62179" start="5968" end="5979" title="Stairwell A" label="Stairwell A"/>
<link wikidata="Q347215" start="6277" end="6292" title="Minoru Yamasaki" label="Minoru Yamasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q371506" start="6335" end="6356" title="Emery Roth" label="Emery Roth &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="6527" end="6540" title="building code" label="building code"/>
<link wikidata="Q323611" start="6597" end="6612" title="building design" label="building design"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724" start="6799" end="6811" title="Le Corbusier" label="Le Corbusier"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="6921" end="6941" title="Islamic architecture" label="Islamic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658031" start="7055" end="7084" title="Dhahran International Airport" label="Dhahran International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972407" start="7094" end="7114" title="Saudi Binladin Group" label="Saudi Binladin Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="7279" end="7282" title="Digital television" label="DTV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7574" end="7592" title="Truss#Vierendeel Truss" label="Vierendeel trusses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903785" start="7876" end="7881" title="bevel" label="bevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="8128" end="8135" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804522" start="8737" end="8753" title="mechanical floor" label="mechanical floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328068" start="8907" end="8912" title="truss" label="truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="9064" end="9071" title="Antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="9518" end="9564" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="9591" end="9602" title="white paper" label="white paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="9833" end="9839" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q194358" start="9855" end="9866" title="vermiculite" label="vermiculite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11240" start="9992" end="10004" title="1993 World Trade Center bombing" label="1993 bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16285362" start="10108" end="10117" title="Fire sprinkler" label="sprinkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988748" start="10333" end="10345" title="CoStar Group" label="CoStar Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="10419" end="10422" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q20312276" start="10609" end="10632" title="Alliance Global, Inc." label="Alliance Global Finance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10634" end="10659" title="Associated Charter Marine" label="Associated Charter Marine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10661" end="10675" title="Carreden Group" label="Carreden Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10689" end="10716" title="Dimetol International Trade" label="Dimetol International Trade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10718" end="10745" title="Eastern Capital Corporation" label="Eastern Capital Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10747" end="10775" title="Falcon International Freight" label="Falcon International Freight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10777" end="10794" title="First Pacific Rim" label="First Pacific Rim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10796" end="10808" title="GAC Shipping" label="GAC Shipping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10810" end="10827" title="Garwood Financial" label="Garwood Financial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10829" end="10851" title="Globe Shipping Company" label="Globe Shipping Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10853" end="10870" title="GSI Cargo Service" label="GSI Cargo Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390608" start="10872" end="10886" title="Hachijuni Bank" label="Hachijuni Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10888" end="10904" title="Hanil Securities" label="Hanil Securities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10906" end="10932" title="Lin Brothers International" label="Lin Brothers International"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10934" end="10951" title="Pluto Commodities" label="Pluto Commodities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024665" start="11173" end="11185" title="Calyon Financial" label="Carr Futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875633" start="12269" end="12282" title="aviation fuel" label="aviation fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q796006" start="12521" end="12525" title="suicide by jumping from height" label="jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862755" start="13781" end="13802" title="Diplomatic missions of Paraguay" label="Consulate of Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984703" start="13854" end="13864" title="Home Lines" label="Home Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988748" start="14125" end="14137" title="CoStar Group" label="CoStar Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="14180" end="14183" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786345" start="14341" end="14369" title="Marsh and McLennan Companies" label="Marsh and McLennan Companies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33580" wikidata="Q207356" url="?curid=33580" title="William Saroyan">
<text>William Saroyan (; August 31, 1908 – May 18, 1981) was an Armenian-American novelist, playwright, and short story writer. He was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Drama in 1940, and in 1943 won the Academy Award for Best Story for the film &quot;The Human Comedy&quot;. When the studio rejected his original 240-page treatment, he turned it into a novel, &quot;The Human Comedy.&quot;

Saroyan wrote extensively about the Armenian immigrant life in California. Many of his stories and plays are set in his native Fresno. Some of his best-known works are &quot;The Time of Your Life&quot;, &quot;My Name Is Aram&quot; and &quot; My Heart&#x27;s in the Highlands&quot;. His two collections of short stories from the 1930s, &quot;Inhale Exhale&quot; (1936) and &quot;The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze&quot; (1941) are regarded as among his major achievements and essential documents of the cultural history of the period on the American West Coast.

He has been described in a Dickinson College news release as &quot;one of the most prominent literary figures of the mid-20th century&quot; and by Stephen Fry as &quot;one of the most underrated writers of the [20th] century.&quot; Fry suggests that &quot;he takes his place naturally alongside Hemingway, Steinbeck and Faulkner&quot;. Kurt Vonnegut has said that Saroyan was &quot;the first and still the greatest of all the American minimalists.”

==Biography==
===Early years===
William Saroyan was born on August 31, 1908, in Fresno, California, to Armenak and Takuhi Saroyan, Armenian immigrants from Bitlis, Ottoman Empire. His father came to New York in 1905 and started preaching in Armenian Apostolic churches.

At the age of three, after his father&#x27;s death, Saroyan, along with his brother and sister, was placed in an orphanage in Oakland, California. He later went on to describe his experience in the orphanage in his writings. Five years later, the family reunited in Fresno, where his mother, Takuhi, had already secured work at a cannery. He continued his education on his own, supporting himself with jobs, such as working as an office manager for the San Francisco Telegraph Company.

Saroyan decided to become a writer after his mother showed him some of his father&#x27;s writings. A few of his early short articles were published in &quot;Overland Monthly&quot;. His first stories appeared at the end of the 1920s. Among these was &quot;The Broken Wheel&quot;, written under the name Sirak Goryan and published in the Armenian journal &quot;Hairenik&quot; in 1933. Many of Saroyan&#x27;s stories were based on his childhood experiences among the Armenian-American fruit growers of the San Joaquin Valley or dealt with the rootlessness of the immigrant. The short story collection &quot;My Name is Aram&quot; (1940), an international bestseller, was about a young boy and the colorful characters of his immigrant family. It has been translated into many languages.

===Career===
As a writer, Saroyan made his breakthrough in &quot;Story&quot; magazine with &quot;The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze&quot; (1934), the title taken from the nineteenth-century song of the same title. The protagonist — a young, starving writer who tries to survive in a Depression-ridden society — resembles the penniless writer in Knut Hamsun&#x27;s 1890 novel &quot;Hunger&quot;, but lacks the anger and nihilism of Hamsun&#x27;s narrator. 
The story was republished in the 1941 short story collection that took its title. The royalties from this enabled Saroyan to travel to Europe and Armenia, where he learned to love the taste of Russian cigarettes, once observing, &quot;You may tend to get cancer from the thing that makes you want to smoke so much, not from the smoking itself&quot; (from &quot;Not Dying&quot;, 1963). His advice to a young writer was: &quot;Try to learn to breathe deeply; really to taste food when you eat, and when you sleep really to sleep. Try as much as possible to be wholly alive with all your might, and when you laugh, laugh like hell.&quot; Saroyan endeavored to create a prose style full of zest for life and seemingly impressionistic, that came to be called &quot;Saroyanesque&quot;.

Saroyan&#x27;s stories of the period characteristically devote an unvarnished attention to the trials and tribulation, social malaise and despair of the Depression. He worked rapidly, hardly editing his text, and drinking and gambling away much of his earnings. 
 
Saroyan published essays and memoirs, in which he depicted the people he had met on travels in the Soviet Union and Europe, such as the playwright George Bernard Shaw, the Finnish composer Jean Sibelius, and Charlie Chaplin. In 1952, Saroyan published &quot;The Bicycle Rider in Beverly Hills&quot;, the first of several volumes of memoirs. Several other works were drawn from his own experiences, although his approach to autobiographical fact contained a fair bit of poetic license. Drawn from such deeply personal sources, Saroyan&#x27;s plays often disregarded the convention that conflict is essential to drama. &quot;My Heart&#x27;s in the Highlands&quot; (1939), his first play, a comedy about a young boy and his Armenian family, was produced at the Guild Theatre in New York. He is probably best remembered for his play &quot;The Time of Your Life&quot; (1939), set in a waterfront saloon in San Francisco. It won a Pulitzer Prize, which Saroyan refused on the grounds that commerce should not judge the arts; he did accept the New York Drama Critics&#x27; Circle award. The play was adapted into a 1948 film starring James Cagney.

Before the war, Saroyan had worked on the screenplay of &quot;Golden Boy&quot; (1939), based on Clifford Odets&#x27;s play, but he never had much success in Hollywood. A second screenplay, &quot;The Human Comedy&quot; (1943) is set in the fictional California town of Ithaca in the San Joaquin Valley (based on Saroyan&#x27;s memories of Fresno, California), where young telegraph messenger Homer bears witness to the sorrows and joys of life during World War II.
Having hired Saroyan to write the MGM screenplay, Louis B. Mayer balked at its length, but Saroyan would not compromise and was removed from directing the project. He then turned the script into a novel, publishing it just prior to the release of the film, for which he won the 1943 Academy Award for Best Story. The novel is often credited as the source for the movie, when in fact the reverse is true. The novel was itself the basis for a 1983 musical of the same name. After his disappointment with the &quot;Human Comedy&quot; film project, he never permitted Hollywood screen adaptations of any of his novels, despite his often dire financial straits.
Saroyan served in the U.S. Army during World War II and was stationed in Astoria, Queens, spending much of his time at the Lombardy Hotel in Manhattan, far from Army personnel. In 1942, he was posted to London as part of a Signal Corps film unit. He narrowly avoided a court martial when his novel, &quot;The Adventures of Wesley Jackson&quot;, was seen as advocating pacifism. Interest in Saroyan&#x27;s novels declined after the war, when he was criticized for sentimentality. Freedom, brotherly love, and universal benevolence were for him basic values, but critics considered his idealism as out of step with the times which, in their view, were properly described as devoted to division, ethnic and ideological hatred, and universal predation. He still wrote prolifically, so that one of his readers could ask &quot;How could you write so much good stuff and still write such bad stuff?&quot; In the novellas &quot;The Assyrian and other stories&quot; (1950) and in &quot;The Laughing Matter&quot; (1953), Saroyan mixed allegorical elements within a realistic novel. The plays &quot;Sam Ego&#x27;s House&quot; (1949) and &quot;The Slaughter of the Innocents&quot; (1958) were not as successful as his prewar plays. Many of Saroyan&#x27;s later plays, such as &quot;The Paris Comedy&quot; (1960), &quot;The London Comedy&quot; (1960), and &quot;Settled Out of Court&quot; (1960), premiered in Europe. Manuscripts of a number of unperformed plays are now at Stanford University with his other papers.

When Ernest Hemingway learned that Saroyan had made fun of the controversial non-fiction work &quot;Death in the Afternoon&quot;, Hemingway responded: &quot;We&#x27;ve seen them come and go — good ones too, better ones than you, Mr. Saroyan.&quot;

One of Saroyan&#x27;s most financially successful ventures was perhaps his most unlikely: the song &quot;Come On-a My House,&quot; which became a huge hit in 1951 for singer Rosemary Clooney. Saroyan wrote the song in 1939 with his cousin Ross Bagdasarian (who later became famous as &quot;David Seville,&quot; the impresario behind Alvin and the Chipmunks), adapting the music from an Armenian folk song.

Saroyan also painted. He said: &quot;I made drawings before I learned how to write. The impulse to do so seems basic — it is both the invention and the use of language.&quot; His abstract expressionist works were exhibited by the Anita Shapolsky Gallery in New York City. From 1958 on, William Saroyan mainly resided in a Paris apartment. In the late 1960s and 1970s, Saroyan earned more money and finally got out of debt. In 1979, he was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame. The Indian educational board CBSE has added a chapter of his in the grade 11 English book &quot;Snapshots&quot; named &quot;The Summer of the Beautiful White Horse&quot; in his honour.

===Personal life===
Saroyan had a correspondence with writer Sanora Babb that began in 1932 and ended in 1941, that grew into an unrequited love affair on Saroyan&#x27;s part.

In 1943, Saroyan married actress Carol Grace (1924–2003; also known as Carol Marcus), with whom he had two children: Aram, who became an author and published a book about his father, and Lucy, who became an actress. By the late 1940s, Saroyan&#x27;s drinking and gambling took a toll on his marriage, and in 1949, upon returning from an extended European trip, he filed for divorce. They remarried in 1951 and divorced again in 1952 with Marcus later claiming in her autobiography, &quot;Among the Porcupines: A Memoir&quot;, that Saroyan was abusive. After her divorce from Saroyan, Carol Grace (Marcus) married actor Walter Matthau in 1959, and they remained married until his death in 2000. 

== Death ==

Saroyan died in Fresno, of prostate cancer at the age of 72. Half of his ashes were buried in Ararat Cemetery in Fresno, California, and the remainder in Armenia at the Komitas Pantheon near fellow artists such as composer Aram Khachaturian, painter Martiros Saryan, and film director Sergei Parajanov.

== Commemoration ==

In 2008, a monument was erected in honor of Saroyan in Mashtots Avenue in Yerevan (sculptor David Yerevantsi, architects Ruben Asratyan and Levon Igityan).

In 2014, the city council of Bitlis approved the renaming of five streets in the historical part of the city in Southeast Turkey. One of the 5 streets was renamed to “William Saroyan Street”.
In 2015 several libraries were opened in honor of William Saroyan in the city of Bitlis, Turkey.

On August 31, 2018, the William Saroyan House Museum was opened in the house where Saroyan lived for the last 17 years of his life, in the city of Fresno, the USA. The house presents photographs from different periods of his life, drawings, and covers of his books. The museum has a separate room which features a hologram of the writer.

In 1991, the USA and the USSR (series &quot;Joint issue of USSR and USA. William Saroyan&quot;) issued stamps depicting William Saroyan.

The Central Bank of Armenia issued a 10,000 Dram coin (&quot;100th Birth anniversary of novelist William Saroyan&quot;) in 2008 and a 5,000 Dram banknote in 2018.

In October 1988, a small alley in San Francisco across from City Lights Bookstore named Adler Place, was renamed William Saroyan Place in Saroyan&#x27;s honor. Championed by City Lights owner Lawrence Ferlinghetti, the naming (along with the renaming of its twin alley across the street to &quot;Jack Kerouac Alley&quot;) was commemorated with a gala.

In Los Angeles, there are a series of stairs in the Hollywoodland neighborhood, one of which is named the Saroyan Stairs. Saroyan used to live in the nearby Villa Carlotta.

==Awards==
In 1940, William Saroyan was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for his play &quot;The Time of Your Life&quot;, but he refused the award.

In 1943, William Saroyan received the Academy Award for his screenplay for &quot;The Human Comedy&quot;, a screenplay he adapted into a novel that was published just prior to the release of the film.&quot; &quot;

The 2013 Parajanov-Vartanov Institute Award posthumously honored Saroyan for the play &quot;The Time of Your Life&quot; and the novel &quot;Human Comedy&quot;. It was presented to his granddaughter by Academy Award-winning Hollywood actor Jon Voight.

==Bibliography==

=== Novels ===

* &quot;The Human Comedy&quot; (1943)
* &quot;The Adventures of Wesley Jackson&quot; (1946)
* &quot;Rock Wagram&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Tracy&#x27;s Tiger&quot; (1952)
* &quot;The Laughing Matter&quot; (1953); reprinted as &quot;A Secret Story&quot; (1954)
* &quot;Mama, I Love You&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Papa, You&#x27;re Crazy&quot; (1957)
* &quot;Boys and Girls Together&quot; (1963)
* &quot;One Day in the Afternoon of the World&quot; (1964)
=== Short story collections ===

* &quot;The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Inhale &amp; Exhale&quot; (1936)
* &quot;Three Times Three&quot; (1936)
* &quot;Little Children&quot; (1937)
* &quot;A Native American&quot; (1938)
* &quot;Love, Here Is My Hat&quot; (1938)
* &quot;The Trouble with Tigers&quot; (1938)
* &quot;Peace, It&#x27;s Wonderful&quot; (1939)
* &quot;My Name Is Aram&quot; (1940)
* &quot;Saroyan&#x27;s Fables&quot; (1941)
* &quot;Dear Baby&quot; (1944)
* &quot;The Assyrian and Other Stories&quot; (1951)
* &quot;The Whole Voyald and Other Stories&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Letters from 74 rue Taitbout, or Don’t Go, But If You Must, Say Hello to Everybody&quot; (1969) 
* &quot;Madness in the Family&quot; (1988)


===Plays===

* &quot;The Time of Your Life&quot; (1939) – winner of the New York Drama Critics&#x27; Circle and the Pulitzer Prize for Drama
* &quot;My Heart&#x27;s in the Highlands&quot; (1939)
* &quot;Elmer and Lily&quot; (1939)
*Three plays (1940):
:*&quot;My Heart&#x27;s in the Highlands&quot;
:*&quot;The Time of Your Life&quot;
:* &quot;Love&#x27;s Old Sweet Song&quot;
* &quot;Love&#x27;s Old Sweet Song&quot; (1940)
* &quot;The Agony of Little Nations&quot; (1940)
* &quot;Subway Circus&quot; (1940)
* &quot;Hello Out There&quot; (1941)
* &quot;Across the Board on Tomorrow Morning&quot; (1941)
* &quot;The Beautiful People&quot; (1941)
* &quot;Bad Men in the West&quot; (1942)
* &quot;Talking to You&quot; (1942)
* &quot;Coming Through the Rye&quot; (1942)
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Go Away Mad&quot; (1947)
* &quot;Jim Dandy&quot; (1947)
* &quot;The Slaughter of the Innocents&quot; (1952)
* &quot;The Oyster and the Pearl (Television Play)&quot; (1953)
* &quot;The Stolen Secret&quot; (1954)
* &quot;A Midsummer Daydream (Television Play)&quot; (1955)
* &quot;The Cave Dwellers&quot; (1958)
* &quot;Sam, The Highest Jumper Of Them All, or the London Comedy&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Settled Out of Court&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Hanging around the Wabash&quot; (1961)
* &quot;The Dogs, or the Paris Comedy&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Armenian&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Assassinations&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Tales from the Vienna Streets&quot; (1980)
* &quot;An Armenian Trilogy&quot; (1986)
* &quot;The Parsley Garden&quot; (1992)
=== Memoirs, essays and other writings ===
* &quot;Hilltop Russians in San Francisco&quot; (1941) 
* &quot;The Bicycle Rider in Beverly Hills&quot; (1952) 
* &quot;Here Comes, There Goes, You Know Who&quot; (1961) 
* &quot;Me: A Modern Masters Book for Children&quot; (1963), illustrated by Murray Tinkelman
* &quot;Not Dying&quot; (1963) 
* &quot;Short Drive, Sweet Chariot&quot; (1966) 
* &quot;Days of Life and Death and Escape to the Moon&quot; (1970) 
* &quot;Places Where I’ve Done Time&quot; (1972) 
* &quot;Sons Come and Go, Mothers Hang In Forever&quot; (1976) 
* &quot;Chance Meetings&quot; (1978) 
* &quot;Obituaries&quot; (1979) 
* &quot;Births&quot; (1983) 

===Short stories===

* &quot;The Snake&quot;
* &quot;An Ornery Kind of Kid&quot;
* &quot;The Filipino and the Drunkard&quot;
* &quot;Gaston&quot; (date unknown)
* &quot;The Hummingbird That Lived Through Winter&quot;
* &quot;Knife-Like, Flower-Like, Like Nothing At All in the World&quot; (1942)
* &quot;The Mourner&quot;
* &quot;The Parsley Garden&quot;
* &quot;The Summer of the Beautiful White Horse&quot; (1938)
* &quot;Seventy Thousand Assyrians&quot; (1934)
* &quot;The Shepherd&#x27;s Daughter&quot;
* &quot;Sweetheart Sweetheart Sweetheart&quot;
* &quot;Third day after Christmas&quot; (1926)
* &quot;Five Ripe Pears&quot; (1935)
* &quot;Pomegranate Trees&quot; (year unknown)
* &quot;Seventeen&quot; (written during the Great Depression, in the collection of &quot;The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze and Other Stories&quot;)
* &quot;The Barber´s Uncle&quot;
=== Anthologies ===
* &quot;The Gay and Melancholy Flux&quot; (Faber, 1938)
* &quot;48 Saroyan Stories&quot; (Avon, 1942)
* &quot;Best Stories of William Saroyan&quot; (Faber, 1945)
* &quot;The Saroyan Special: Selected Short Stories&quot; (Harcourt Brace, 1948)
* &quot;Love&quot; (Lion Library, 1955)
* &quot;The William Saroyan Reader&quot; (Braziller, 1958; Barricade, 1994)
* &quot;I Used to Believe I Had Forever, Now I&#x27;m Not So Sure&quot; (Cowles, 1968)
* &quot;The Man with the Heart in the Highlands and Other Stories&quot; (Dell, 1968)
* &quot;My Name Is Saroyan&quot; (Coward-McCann, 1983)
* &quot;Saroyan: The New Saroyan Reader&quot; (Donald S. Ellis, 1984)
* &quot;The Man with the Heart in the Highlands and Other Early Stories&quot; (New Directions, 1989)
* &quot;Fresno Stories&quot; (New Directions, 1994)
* &quot;Essential Saroyan&quot; (Heyday, 2005)

===Poem===
* &quot;Me&quot; (&quot;The Saturday Evening Post&quot;, March 9, 1963, illustrated by Murray Tinkelman)

===Song===
* &quot;Come On-a My House&quot;, a hit for Rosemary Clooney, based on an Armenian folk song, written with his cousin, Ross Bagdasarian, later the impresario of Alvin and the Chipmunks.
* &quot;Eat, Eat, Eat&quot; (words and music) sung by Danny Kaye with the Vic Schoen Orchestra

==References==
;Specific
;General
* &quot;Saroyan: His Heart In The Highlands &quot; (2008)

==Further reading==
* Balakian, N., 1998. &quot;The World of William Saroyan&quot;.
* Floan, H. R., 1966. &quot;William Saroyan&quot;.
* Foster, E. H., 1984. &quot;William Saroyan&quot;.
* Foster, E. H., 1991. &quot;William Saroyan: A Study in the Shorter Fiction&quot;.
* Gifford, Barry, and Lee, Lawrence, 1984. &quot;Saroyan&quot;.
* Keyishan, H., 1995. &quot;Critical Essays in William Saroyan&quot;.
* Leggett, John, 2002. &quot;A Daring Young Man: A Biography of William Saroyan&quot;.
* Linde, Mauricio D. Aguilera, 2002, &quot;Saroyan and the Dream of Success: The American Vaudeville as a Political Weapon,&quot; 11.1 (Winter): 18–31.
* Linde, Mauricio D. 2016. &quot;Saroyan’s Travel Memories: Contesting National Identities for Armenian-Americans&quot;. &quot;Zeitschrift für Anglistik und Amerikanistik.A Quarterly of Language, Literature and Culture.&quot;64(4), pp. 415–429.
* Radavich, David. &quot;War of the Wests: Saroyan&#x27;s Dramatic Landscape.&quot; &quot;American Drama&quot; 9:2 (Spring 2000): 29–49.
* Samuelian, Varaz, 1985. &quot;Willie &amp; Varaz: Memories of My Friend William Saroyan&quot;.
* Whitmore, Jon, 1995. &quot;William Saroyan&quot;.

==External links==
* Forever Saroyan Family Archives
* The William Saroyan Society.
* The William Saroyan Foundation
* William Saroyan article on Armeniapedia.org.
* William Saroyan at Parajanov.com
* Website of the documentary film &quot;William Saroyan : The Man, The Writer&quot;, by Paul and Susie Kalinian
* Saroyan House Museum
* 








 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207356" start="0" end="15" title="William Saroyan" label="William Saroyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q289214" start="141" end="165" title="Pulitzer Prize for Drama" label="Pulitzer Prize for Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q504298" start="195" end="223" title="Academy Award for Best Story" label="Academy Award for Best Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520430" start="237" end="265" title="The Human Comedy (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Human Comedy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725164" start="358" end="374" title="The Human Comedy (novel)" label="The Human Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325516" start="419" end="427" title="Armenian Americans" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="510" end="516" title="Fresno, California" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769360" start="557" end="578" title="The Time of Your Life" label="The Time of Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946108" start="592" end="607" title="My Name Is Aram" label="My Name Is Aram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15389739" start="625" end="657" title="My Heart&amp;#x27;s in the Highlands (play)" label="My Heart&amp;#x27;s in the Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q107524741" start="761" end="803" title="The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze (short story collection)" label="The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210045" start="980" end="997" title="Dickinson College" label="Dickinson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="1100" end="1111" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="1248" end="1257" title="Hemingway" label="Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="1259" end="1268" title="Steinbeck" label="Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q38392" start="1273" end="1281" title="William Faulkner" label="Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="1289" end="1302" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="1483" end="1501" title="Fresno, California" label="Fresno, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="1534" end="1542" title="Armenians" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83531" start="1559" end="1565" title="Bitlis" label="Bitlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1567" end="1581" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="1644" end="1669" title="Armenian Apostolic church" label="Armenian Apostolic church"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="1800" end="1807" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113733" start="2318" end="2334" title="Overland Monthly" label="Overland Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639547" start="2520" end="2528" title="Hairenik" label="Hairenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q964198" start="2664" end="2682" title="San Joaquin Valley" label="San Joaquin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620375" start="3009" end="3014" title="Story (magazine)" label="Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385715" start="3142" end="3164" title="The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze (song)" label="song of the same title"/>
<link wikidata="Q40826" start="3297" end="3308" title="Knut Hamsun" label="Knut Hamsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062365" start="3333" end="3339" title="Hunger (Hamsun novel)" label="Hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4342" end="4352" title="Great Depression" label="Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="4601" end="4620" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="4643" end="4656" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Jean Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="4662" end="4677" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="4786" end="4792" title="memoir" label="memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q922131" start="4923" end="4937" title="poetic license" label="poetic license"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769360" start="5289" end="5310" title="The Time of Your Life" label="The Time of Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="5379" end="5393" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="5491" end="5526" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle" label="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790875" start="5562" end="5571" title="The Time of Your Life (film)" label="1948 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q94041" start="5581" end="5593" title="James Cagney" label="James Cagney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381081" start="5652" end="5674" title="Golden Boy (1939 film)" label="&amp;quot;Golden Boy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q734944" start="5692" end="5706" title="Clifford Odets" label="Clifford Odets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579231" start="5714" end="5718" title="Golden Boy (play)" label="play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520430" start="5791" end="5807" title="The Human Comedy (film)" label="The Human Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q964198" start="5878" end="5896" title="San Joaquin Valley" label="San Joaquin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="5934" end="5940" title="Fresno" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="5967" end="5976" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6046" end="6058" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="6094" end="6097" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="6110" end="6124" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q504298" start="6343" end="6371" title="Academy Award for Best Story" label="Academy Award for Best Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740838" start="6501" end="6530" title="The Human Comedy (musical)" label="1983 musical of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520430" start="6572" end="6584" title="The Human Comedy (film)" label="Human Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="6739" end="6748" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6756" end="6768" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q121765" start="6790" end="6805" title="Astoria, Queens" label="Astoria, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q736213" start="6940" end="6952" title="United States Army Signal Corps" label="Signal Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="6986" end="6999" title="court martial" label="court martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="7085" end="7093" title="pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="7301" end="7309" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="7742" end="7753" title="allegory" label="allegorical"/>
<link wikidata="Q108744146" start="8066" end="8086" title="Settled Out of Court (play)" label="Settled Out of Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="8178" end="8197" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="8227" end="8243" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970223" start="8322" end="8344" title="Death in the Afternoon" label="Death in the Afternoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151337" start="8576" end="8594" title="Come On-a My House" label="Come On-a My House"/>
<link wikidata="Q466508" start="8645" end="8661" title="Rosemary Clooney" label="Rosemary Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176607" start="8710" end="8726" title="Ross Bagdasarian" label="Ross Bagdasarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26823554" start="8761" end="8774" title="David Seville" label="David Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q917295" start="8804" end="8827" title="Alvin and the Chipmunks" label="Alvin and the Chipmunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="9057" end="9079" title="abstract expressionist" label="abstract expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864768" start="9108" end="9131" title="Anita Shapolsky Gallery" label="Anita Shapolsky Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="9335" end="9364" title="American Theater Hall of Fame" label="American Theater Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222478" start="9613" end="9624" title="Sanora Babb" label="Sanora Babb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660514" start="9762" end="9773" title="Carol Grace" label="Carol Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783946" start="9846" end="9850" title="Aram Saroyan" label="Aram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266020" start="9916" end="9920" title="Lucy Saroyan" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q600571" start="10272" end="10279" title="abusive" label="abusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660514" start="10313" end="10324" title="Carol Grace" label="Carol Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q202172" start="10348" end="10362" title="Walter Matthau" label="Walter Matthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="10465" end="10480" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4344336" start="10607" end="10623" title="Komitas Pantheon" label="Komitas Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q152293" start="10661" end="10678" title="Aram Khachaturian" label="Aram Khachaturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q718409" start="10688" end="10703" title="Martiros Saryan" label="Martiros Saryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311311" start="10723" end="10739" title="Sergei Parajanov" label="Sergei Parajanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873785" start="10818" end="10833" title="Mashtots Avenue" label="Mashtots Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="10837" end="10844" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83531" start="10949" end="10955" title="Bitlis" label="Bitlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q155638" start="11032" end="11048" title="Southeastern Anatolia Region" label="Southeast Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83531" start="11193" end="11199" title="Bitlis" label="Bitlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11201" end="11207" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q58212632" start="11234" end="11262" title="William Saroyan House Museum" label="William Saroyan House Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="11357" end="11363" title="Fresno, California" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11369" end="11372" title="United States" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11562" end="11565" title="United States" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="11574" end="11578" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q190223" start="11691" end="11714" title="Central Bank of Armenia" label="Central Bank of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130498" start="11731" end="11735" title="Armenian dram" label="Dram"/>
<link wikidata="Q130498" start="11827" end="11831" title="Armenian dram" label="Dram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394278" start="11911" end="11932" title="City Lights Bookstore" label="City Lights Bookstore"/>
<link wikidata="Q314269" start="12043" end="12064" title="Lawrence Ferlinghetti" label="Lawrence Ferlinghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805604" start="12147" end="12165" title="Jack Kerouac Alley" label="Jack Kerouac Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159075" start="12361" end="12375" title="Villa Carlotta (Los Angeles County)" label="Villa Carlotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327066" start="12743" end="12771" title="Parajanov-Vartanov Institute" label="Parajanov-Vartanov Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q167520" start="12973" end="12983" title="Jon Voight" label="Jon Voight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725164" start="13028" end="13044" title="The Human Comedy (novel)" label="The Human Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831663" start="13153" end="13171" title="Tracy&amp;#x27;s Tiger" label="Tracy&amp;#x27;s Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q107524741" start="13502" end="13544" title="The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze (short story collection)" label="The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946108" start="13857" end="13872" title="My Name Is Aram" label="My Name Is Aram"/>
<link wikidata="Q28873506" start="14076" end="14158" title="Letters from 74 rue Taitbout" label="Letters from 74 rue Taitbout, or Don’t Go, But If You Must, Say Hello to Everybody"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769360" start="14239" end="14260" title="The Time of Your Life" label="The Time of Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="14290" end="14325" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle" label="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q289214" start="14334" end="14358" title="Pulitzer Prize for Drama" label="Pulitzer Prize for Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q15389739" start="14367" end="14399" title="My Heart&amp;#x27;s in the Highlands (play)" label="My Heart&amp;#x27;s in the Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769360" start="14525" end="14546" title="The Time of Your Life" label="The Time of Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708843" start="14735" end="14750" title="Hello Out There" label="Hello Out There"/>
<link wikidata="Q126040132" start="15283" end="15300" title="The Cave Dwellers" label="The Cave Dwellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q108744146" start="15401" end="15421" title="Settled Out of Court (play)" label="Settled Out of Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199756" start="16022" end="16038" title="Murray Tinkelman" label="Murray Tinkelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767269" start="16766" end="16805" title="The Summer of the Beautiful White Horse" label="The Summer of the Beautiful White Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q107524741" start="17171" end="17243" title="The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze (short stories)" label="&amp;quot;The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze and Other Stories&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302345" start="18190" end="18215" title="The Saturday Evening Post" label="The Saturday Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199756" start="18253" end="18269" title="Murray Tinkelman" label="Murray Tinkelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151337" start="18291" end="18309" title="Come On-a My House" label="Come On-a My House"/>
<link wikidata="Q466508" start="18327" end="18343" title="Rosemary Clooney" label="Rosemary Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176607" start="18402" end="18418" title="Ross Bagdasarian, Sr." label="Ross Bagdasarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q917295" start="18444" end="18467" title="Alvin and the Chipmunks" label="Alvin and the Chipmunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q213425" start="18523" end="18533" title="Danny Kaye" label="Danny Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924906" start="18543" end="18553" title="Vic Schoen" label="Vic Schoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271762" start="19783" end="19796" title="Jon Whitmore" label="Whitmore, Jon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33582" wikidata="Q204344" url="?curid=33582" title="World Food Programme">
<text>The World Food Programme (WFP) is an international organization within the United Nations that provides food assistance worldwide. It is the world&#x27;s largest humanitarian organization and the leading provider of school meals. Founded in 1961, WFP is headquartered in Rome and has offices in 87 countries. In 2023 it supported over 152 million people, and it is present in more than 120 countries and territories.

In addition to emergency food relief, WFP offers technical and development assistance, such as building capacity for emergency preparedness and response, managing supply chains and logistics, promoting social safety programs, and strengthening resilience against climate change. It is also a major provider of direct cash assistance, and provides passenger services for humanitarian workers through its management of the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS).

WFP is an executive member of the United Nations Sustainable Development Group, a consortium of UN entities that aims to fulfil the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), with a priority to achieve SDG 2, &quot;zero hunger&quot;, by 2030.

The World Food Programme was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2020 for its efforts to provide food assistance in areas of conflict and to prevent the use of food as a weapon of war and conflict.

==History==
WFP was established in 1961 after the 1960 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Conference, when George McGovern, director of the US Food for Peace Programmes, proposed establishing a multilateral food aid programme. WFP launched its first programmes in 1963 by the FAO and the United Nations General Assembly on a three-year experimental basis, supporting the Nubian population at Wadi Halfa in Sudan. In 1965, the programme was extended to a continuing basis.

== Background ==
WFP works across a broad spectrum of Sustainable Development Goals. Food shortages, hunger, malnutrition, and foodborne illness lead to poor health, which affects other areas of sustainable development, such as education, employment, and poverty (Sustainable Development Goals Four, Eight, and One respectively).

==Funding==
WFP operations are primarily funded by voluntary donations by governments worldwide, along with contributions from corporations and private donors. In 2022, funding reached a record USD 14.1 billion—up by almost 50 percent from 2021—against an operational funding need of USD 21.4 billion. The United States was the largest donor.

In 2023, the WFP received USD 8.3 billion in funding, likely marking the first time since 2010 that funding decreased from the previous year, creating a funding gap of 64%.

In February 2025, the WFP received directives from the U.S. to halt operations on numerous U.S.-funded grants, despite an emergency waiver issued by Secretary of State Marco Rubio intended to allow essential food assistance to continue. These grants, managed by the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), are valued at tens of millions of dollars and are instrumental in providing food aid to countries such as Yemen, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan, South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Haiti, and Mali. The suspension encompasses several projects under the Food for Peace Title II program, which annually allocates approximately $2 billion for the donation of U.S. commodities and constitutes a significant portion of U.S. international food assistance. This program is jointly administered by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and USAID.

==Organization==
===Governance, leadership and staff===
WFP is governed by an executive board that consists of representatives of 36 member states and provides intergovernmental support, direction, and supervision of WFP&#x27;s activities. Of the 36 board members, 18 are elected by the United Nations Economic and Social Council and 18 by the Food and Agriculture Organization. The European Union is a permanent observer in WFP and, as a major donor, participates in the work of its executive board. WFP is headed by an executive director, who is appointed jointly by the UN Secretary-General and the director-general of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations. The executive director is appointed for fixed five-year terms and is responsible for the administration of the organization as well as the implementation of its programmes, projects, and other activities. Cindy McCain, previously Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the United States Mission to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Agencies in Rome, was appointed to the role in March 2023.

In March 2023, WFP had over 22,300 staff.

==== List of executive directors ====
Since 1992, all executive directors have been American. The following is a chronological list of those who have served as executive director of the World Food Programme:

#Addeke Hendrik Boerma () (May 1962 – December 1967)
#Sushil K. Dev () (January 1968 – August 1968) (acting)
#Francisco Aquino () (July 1968 – May 1976)
#Thomas C. M. Robinson () (May 1976 – June 1977 acting; July 1977 – September 1977)
#Garson N. Vogel () (October 1977 – April 1981)
#Bernardo de Azevedo Brito () (May 1981 – February 1982) (acting)
#Juan Felipe Yriart () (February 1982 – April 1982) (acting)
#James Ingram () (April 1982 – April 1992)
#Catherine Bertini () (April 1992 – April 2002)
#James T. Morris () (April 2002 – April 2007)
#Josette Sheeran () (April 2007 – April 2012)
#Ertharin Cousin () (April 2012 – April 2017)
#David Beasley () (April 2017 – April 2023)
#Cindy McCain () (Since April 2023)

==Activities==

===Emergencies===
About two-thirds of WFP life-saving food assistance goes to people facing high degrees of food insecurity, predominantly resulting from violence and armed conflict. Over 60% of the people facing hunger globally live in regions experiencing armed violence, which compounds with increased displacement, destruction of food systems, and increased humanitarian access challenges to pose massive risks to food security in the regions. In 2023, more than 300 million people faced acute hunger globally. WFP said it had &quot;reached 152 million people with essential aid&quot; in 2023.

The latest Hunger Hotspots outlook released June 2024 and co-published by WFP and FAO, emphasised that &quot;acute food insecurity is likely to deteriorate further in 18 hotspots&quot; between June and October 2024. These countries and country clusters face famine or risk of famine, with population already in or facing IPC Phase 5 (Catastrophe). Of those countries, Haiti, Mali, Palestine, South Sudan, and Sudan are classified as the most concerning.

WFP is also a first responder to sudden-onset emergencies. When floods struck Sudan in July 2020, it provided emergency food assistance to nearly 160,000 people. WFP provided food as well as vouchers for people to buy vital supplies, while also planning recovery, reconstruction, and resilience-building activities, after Cyclone Idai struck Mozambique and floods washed an estimated 400,000 hectares of crops on early 2019.

WFP&#x27;s emergency support is also preemptive in offsetting the potential impact of disasters. In the Sahel region of Africa, amidst economic challenges, climate change, and armed militancy, WFP&#x27;s activities included working with communities and partners to harvest water for irrigation, restore degraded land, and support livelihoods through skills training. It uses early-warning systems to help communities prepare for disasters. In Bangladesh, weather forecasting led to the distribution of cash to vulnerable farmers to pay for measures such as reinforcing their homes or stockpiling food ahead of heavy flooding.

WFP is the lead agency of the Logistics Cluster, a coordination mechanism established by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC). It also co-leads the Food Security Cluster. The WFP-managed United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) serves over 300 destinations globally. WFP also manages the United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot (UNHRD), a global network of hubs that procure, store and transport emergency supplies for the organization and the wider humanitarian community. WFP logistical support, including its air service and hubs, has enabled staff and supplies from WFP and partner organizations to reach areas where commercial flights have not been available during the COVID-19 pandemic.

===Climate change===

WFP provided cash to vulnerable groups ahead of torrential rains in Bangladesh in July 2019. Its response to Hurricane Dorian in the Bahamas in September 2019 was assisted by a regional office in Barbados, which had been set up the previous year to enable better disaster preparedness and response. In advance of Dorian, WFP deployed technical experts in food security, logistics and emergency telecommunication to support a rapid needs assessment. Assessment teams also conducted an initial aerial reconnaissance mission with the aim to put teams on the ground as soon as possible.

===Nutrition===
WFP works with governments, other UN agencies, NGOs and the private sector, increasing food security, supporting nutrition interventions, policies and programmes, that include school meals and food fortification.

===School meals===

School meals encourage parents in vulnerable families to send their children to school, rather than work. They have proved highly beneficial in areas including education and gender equality, health and nutrition, social protection, local economies and agriculture. WFP works with partners to ensure school feeding is part of integrated school health and nutrition programmes, which include services such as malaria control, menstrual hygiene and guidance on sanitation and hygiene.

===Smallholder farmers===
WFP is a member of a global consortium that forms the , which helps smallholder farmers receive information, investment and support, so they can produce and sell marketable surplus and increase their income. WFP connects smallholder farmers to markets in more than 40 countries.

In 2008, WFP coordinated the five-year Purchase for Progress (P4P) pilot project. P4P assists smallholding farmers by offering them opportunities to access agricultural markets and become competitive players in the marketplace. The project spanned across 20 countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America and trained 800,000 farmers in improved agricultural production, post-harvest handling, quality assurance, group marketing, agricultural finance, and contracting with WFP. The project resulted in 366,000 metric tons of food produced and generated more than US$148 million in income for its smallholder farmers.

===Asset creation===
WFP&#x27;s Food Assistance for Assets (FFA) programme provides cash or food-based transfers to address recipients&#x27; immediate food needs, while they build or boost assets, such as repairing irrigation systems, bridges, and land and water management activities.

FFA reflects WFP&#x27;s drive towards food assistance and development rather than food aid and dependency. It does this by focusing on the assets and their impact on people and communities rather than on the work to realize them, a shift away from previous approaches such as Food or Cash for Work programmes and large public works programmes.

===Cash assistance===

WFP uses cash transfers such as physical banknotes, a debit card or vouchers, aiming to give more choices to aid recipients and encourage the funds to be invested back into local economies. During the first half of 2022, WFP delivered US$1.6 billion in cash to 37 million people in 70 countries to alleviate hunger. A 2022 study by the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative concluded that the Emergency Social Safety Net (ESSN) cash programme &quot;significantly reduced the incidence and intensity of multidimensional poverty&quot; among the people receiving cash transfers.

===Capacity building===
In the most climate disaster-prone provinces of the Philippines, WFP is providing emergency response training and equipment to local government units, and helping set up automated weather stations.

===Digital innovation===
WFP&#x27;s digital transformation centres on deploying the latest technologies and data to help achieve zero hunger. The WFP Innovation Accelerator has sourced and supported more than 60 projects spanning 45 countries. In 2017, WFP launched the Building Blocks programme. It aims to distribute money-for-food assistance to Syrian refugees in Jordan. The project uses blockchain technology to digitize identities and allow refugees to receive food by eye scanning. WFP&#x27;s low-tech hydroponics kits allow refugees to grow barley that feed livestock in the Sahara desert. The SMP PLUS software is an AI-powered menu creation tool for school meals programmes worldwide 

===Partnerships===

WFP works with governments, the private sector, UN agencies, international finance groups, academia, and more than 1,000 non-governmental organisations. The WFP, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, and the International Fund for Agricultural Development reaffirmed their joint efforts to end global hunger, particularly amid the COVID-19 pandemic, during a joint meeting of their governing bodies in October 2020. In the United States, Washington, D.C.–based 501(c)(3) organization World Food Program USA supports the WFP. The American organisation frequently donates to the WFP, though the two are separate entities for taxation purposes.

=== Aid transparency ===
WFP joined the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) in 2013 as its 150th member and has regularly published data since then using the identifier XM-DAC-41140. The organisation was assessed by Publish What You Fund and included in the 2024 Aid Transparency Index with an overall score of 84.5, which is categorised as a &quot;very good&quot; score.

== Reviews ==

===Recognition and awards===
WFP won the 2020 Nobel Peace Prize for its &quot;efforts for combating hunger&quot;, its &quot;contribution to creating peace in conflicted-affected areas&quot;, and for acting as a driving force in efforts to prevent the use of food as a weapon of war and conflict. Receiving the award, executive David Beasley called for billionaires to &quot;step up&quot; and help source the US$5 billion WFP needs to save 30 million people from famine.

===Challenges===

In 2018, the Center for Global Development ranked WFP last in a study of 40 aid programmes, based on indicators grouped into four themes: maximising efficiency, fostering institutions, reducing burdens, and transparency and learning. These indicators relate to aid effectiveness principles developed at the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005), the Accra Agenda for Action (2008), and the Busan Partnership Agreement (2011).

There is wide general debate on the net effectiveness of aid, including unintended consequences such as increasing the duration of conflicts and increasing corruption. WFP faces difficult decisions in working with some regimes.

Some surveys have shown internal culture problems at WFP, including sexual harassment.

==See also==

* Asia Emergency Response Facility, a WFP special operation to establish an emergency response facility in Asia
* Fight Hunger, a WFP initiative to end child hunger by 2015 
* &quot;Food Force&quot;, an educational game published by WFP
* Network for Capacity Development in Nutrition
* World Food Council, a defunct UN agency absorbed by FAO and WFP

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="4" end="24" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="26" end="29" title="World Food Programme" label="WFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="37" end="63" title="international organization" label="international organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="75" end="89" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="104" end="119" title="aid" label="food assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q775858" start="162" end="174" title="humanitarian" label="humanitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="271" end="275" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551358" start="620" end="642" title="Social safety net" label="social safety programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="681" end="695" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437488" start="839" end="878" title="United Nations Humanitarian Air Service" label="United Nations Humanitarian Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187686" start="923" end="967" title="United Nations Sustainable Development Group" label="United Nations Sustainable Development Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="1024" end="1053" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q50215926" start="1088" end="1093" title="Sustainable Development Goal 2" label="SDG 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370427" start="1171" end="1196" title="2020 Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize in 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="1381" end="1414" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="1438" end="1453" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465473" start="1474" end="1488" title="Food for Peace" label="Food for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="1619" end="1650" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15140604" start="1702" end="1719" title="Nubians" label="Nubian population"/>
<link wikidata="Q740865" start="1723" end="1733" title="Wadi Halfa" label="Wadi Halfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="1858" end="1887" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="1889" end="1903" title="Food security" label="Food shortages"/>
<link wikidata="Q165947" start="1905" end="1911" title="hunger" label="hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="1913" end="1925" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="1931" end="1948" title="foodborne illness" label="foodborne illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q53581209" start="2098" end="2102" title="Sustainable Development Goal 4" label="Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q53581217" start="2104" end="2109" title="Sustainable Development Goal 8" label="Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q50214636" start="2115" end="2118" title="Sustainable Development Goal 1" label="One"/>
<link wikidata="Q324546" start="2821" end="2832" title="Marco Rubio" label="Marco Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q170075" start="3809" end="3851" title="United Nations Economic and Social Council" label="United Nations Economic and Social Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="3866" end="3899" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3905" end="3919" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q240628" start="4416" end="4428" title="Cindy McCain" label="Cindy McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335406" start="4866" end="4887" title="Addeke Hendrik Boerma" label="Addeke Hendrik Boerma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4919" end="4932" title="Sushil K. Dev" label="Sushil K. Dev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4975" end="4991" title="Francisco Aquino" label="Francisco Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5019" end="5040" title="Thomas C. M. Robinson" label="Thomas C. M. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5103" end="5118" title="Garson N. Vogel" label="Garson N. Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5151" end="5176" title="Bernardo de Azevedo Brito" label="Bernardo de Azevedo Brito"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5217" end="5235" title="Juan Felipe Yriart" label="Juan Felipe Yriart"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073619" start="5278" end="5290" title="James Ingram (diplomat)" label="James Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052540" start="5321" end="5338" title="Catherine Bertini" label="Catherine Bertini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5369" end="5384" title="James T. Morris" label="James T. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q433934" start="5415" end="5430" title="Josette Sheeran" label="Josette Sheeran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162301" start="5461" end="5476" title="Ertharin Cousin" label="Ertharin Cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11671" start="5507" end="5520" title="David Beasley" label="David Beasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q240628" start="5551" end="5563" title="Cindy McCain" label="Cindy McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042865" start="6523" end="6534" title="Integrated Food Security Phase Classification" label="IPC Phase 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="6570" end="6575" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="6577" end="6581" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="6583" end="6592" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="6594" end="6605" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="6611" end="6616" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="6735" end="6740" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q62023294" start="6979" end="6991" title="Cyclone Idai" label="Cyclone Idai"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906568" start="7740" end="7757" title="Logistics Cluster" label="Logistics Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360224" start="7803" end="7834" title="Inter-Agency Standing Committee" label="Inter-Agency Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437488" start="7903" end="7942" title="United Nations Humanitarian Air Service" label="United Nations Humanitarian Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888429" start="8011" end="8053" title="United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot" label="United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q66764432" start="8552" end="8568" title="Hurricane Dorian" label="Hurricane Dorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="10160" end="10172" title="smallholding" label="smallholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q16669466" start="11345" end="11358" title="cash transfer" label="cash transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13499" start="11390" end="11400" title="debit card" label="debit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115423" start="11672" end="11719" title="Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative" label="Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="12983" end="13012" title="non-governmental organisation" label="non-governmental organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="13031" end="13064" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="13074" end="13121" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="International Fund for Agricultural Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="13197" end="13214" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="13304" end="13320" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="13327" end="13349" title="501(c)(3) organization" label="501(c)(3) organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q14901678" start="13549" end="13590" title="International Aid Transparency Initiative" label="International Aid Transparency Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258091" start="13738" end="13759" title="Publish What You Fund" label="Publish What You Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370427" start="13951" end="13973" title="2020 Nobel Peace Prize" label="2020 Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14168" end="14204" title="Food security#Politics" label="food as a weapon of war and conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355598" start="14412" end="14441" title="Center for Global Development" label="Center for Global Development"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14870" end="14894" title="Aid#Criticism" label="net effectiveness of aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806370" start="15167" end="15199" title="Asia Emergency Response Facility" label="Asia Emergency Response Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411879" start="15279" end="15291" title="Fight Hunger" label="Fight Hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190708" start="15347" end="15357" title="Food Force" label="Food Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001016" start="15404" end="15449" title="Network for Capacity Development in Nutrition" label="Network for Capacity Development in Nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558215" start="15452" end="15470" title="World Food Council" label="World Food Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33583" wikidata="Q7817" url="?curid=33583" title="World Health Organization">
<text>The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations responsible for global public health. It is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, and has six regional offices and 150 field offices worldwide. Only sovereign states are eligible to join, and it is the largest intergovernmental health organization at the international level.

The WHO&#x27;s purpose is to achieve the highest possible level of health for all the world&#x27;s people, defining health as &quot;a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.&quot; The main functions of the World Health Organization include promoting the control of epidemic and endemic diseases; providing and improving the teaching and training in public health, the medical treatment of disease, and related matters; and promoting the establishment of international standards for biological products.

The WHO was established on April 7, 1948, and formally began its work on September 1, 1948. It incorporated the assets, personnel, and duties of the League of Nations&#x27; Health Organization and the Paris-based , including the International Classification of Diseases (ICD). The agency&#x27;s work began in earnest in 1951 after a significant infusion of financial and technical resources.

The WHO&#x27;s official mandate is to promote health and safety while helping the vulnerable worldwide. It provides technical assistance to countries, sets international health standards, collects data on global health issues, and serves as a forum for scientific or policy discussions related to health. Its official publication, the &quot;World Health Report&quot;, provides assessments of worldwide health topics.

The WHO has played a leading role in several public health achievements, most notably the eradication of smallpox, the near-eradication of polio, and the development of an Ebola vaccine. Its current priorities include communicable diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, Ebola, malaria and tuberculosis; non-communicable diseases such as heart disease and cancer; healthy diet, nutrition, and food security; occupational health; and substance abuse. The agency advocates for universal health care coverage, engagement with the monitoring of public health risks, coordinating responses to health emergencies, and promoting health and well-being generally.

The WHO is governed by the World Health Assembly (WHA), which is composed of its 194 member states. The WHA elects and advises an executive board made up of 34 health specialists; selects the WHO&#x27;s chief administrator, the director-general (currently Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus of Ethiopia); sets goals and priorities; and approves the budget and activities. The WHO is funded primarily by contributions from member states (both assessed and voluntary), followed by private donors. Its total approved budget for 2020–2021 is over $7.2 billion, while the approved budget for 2022–2023 is over $6.2 billion. The budget is $6.83 billion for 2024–2025.

==History==

===Origin and founding===
The International Sanitary Conferences (ISC), the first of which was held on 23 June 1851, were a series of conferences that took place until 1938, about 87 years. The first conference, in Paris, was almost solely concerned with cholera, which would remain the disease of major concern for the ISC for most of the 19th century. With the cause, origin, and communicability of many epidemic diseases still uncertain and a matter of scientific argument, international agreement on appropriate measures was difficult to reach.
Seven of these international conferences, spanning 41 years, were convened before any resulted in a multi-state international agreement. The seventh conference, in Venice in 1892, finally resulted in a convention. It was concerned only with the sanitary control of shipping traversing the Suez Canal, and was an effort to guard against importation of cholera.

Five years later, in 1897, a convention concerning the bubonic plague was signed by sixteen of the nineteen states attending the Venice conference. While Denmark, Sweden-Norway, and the US did not sign this convention, it was unanimously agreed that the work of the prior conferences should be codified for implementation. Subsequent conferences, from 1902 until the final one in 1938, widened the diseases of concern for the ISC, and included discussions of responses to yellow fever, brucellosis, leprosy, tuberculosis, and typhoid. In part as a result of the successes of the Conferences, the Pan-American Sanitary Bureau (1902), and the or &quot;International office of Public Hygiene&quot; in English(1907) were soon founded. When the League of Nations was formed in 1920, it established the Health Organization of the League of Nations. After World War II, the United Nations absorbed all the other health organizations, to form the WHO.

The WHO has played a crucial role in coordinating the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic, providing essential guidelines on preventive measures, supporting research on vaccines, and facilitating vaccine distribution through initiatives like COVAX.

===Establishment===
During the 1945 United Nations Conference on International Organization, Szeming Sze, a delegate from China, conferred with Norwegian and Brazilian delegates on creating an international health organization under the auspices of the new United Nations. After failing to get a resolution passed on the subject, Alger Hiss, the secretary general of the conference, recommended using a declaration to establish such an organization. Sze and other delegates lobbied and a declaration passed calling for an international conference on health. The use of the word &quot;world&quot;, rather than &quot;international&quot;, emphasized the truly global nature of what the organization was seeking to achieve. The constitution of the World Health Organization was signed by all 51 countries of the United Nations, and by 10 other countries, on 22 July 1946. It thus became the first specialized agency of the United Nations to which every member subscribed. Its constitution formally came into force on the first World Health Day on 7 April 1948, when it was ratified by the 26th member state. The WHO formally began its work on September 1, 1948.

The first meeting of the World Health Assembly finished on 24 July 1948, having secured a budget of (then ) for the 1949 year. G. Brock Chisholm was appointed director-general of the WHO, having served as executive secretary and a founding member during the planning stages, while Andrija Štampar was the assembly&#x27;s first president. Its first priorities were to control the spread of malaria, tuberculosis and sexually transmitted infections, and to improve maternal and child health, nutrition and environmental hygiene. Its first legislative act was concerning the compilation of accurate statistics on the spread and morbidity of disease. The logo of the World Health Organization features the Rod of Asclepius as a symbol for healing.

In 1959, the WHO signed Agreement WHA 12–40 with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which says:

The nature of this statement has led some groups and activists including Women in Europe for a Common Future to claim that the WHO is restricted in its ability to investigate the effects on human health of radiation caused by the use of nuclear power and the continuing effects of nuclear disasters in Chernobyl and Fukushima. They believe WHO must regain what they see as independence. Independent WHO held a weekly vigil from 2007 to 2017 in front of WHO headquarters. However, as pointed out by Foreman in clause 2 it states:

The key text is highlighted in bold, the agreement in clause 2 states that the WHO is free to perform any health-related work.

=== Operational history ===
1947: The WHO established an epidemiological information service via telex.

1949: The Soviet Union and its constituent republics quit the WHO over the organization&#x27;s unwillingness to share the penicillin recipe. They would not return until 1956.

1950: A mass tuberculosis inoculation drive using the BCG vaccine gets under way.

1955: The malaria eradication programme was launched, although objectives were later modified. (In most areas, the programme goals became control instead of eradication.)

1958: Viktor Zhdanov, Deputy Minister of Health for the USSR, called on the World Health Assembly to undertake a global initiative to eradicate smallpox, resulting in Resolution WHA11.54.

1965: The first report on diabetes mellitus and the creation of the International Agency for Research on Cancer.

1966: The WHO moved its headquarters from the Ariana wing at the Palace of Nations to a newly constructed headquarters elsewhere in Geneva.

1967: The WHO intensified the global smallpox eradication campaign by contributing $2.4 million annually to the effort and adopted a new disease surveillance method, at a time when 2 million people were dying from smallpox per year. The initial problem the WHO team faced was inadequate reporting of smallpox cases. WHO established a network of consultants who assisted countries in setting up surveillance and containment activities. The WHO also helped contain the last European outbreak in Yugoslavia in 1972. After over two decades of fighting smallpox, a Global Commission declared in 1979 that the disease had been eradicated – the first disease in history to be eliminated by human effort.

1974: The Expanded Programme on Immunization and the control programme of onchocerciasis was started, an important partnership between the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and the World Bank.

1975: The WHO launched the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical diseases (the TDR). Co-sponsored by UNICEF, UNDP, and the World Bank, it was established in response to a 1974 request from the WHA for an intensive effort to develop improved control of tropical diseases. The TDR&#x27;s goals are, firstly, to support and coordinate international research into diagnosis, treatment and control of tropical diseases; and, secondly, to strengthen research capabilities within endemic countries.

1976: The WHA enacted a resolution on disability prevention and rehabilitation, with a focus on community-driven care.

1977 and 1978: The first list of essential medicines was drawn up, and a year later the ambitious goal of &quot;Health For All&quot; was declared.

1986: The WHO began its global programme on HIV/AIDS. Two years later preventing discrimination against patients was attended to and in 1996 the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) was formed.

1988: The Global Polio Eradication Initiative was established.

1995: The WHO established an independent International Commission for the Certification of Dracunculiasis Eradication (Guinea worm disease eradication; ICCDE). The ICCDE recommends to the WHO which countries fulfil requirements for certification. It also has role in advising on progress made towards elimination of transmission and processes for verification.

1998: The WHO&#x27;s director-general highlighted gains in child survival, reduced infant mortality, increased life expectancy and reduced rates of &quot;scourges&quot; such as smallpox and polio on the fiftieth anniversary of WHO&#x27;s founding. He, did, however, accept that more had to be done to assist maternal health and that progress in this area had been slow.

2000: The Stop TB Partnership was created along with the UN&#x27;s formulation of the Millennium Development Goals.

2001: The measles initiative was formed, and credited with reducing global deaths from the disease by 68% by 2007.

2002: The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria was drawn up to improve the resources available.

2005: The WHO revises International Health Regulations (IHR) in light of emerging health threats and the experience of the 2002/3 SARS epidemic, authorizing WHO, among other things, to declare a health threat a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.

2006: The WHO endorsed the world&#x27;s first official HIV/AIDS Toolkit for Zimbabwe, which formed the basis for global prevention, treatment, and support the plan to fight the AIDS pandemic.

2006: The WHO launches the Global action plan for influenza vaccines

2016: The Global action plan for influenza vaccines ends with a report which concludes that &quot;while substantial progress has been made over the 10 years of the Plan, the world is still not ready to respond to an influenza pandemic.&quot;

2016: Following the perceived failure of the response to the West Africa Ebola outbreak, the World Health Emergencies programme was formed, changing the WHO from just being a &quot;normative&quot; agency to one that responds operationally to health emergencies.

2020: the World Health Organization announced that it had classified the novel coronavirus outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern. The novel coronavirus was a new strain of coronavirus that had never been detected in humans before. The WHO named this new coronavirus &quot;COVID-19&quot; or &quot;2019-nCov&quot;.

2022: The WHO suggests formation of a Global Health Emergency Council, with a new global health emergency workforce, and recommends revision of the International Health Regulations.

2024: WHO has declared the spread of mpox (formerly monkeypox) in several African countries a public health emergency of international concern, marking the second such declaration in the last two years due to the virus&#x27;s transmission.

== Policies and objectives ==

===Overall focus===
The WHO&#x27;s Constitution states that its objective &quot;is the attainment by all people of the highest possible level of health&quot;.

The WHO fulfils this objective through its functions as defined in its Constitution:

, the WHO has defined its role in public health as follows:
* providing leadership on matters critical to health and engaging in partnerships where joint action is needed;
* shaping the research agenda and stimulating the generation, translation, and dissemination of valuable knowledge;
* setting norms and standards and promoting and monitoring their implementation;
* articulating ethical and evidence-based policy options;
* providing technical support, catalysing change, and building sustainable institutional capacity; and
* monitoring the health situation and assessing health trends.
* CRVS (civil registration and vital statistics) to provide monitoring of vital events (birth, death, wedding, divorce).
Since the late 20th century, the rise of new actors engaged in global health—such as the World Bank, the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation, the U.S. President&#x27;s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) and dozens of public-private partnerships for global health—have weakened the WHO&#x27;s role as a coordinator and policy leader in the field; subsequently, there are various proposals to reform or reorient the WHO&#x27;s role and priorities in public health, ranging from narrowing its mandate to strengthening its independence and authority.

In line with a growing global trend, as documented by the OECD and established at the EU, the WHO has embraced increased public participation in health policymaking. This is in alignment with the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and other intergovernmental agreements, and means &quot;empowering people, communities and civil society through inclusive participation in decision-making processes that affect health across the policy cycle and at all levels of the system.&quot;

====Communicable diseases====
During the 1970s, WHO had dropped its commitment to a global malaria eradication campaign as too ambitious, it retained a strong commitment to malaria control. WHO&#x27;s Global Malaria Programme works to keep track of malaria cases, and future problems in malaria control schemes. As of 2012, the WHO was to report as to whether RTS,S/AS01, were a viable malaria vaccine. For the time being, insecticide-treated mosquito nets and insecticide sprays are used to prevent the spread of malaria, as are antimalarial drugs – particularly to vulnerable people such as pregnant women and young children.

In 1988, WHO launched the Global Polio Eradication Initiative to eradicate polio. It has also been successful in helping to reduce cases by 99% since WHO partnered with Rotary International, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the United Nations Children&#x27;s Fund (UNICEF), and smaller organizations. , it has been working to immunize young children and prevent the re-emergence of cases in countries declared &quot;polio-free&quot;. In 2017, a study was conducted as to why Polio Vaccines may not be enough to eradicate the Virus &amp; conduct new technology. Polio is now on the verge of extinction, thanks to a Global Vaccination Drive. The World Health Organization (WHO) stated the eradication programme has saved millions from deadly disease.

Between 1990 and 2010, WHO&#x27;s help has contributed to a 40% decline in the number of deaths from tuberculosis, and since 2005, over 46 million people have been treated and an estimated 7 million lives saved through practices advocated by WHO. These include engaging national governments and their financing, early diagnosis, standardising treatment, monitoring of the spread and effect of tuberculosis, and stabilising the drug supply. It has also recognized the vulnerability of victims of HIV/AIDS to tuberculosis.

In 2003, the WHO denounced the Roman Curia&#x27;s health department&#x27;s opposition to the use of condoms, saying: &quot;These incorrect statements about condoms and HIV are dangerous when we are facing a global pandemic which has already killed more than 20 million people, and currently affects at least 42 million.&quot; , the Catholic Church remains opposed to increasing the use of contraception to combat HIV/AIDS. At the time, the World Health Assembly president, Guyana&#x27;s Health Minister Leslie Ramsammy, condemned Pope Benedict&#x27;s opposition to contraception, saying he was trying to &quot;create confusion&quot; and &quot;impede&quot; proven strategies in the battle against the disease.

In 2007, the WHO organized work on pandemic influenza vaccine development through clinical trials in collaboration with many experts and health officials. A pandemic involving the H1N1 influenza virus was declared by the then director-general Margaret Chan in April 2009. Margret Chan declared in 2010 that the H1N1 has moved into the post-pandemic period. By the post-pandemic period, critics claimed the WHO had exaggerated the danger, spreading &quot;fear and confusion&quot; rather than &quot;immediate information&quot;. Industry experts countered that the 2009 pandemic had led to &quot;unprecedented collaboration between global health authorities, scientists and manufacturers, resulting in the most comprehensive pandemic response ever undertaken, with a number of vaccines approved for use three months after the pandemic declaration. This response was only possible because of the extensive preparations undertaken during the last decade&quot;.

The 2012–2013 WHO budget identified five areas among which funding was distributed. Two of those five areas related to communicable diseases: the first, to reduce the &quot;health, social and economic burden&quot; of communicable diseases in general; the second to combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis in particular.

, the World Health Organization has worked within the UNAIDS network and strives to involve sections of society other than health to help deal with the economic and social effects of HIV/AIDS. In line with UNAIDS, WHO has set itself the interim task between 2009 and 2015 of reducing the number of those aged 15–24 years who are infected by 50%; reducing new HIV infections in children by 90%; and reducing HIV-related deaths by 25%.

The World Health Organization&#x27;s definition of neglected tropical disease has been criticised to be restrictive (focusing only on communicable diseases) and described as a form of epistemic injustice, where conditions like snakebite are forced to be framed as a medical problem.

====Non-communicable diseases====
One of the thirteen WHO priority areas is aimed at the prevention and reduction of &quot;disease, disability and premature deaths from chronic noncommunicable diseases, mental disorders, violence and injuries, and visual impairment which are collectively responsible for almost 71% of all deaths worldwide&quot;. The Division of Noncommunicable Diseases for Promoting Health through the Reproductive Health has published the magazine, &quot;Entre Nous&quot;, across Europe since 1983.

WHO is mandated under two of the international drug control conventions (Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 and Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971) to carry out scientific assessments of substances for international drug control. Through the WHO Expert Committee on Drug Dependence (ECDD), it can recommend changes to scheduling of substances to the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs. The ECDD is in charge of evaluating &quot;the impact of psychoactive substances on public health&quot; and &quot;their dependence producing properties and potential harm to health, as well as considering their potential medical benefits and therapeutic applications.&quot;

====Environmental health====
The WHO estimates that 12.6 million people died as a result of living or working in an unhealthy environment in 2012 – this accounts for nearly 1 in 4 of total global deaths. Environmental risk factors, such as air, water, and soil pollution, chemical exposures, climate change, and ultraviolet radiation, contribute to more than 100 diseases and injuries. This can result in a number of pollution-related diseases.
* 2018 (30 October – 1 November) : 1 WHO&#x27;s first global conference on air pollution and health (&quot;Improving air quality, combatting climate change – saving lives&quot;) ; organized in collaboration with UN Environment, World Meteorological Organization (WMO), and the secretariat of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)

====Life course and lifestyle====
WHO works to &quot;reduce morbidity and mortality and improve health during key stages of life, including pregnancy, childbirth, the neonatal period, childhood and adolescence, and improve sexual and reproductive health and promote active and healthy aging for all individuals&quot;, for instance with the Special Programme on Human Reproduction.

It also tries to prevent or reduce risk factors for &quot;health conditions associated with use of tobacco, alcohol, drugs and other psychoactive substances, unhealthy diets and physical inactivity and unsafe sex&quot;.

The WHO works to improve nutrition, food safety and food security and to ensure this has a positive effect on public health and sustainable development.

In April 2019, the WHO released new recommendations stating that children between the ages of two and five should spend no more than one hour per day engaging in sedentary behaviour in front of a screen and that children under two should not be permitted any sedentary screen time.

In January 2025, the WHO released a new guideline &quot;Use of lower-sodium salt substitutes&quot; which strongly recommends reducing sodium intake to less than 2 g/day and conditionally recommends replacing regular table salt with lower-sodium salt substitutes that contain potassium. This recommendation is intended for adults (not pregnant women or children) in general populations, excluding individuals with kidney impairments or with other circumstances or conditions that might compromise potassium excretion.

====Surgery and trauma care====
The World Health Organization promotes road safety as a means to reduce traffic-related injuries. It has also worked on global initiatives in surgery, including emergency and essential surgical care, trauma care, and safe surgery. The WHO Surgical Safety Checklist is in current use worldwide in the effort to improve patient safety.

====Emergency work====
The World Health Organization&#x27;s primary objective in natural and man-made emergencies is to coordinate with member states and other stakeholders to &quot;reduce avoidable loss of life and the burden of disease and disability.&quot;

On 5 May 2014, WHO announced that the spread of polio was a world health emergency – outbreaks of the disease in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East were considered &quot;extraordinary&quot;.

On 8 August 2014, WHO declared that the spread of Ebola was a public health emergency; an outbreak which was believed to have started in Guinea had spread to other nearby countries such as Liberia and Sierra Leone. The situation in West Africa was considered very serious.

=====Reform efforts following the Ebola outbreak=====
Following the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa, the organization was heavily criticized for its bureaucracy, insufficient financing, regional structure, and staffing profile.

An internal WHO report on the Ebola response pointed to underfunding and the lack of &quot;core capacity&quot; in health systems in developing countries as the primary weaknesses of the existing system. At the annual World Health Assembly in 2015, Director-General Margaret Chan announced a $100 million Contingency Fund for rapid response to future emergencies, of which it had received $26.9 million by April 2016 (for 2017 disbursement). WHO has budgeted an additional $494 million for its Health Emergencies Programme in 2016–17, for which it had received $140 million by April 2016.

The program was aimed at rebuilding WHO capacity for direct action, which critics said had been lost due to budget cuts in the previous decade that had left the organization in an advisory role dependent on member states for on-the-ground activities. In comparison, billions of dollars have been spent by developed countries on the 2013–2016 Ebola epidemic and 2015–16 Zika epidemic.

=====Response to the COVID-19 pandemic=====
The WHO created an Incident Management Support Team on 1 January 2020, one day after Chinese health authorities notified the organization of a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown aetiology. On 5 January the WHO notified all member states of the outbreak, and in subsequent days provided guidance to all countries on how to respond, and confirmed the first infection outside China. On 14 January 2020, the WHO announced that preliminary investigations conducted by Chinese authorities had found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) identified in Wuhan. The same day, the organization warned of limited human-to-human transmission, and confirmed human-to-human transmission one week later. On 30 January the WHO declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), considered a &quot;call to action&quot; and &quot;last resort&quot; measure for the international community and a pandemic on 11 March.

While organizing the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic and overseeing &quot;more than 35 emergency operations&quot; for cholera, measles and other epidemics internationally, the WHO has been criticized for praising China&#x27;s public health response to the crisis while seeking to maintain a &quot;diplomatic balancing act&quot; between the United States and China. David L. Heymann, professor of infectious disease epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, said that &quot;China has been very transparent and open in sharing its data... and they opened up all of their files with the WHO present.&quot;

The WHO faced criticism from the United States&#x27; Trump administration while &quot;guid[ing] the world in how to tackle the deadly&quot; COVID-19 pandemic. On 14 April 2020, United States president Donald Trump said that he would halt United States funding to the WHO while reviewing its role in &quot;severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus.&quot; World leaders and health experts largely condemned President Trump&#x27;s announcement, which came amid criticism of his response to the outbreak in the United States. WHO called the announcement &quot;regrettable&quot; and defended its actions in alerting the world to the emergence of COVID-19. On 8 May 2020, the United States blocked a vote on a U.N. Security Council resolution aimed at promoting nonviolent international cooperation during the pandemic, and mentioning the WHO. On 7 July 2020, President Trump formally notified the UN of his intent to withdraw the United States from the WHO. However, Trump&#x27;s successor, President Joe Biden, cancelled the planned withdrawal and announced in January 2021 that the U.S. would resume funding the organization.

In January 2025, during his second term, President Trump issued an executive order to withdraw the United States from the WHO, citing WHO&#x27;s mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic originating in Wuhan, among other reasons.

In May 2023, the WHO announced that COVID-19 was no longer a world-wide health emergency.

====Health policy====
WHO addresses government health policy with two aims: firstly, &quot;to address the underlying social and economic determinants of health through policies and programmes that enhance health equity and integrate pro-poor, gender-responsive, and human rights-based approaches&quot; and secondly &quot;to promote a healthier environment, intensify primary prevention and influence public policies in all sectors so as to address the root causes of environmental threats to health&quot;.

The organization develops and promotes the use of evidence-based tools, norms and standards to support member states to inform health policy options. It oversees the implementation of the International Health Regulations, and publishes a series of medical classifications; of these, three are over-reaching &quot;reference classifications&quot;: the International Statistical Classification of Diseases (ICD), the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) and the International Classification of Health Interventions (ICHI). Other international policy frameworks produced by WHO include the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes (adopted in 1981), Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (adopted in 2003) the Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel (adopted in 2010) as well as the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines and its pediatric counterpart. An international convention on pandemic prevention and preparedness is being actively considered.

In terms of health services, WHO looks to improve &quot;governance, financing, staffing and management&quot; and the availability and quality of evidence and research to guide policy. It also strives to &quot;ensure improved access, quality and use of medical products and technologies&quot;. WHO – working with donor agencies and national governments – can improve their reporting about use of research evidence.

====Digital Health====
On Digital Health topics, WHO has existing Inter-Agency collaboration with the International Telecommunication Union (the UN Specialized Agency for ICT), including the Be Health, Be Mobile initiate and the ITU-WHO Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Health.

=== Policy packages ===

The WHO has developed several technical policy packages to support countries to improve health:
* ACTIVE (physical activity)
* HEARTS (cardiovascular diseases)
* MPOWER (tobacco control)
* REPLACE (trans fat)
* SAFER (alcohol)
* SHAKE (salt reduction)

===Governance and support===
The remaining two of WHO&#x27;s thirteen identified policy areas relate to the role of WHO itself:
* &quot;to provide leadership, strengthen governance and foster partnership and collaboration with countries, the United Nations system, and other stakeholders in order to fulfil the mandate of WHO in advancing the global health agenda&quot;; and
* &quot;to develop and sustain WHO as a flexible, learning organization, enabling it to carry out its mandate more efficiently and effectively&quot;.

====Partnerships====
The WHO along with the World Bank constitute the core team responsible for administering the International Health Partnership (IHP+). The IHP+ is a group of partner governments, development agencies, civil society, and others committed to improving the health of citizens in developing countries. Partners work together to put international principles for aid effectiveness and development co-operation into practice in the health sector.

The organization relies on contributions from renowned scientists and professionals to inform its work, such as the WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization, the WHO Expert Committee on Leprosy, and the WHO Study Group on Interprofessional Education &amp; Collaborative Practice.

WHO runs the Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research, targeted at improving health policy and systems.

WHO also aims to improve access to health research and literature in developing countries such as through the HINARI network.

WHO collaborates with The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, UNITAID, and the United States President&#x27;s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief to spearhead and fund the development of HIV programs.

WHO created the Civil Society Reference Group on HIV, which brings together other networks that are involved in policymaking and the dissemination of guidelines.

WHO, a sector of the United Nations, partners with UNAIDS to contribute to the development of HIV responses in different areas of the world.

WHO facilitates technical partnerships through the Technical Advisory Committee on HIV, which they created to develop WHO guidelines and policies.

In 2014, WHO released the &quot;Global Atlas of Palliative Care at the End of Life&quot; in a joint publication with the Worldwide Hospice Palliative Care Alliance, an affiliated NGO working collaboratively with the WHO to promote palliative care in national and international health policy.

====Public health education and action====
The practice of empowering individuals to exert more control over and make improvements to their health is known as health education, as described by the WHO. It shifts away from an emphasis on personal behaviour and toward a variety of societal and environmental solutions.

Each year, the organization marks World Health Day and other observances focusing on a specific health promotion topic. World Health Day falls on 7 April each year, timed to match the anniversary of WHO&#x27;s founding. Recent themes have been vector-borne diseases (2014), healthy ageing (2012) and drug resistance (2011).

The other official global public health campaigns marked by WHO are World Tuberculosis Day, World Immunization Week, World Malaria Day, World No Tobacco Day, World Blood Donor Day, World Hepatitis Day, and World AIDS Day.

As part of the United Nations, the World Health Organization supports work towards the Millennium Development Goals. Of the eight Millennium Development Goals, three – reducing child mortality by two-thirds, to reduce maternal deaths by three-quarters, and to halt and begin to reduce the spread of HIV/AIDS – relate directly to the WHO&#x27;s scope; the other five inter-relate and affect world health.

===Data handling and publications===
The World Health Organization works to provide the needed health and well-being evidence through a variety of data collection platforms, including the World Health Survey covering almost 400,000 respondents from 70 countries, and the &quot;Study on Global Aging and Adult Health&quot; (SAGE) covering over 50,000 persons over 50 years old in 23 countries. The Country Health Intelligence Portal (CHIP), has also been developed to provide an access point to information about the health services that are available in different countries. The information gathered in this portal is used by the countries to set priorities for future strategies or plans, implement, monitor, and evaluate it.

The WHO has published various tools for measuring and monitoring the capacity of national health systems and health workforces. The Global Health Observatory (GHO) has been the WHO&#x27;s main portal which provides access to data and analyses for key health themes by monitoring health situations around the globe.

The &quot;WHO Assessment Instrument for Mental Health Systems&quot; (WHO-AIMS), the &quot;WHO Quality of Life Instrument&quot; (WHOQOL), and the &quot;Service Availability and Readiness Assessment&quot; (SARA) provide guidance for data collection. Collaborative efforts between WHO and other agencies, such as through the Health Metrics Network, also aim to provide sufficient high-quality information to assist governmental decision making. WHO promotes the development of capacities in member states to use and produce research that addresses their national needs, including through the Evidence-Informed Policy Network (EVIPNet). The Pan American Health Organization (PAHO/AMRO) became the first region to develop and pass a policy on research for health approved in September 2009.

On 10 December 2013, a new WHO database, known as MiNDbank, went online. The database was launched on Human Rights Day, and is part of WHO&#x27;s QualityRights initiative, which aims to end human rights violations against people with mental health conditions. The new database presents a great deal of information about mental health, substance abuse, disability, human rights, and the different policies, strategies, laws, and service standards being implemented in different countries. It also contains important international documents and information. The database allows visitors to access the health information of WHO member states and other partners. Users can review policies, laws, and strategies and search for the best practices and success stories in the field of mental health.

The WHO regularly publishes a &quot;World Health Report&quot;, its leading publication, including an expert assessment of a specific global health topic. Other publications of WHO include the &quot;Bulletin of the World Health Organization&quot;, the &quot;Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal&quot; (overseen by EMRO), the &quot;Human Resources for Health&quot; (published in collaboration with BioMed Central), and the &quot;Pan American Journal of Public Health&quot; (overseen by PAHO/AMRO).

In 2016, the World Health Organization drafted a global health sector strategy on HIV. In the draft, the World Health Organization outlines its commitment to ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030 with interim targets for the year 2020. To make achievements towards these targets, the draft lists actions that countries and the WHO can take, such as a commitment to universal health coverage, medical accessibility, prevention and eradication of disease, and efforts to educate the public. Some notable points made in the draft include tailoring resources to mobilized regions where the health system may be compromised due to natural disasters, etc. Among the points made, it seems clear that although the prevalence of HIV transmission is declining, there is still a need for resources, health education, and global efforts to end this epidemic.

The WHO has a Framework Convention on Tobacco implementation database which is one of the few mechanisms to help enforce compliance with the FCTC. However, there have been reports of numerous discrepancies between it and national implementation reports on which it was built. As researchers Hoffman and Rizvi report &quot;As of July 4, 2012, 361 (32·7%) of 1104 countries&#x27; responses were misreported: 33 (3·0%) were clear errors (e.g., database indicated &#x27;yes&#x27; when report indicated &#x27;no&#x27;), 270 (24·5%) were missing despite countries having submitted responses, and 58 (5·3%) were, in our opinion, misinterpreted by WHO staff&quot;.

WHO has been moving toward acceptance and integration of traditional medicine and traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). In 2022, the new International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, ICD-11, will attempt to enable classifications from traditional medicine to be integrated with classifications from evidence-based medicine. Though Chinese authorities have pushed for the change, this and other support of the WHO for traditional medicine has been criticized by the medical and scientific community, due to lack of evidence and the risk of endangering wildlife hunted for traditional remedies. A WHO spokesman said that the inclusion was &quot;not an endorsement of the scientific validity of any Traditional Medicine practice or the efficacy of any Traditional Medicine intervention.&quot;

==== International Agency for Research on Cancer ====

The WHO sub-department, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), conducts and coordinates research into the causes of cancer. It also collects and publishes surveillance data regarding the occurrence of cancer worldwide.

Its Monographs Programme identifies carcinogenic hazards and evaluates environmental causes of cancer in humans.

==Structure and governance==
The World Health Organization is a member of the United Nations Development Group.

===Membership===

, the WHO has 194 member states: all member states of the United Nations except for Liechtenstein (192 countries), plus the Cook Islands and Niue. A state becomes a full member of WHO by ratifying the treaty known as the Constitution of the World Health Organization. As of January 2025, it also had two associate members, Puerto Rico and Tokelau. The WHO two-year budget for 2022–2023 is paid by its 194 members and 2 associate members. Several other countries have been granted observer status. Palestine is an observer as a &quot;national liberation movement&quot; recognized by the League of Arab States under United Nations Resolution 3118. The Sovereign Military Order of Malta (or &quot;Order of Malta&quot;) also attends on an observer basis. The Holy See attends as an observer, and its participation as &quot;non-Member State Observer&quot; was formalized by an Assembly resolution in 2021. The government of Taiwan was allowed to participate under the designation &quot;Chinese Taipei&quot; as an observer from 2009 to 2016, but has not been invited again since. On 20 January 2025, U.S. President Donald Trump signed an executive order initiating the 12-month process of withdrawing the U.S. from the WHO. On 5 February 2025, Argentinian president Javier Milei announced that Argentina would also be withdrawing from WHO.

WHO member states appoint delegations to the World Health Assembly, the WHO&#x27;s supreme decision-making body. All UN member states are eligible for WHO membership, and, according to the WHO website, &quot;other countries may be admitted as members when their application has been approved by a simple majority vote of the World Health Assembly&quot;. The World Health Assembly is attended by delegations from all member states, and determines the policies of the organization.

The executive board is composed of members technically qualified in health and gives effect to the decisions and policies of the World Health Assembly. In addition, the UN observer organizations International Committee of the Red Cross and International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies have entered into &quot;official relations&quot; with WHO and are invited as observers. In the World Health Assembly, they are seated alongside the other NGOs.

====Membership and participation of the Republic of China====

The Republic of China (ROC), whose government controlled Mainland China from 1912 to 1949 and currently controls Taiwan since 1945 following World War II, was the founding member of WHO since its inception and had represented &quot;China&quot; in the organization. The adoption of the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758 in 1971, however, had the representation of &quot;China&quot; handed over to the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC), and led to the expulsion of the Republic of China from WHO and other UN bodies. Since that time, per the One-China policy, both the ROC and PRC lay claims of sovereignty to each other&#x27;s territory.

In May 2009, the Department of Health of the Republic of China was invited by the WHO to attend the 62nd World Health Assembly as an observer under the name &quot;Chinese Taipei&quot;. This was the ROC&#x27;s first participation at WHO meetings since 1971, as a result of the improved cross-strait relations since Ma Ying-jeou became the president of the Republic of China a year before. Its participation with WHO ended due to diplomatic pressure from the PRC following the election in 2016 that brought the independence-minded Democratic Progressive Party back into power.

Political pressure from the PRC has led to the ROC being barred from membership of the WHO and other UN-affiliated organizations, and in 2017 to 2020 the WHO refused to allow Taiwanese delegates to attend the WHO annual assembly. According to Taiwanese publication The News Lens, on multiple occasions Taiwanese journalists have been denied access to report on the assembly.

In May 2018, the WHO denied access to its annual assembly by Taiwanese media, reportedly due to demands from the PRC. Later in May 172 members of the United States House of Representatives wrote to the director-general of the World Health Organization to argue for Taiwan&#x27;s inclusion as an observer at the WHA. The United States, Japan, Germany, and Australia all support Taiwan&#x27;s inclusion in WHO.

Pressure to allow the ROC to participate in WHO increased as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic with Taiwan&#x27;s exclusion from emergency meetings concerning the outbreak bringing a rare united front from Taiwan&#x27;s diverse political parties. Taiwan&#x27;s main opposition party, the Kuomintang (KMT, Chinese Nationalist Party), expressed their anger at being excluded arguing that disease respects neither politics nor geography. China once again dismissed concerns over Taiwanese inclusion with the foreign minister claiming that no-one cares more about the health and wellbeing of the Taiwanese people than central government of the PRC. During the outbreak Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau voiced his support for Taiwan&#x27;s participation in WHO, as did Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe. In January 2020 the European Union, a WHO observer, backed Taiwan&#x27;s participation in WHO meetings related to the coronavirus pandemic as well as their general participation.

In a 2020 interview, Assistant Director-General Bruce Aylward appeared to dodge a question from RTHK reporter Yvonne Tong about Taiwan&#x27;s response to the pandemic and inclusion in the WHO, blaming internet connection issues. When the video chat was restarted, he was asked another question about Taiwan. He responded by indicating that they had already discussed China and formally ended the interview. This incident led to accusations about the PRC&#x27;s political influence over the international organization.

Taiwan&#x27;s effective response to the 2019–20 COVID-19 pandemic has bolstered its case for WHO membership. Taiwan&#x27;s response to the outbreak has been praised by a number of experts. In early May 2020, New Zealand Foreign Minister Winston Peters expressed support for the ROC&#x27;s bid to rejoin the WHO during a media conference. The New Zealand Government subsequently supporting Taiwan&#x27;s bid to join the WHO, putting NZ alongside Australia and the United States who have taken similar positions.

On 9 May, Congressmen Eliot Engel, the Democratic chairman of the United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Michael McCaul, the House Committee&#x27;s ranking Republican member, Senator Jim Risch, the Republican chairman of the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, and Senator Bob Menendez, the Senate Committee&#x27;s ranking Democratic member, submitted a joint letter to nearly 60 &quot;like-minded&quot; countries including Canada, Thailand, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, and Australia, urging them to support ROC&#x27;s participation in the World Health Organization.

In November 2020, the word &quot;Taiwan&quot; was blocked in comments on a livestream on the WHO&#x27;s Facebook page.

==== Membership and participation of the United States ====
On 14 April 2020, United States president Donald Trump said that he would halt United States funding to the WHO while reviewing its role in &quot;severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus.&quot; World leaders and health experts largely condemned President Trump&#x27;s announcement, which came amid criticism of his response to the outbreak in the United States. WHO called the announcement &quot;regrettable&quot; and defended its actions in alerting the world to the emergence of COVID-19. On 7 July 2020, President Trump formally notified the UN of his intent to withdraw the United States from the WHO. However, Trump&#x27;s successor, president Joe Biden, cancelled the planned withdrawal and announced in January 2021 that the U.S. would resume funding the organization. On 20 January 2025, an executive order was signed by a re-inaugurated Trump, formally notifying the United Nations of his intent to withdraw the United States from the WHO for a second time.

===World Health Assembly and Executive Board===

The World Health Assembly (WHA) is the legislative and supreme body of the WHO. Based in Geneva, it typically meets yearly in May. It appoints the director-general every five years and votes on matters of policy and finance of WHO, including the proposed budget. It also reviews reports of the executive board and decides whether there are areas of work requiring further examination.

The Assembly elects 34 members, technically qualified in the field of health, to the executive board for three-year terms. The main functions of the board are to carry out the decisions and policies of the Assembly, to advise it, and to facilitate its work. As of June 2023, the chair of the executive board is Dr. Hanan Mohamed Al Kuwari of Qatar.

===Director-General===
The head of the organization is the director-general, elected by the World Health Assembly. The term lasts for five years, and directors-general are typically appointed in May, when the Assembly meets. The current director-general is Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who was appointed on 1 July 2017.

===Global institutions===
Apart from regional, country, and liaison offices, the World Health Assembly has also established other institutions for promoting and carrying on research.
* International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)

=== Personnel ===
The WHO employs 7,000 people in 149 countries and regions to carry out its principles. In support of the principle of a tobacco-free work environment, the WHO does not recruit cigarette smokers. The organization has previously instigated the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in 2003.

=== Goodwill Ambassadors ===
The WHO operates &quot;Goodwill Ambassadors&quot;; members of the arts, sports, or other fields of public life aimed at drawing attention to the WHO&#x27;s initiatives and projects. There are currently five Goodwill Ambassadors (Jet Li, Nancy Brinker, Peng Liyuan, Yohei Sasakawa and the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra) and a further ambassador associated with a partnership project (Craig David).

On 21 October 2017, the director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus appointed the then Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe as a WHO Goodwill Ambassador to help promote the fight against non-communicable diseases. The appointment address praised Mugabe for his commitment to public health in Zimbabwe. The appointment attracted widespread condemnation and criticism in WHO member states and international organizations due to Robert Mugabe&#x27;s poor record on human rights and presiding over a decline in Zimbabwe&#x27;s public health. Due to the outcry, the following day the appointment was revoked.

===Medical Society of the World Health Organization===
Since the beginning, the WHO has had the &quot;Medical Society of the World Health Organization&quot;. It has conducted lectures by noted researchers and published findings, recommendations. The founder, Dr. S. William A. Gunn has been its president. In 1983, Murray Eden was awarded the WHO &quot;Medical Society&quot; medal, for his work as consultant on research and development for WHO&#x27;s director-general.

=== Financing and partnerships ===

The WHO is financed by contributions from member states and outside donors. In 2020–21, the largest contributors were the Germany, Gates Foundation, United States, United Kingdom and European Commission. The WHO Executive Board formed a Working Group on Sustainable Financing in 2021, charged to rethink WHO&#x27;s funding strategy and present recommendations. Its recommendations were adopted by the 2022 World Health Assembly, the key one being to raise compulsory member dues to a level equal to 50% of WHO&#x27;s 2022–2023 base budget by the end of the 2020s.
* Assessed contributions are the dues the Member States pay depending on the states&#x27; wealth and population
* Voluntary contributions specified are funds for specific programme areas provided by the Member States or other partners
* Core voluntary contributions are funds for flexible uses provided by the Member States or other partners

==== Past ====
At the beginning of the 21st century, the WHO&#x27;s work involved increasing collaboration with external bodies. , a total of 473 nongovernmental organizations (NGO) had some form of partnership with WHO. There were 189 partnerships with international NGOs in formal &quot;official relations&quot; – the rest being considered informal in character. Partners include the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation.

, the largest annual assessed contributions from member states came from the United States ($110 million), Japan ($58 million), Germany ($37 million), United Kingdom ($31 million) and France ($31 million). The combined 2012–2013 budget proposed a total expenditure of $3,959 million, of which $944 million (24%) will come from assessed contributions. This represented a significant fall in outlay compared to the previous 2009–2010 budget, adjusting to take account of previous underspends. Assessed contributions were kept the same. Voluntary contributions will account for $3,015 million (76%), of which $800 million is regarded as highly or moderately flexible funding, with the remainder tied to particular programmes or objectives.

According to The Associated Press, the WHO routinely spends about $200 million a year on travel expenses, more than it spends to tackle mental health problems, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria combined. In 2016, Margaret Chan, director-general of WHO from January 2007 to June 2017, stayed in a $1000-per-night hotel room while visiting West Africa.

The biggest contributor used to be the United States, which gives over $400 million annually. U.S. contributions to the WHO are funded through the U.S. State Department&#x27;s account for Contributions to International Organizations (CIO). In April 2020, U.S. President Donald Trump, with backing by members of his party, announced that his administration would halt funding to the WHO. Funds previously earmarked for the WHO were to be held for 60–90 days pending an investigation into the WHO&#x27;s handling of the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in respect to the organization&#x27;s purported relationship with China. The announcement was immediately criticized by world leaders including António Guterres, the secretary general of the United Nations; Heiko Maas, the German foreign minister; and Moussa Faki Mahamat, African Union chairman. During the first two years of the pandemic, American funding of the WHO declined by a quarter, although it is expected to increase during 2022 and 2023.

On 16 May 2020, the Trump Administration agreed to pay up to what China pays in assessed contributions, which is less than about one-tenth of its previous funding. Biennium 2018–2019 China paid in assessed contributions US$75,796K, in specified voluntary contributions US$10,184K, for a total US$85,980K.

=== WHO Public Health Prizes and Awards ===
World Health Organization Prizes and Awards are given to recognize major achievements in public health. The candidates are nominated and recommended by each prize and award selection panel. The WHO Executive Board selects the winners, which are presented during the World Health Assembly.

== World headquarters and offices ==
The seat of the organization is in Geneva, Switzerland. It was designed by Swiss architect Jean Tschumi and inaugurated in 1966. In 2017, the organization launched an international competition to redesign and extend its headquarters.

===Gallery of the WHO headquarters building===
===Country and liaison offices===
The World Health Organization operates 150 country offices in six different regions. It also operates several liaison offices, including those with the European Union, United Nations and a single office covering the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. It also operates the International Agency for Research on Cancer in Lyon, France, and the WHO Centre for Health Development in Kobe, Japan. Additional offices include those in Pristina; the West Bank and Gaza; the US-Mexico Border Field Office in El Paso; the Office of the Caribbean Program Coordination in Barbados; and the Northern Micronesia office. There will generally be one WHO country office in the capital, occasionally accompanied by satellite-offices in the provinces or sub-regions of the country in question.

The country office is headed by a WHO Representative (WR). , the only WHO Representative outside Europe to be a national of that country was for the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (&quot;Libya&quot;); all other staff was international. WHO Representatives in the Region termed the Americas are referred to as PAHO/WHO Representatives. In Europe, WHO Representatives also serve as head of the country office, and are nationals except for Serbia; there are also heads of the country office in Albania, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkey, and Uzbekistan. The WR is a member of the UN system country team which is coordinated by the UN System Resident Coordinator.

The country office consists of the WR, and several health and other experts, both foreign and local, as well as the necessary support staff. The main functions of WHO country offices include being the primary adviser of that country&#x27;s government in matters of health and pharmaceutical policies.

===Regional offices===
The regional divisions of WHO were created between 1949 and 1952, following the model of the pre-existing Pan American Health Organization, and are based on article 44 of the WHO&#x27;s constitution, which allowed the WHO to &quot;establish a [single] regional organization to meet the special needs of [each defined] area&quot;. Many decisions are made at the regional level, including important discussions over WHO&#x27;s budget, and in deciding the members of the next assembly, which are designated by the regions.

Each region has a regional committee, which generally meets once a year, normally in the autumn. Representatives attend from each member or associative member in each region, including those states that are not full members. For example, Palestine attends meetings of the Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office. Each region also has a regional office. Each regional office is headed by a director, who is elected by the Regional Committee. The board must approve such appointments, although as of 2004, it had never over-ruled the preference of a regional committee. The exact role of the board in the process has been a subject of debate, but the practical effect has always been small. Since 1999, regional directors serve for a once-renewable five-year term, and typically take their position on 1 February.

Each regional committee of the WHO consists of all the Health Department heads, in all the governments of the countries that constitute the Region. Aside from electing the regional director, the regional committee is also in charge of setting the guidelines for the implementation, within the region, of the health and other policies adopted by the World Health Assembly. The regional committee also serves as a progress review board for the actions of WHO within the Region. The regional director is effectively the head of WHO for his or her region. The RD manages and/or supervises a staff of health and other experts at the regional offices and in specialized centres. The RD is also the direct supervising authority – concomitantly with the WHO Director-General – of all the heads of WHO country offices, known as WHO Representatives, within the region.

The strong position of the regional offices has been criticized in WHO history for undermining its effectiveness and led to unsuccessful attempts to integrate them more strongly within &#x27;One WHO&#x27;. Disease specific programmes such as the smallpox eradication programme or the 1980s Global Programme on AIDS were set up with more direct, vertical structures that bypassed the regional offices.

==Private funding==
In 2024, the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation was the organization&#x27;s major private contributor, funding 10% of its budget.

==See also==

* Alliance for Healthy Cities, an international alliance
* Global mental health
* Health promotion
* Health Sciences Online, virtual learning resources
* Healthy city
* High 5s Project, a patient safety collaboration
* International Labour Organization
* List of most polluted cities in the world by particulate matter concentration
* Open Learning for Development, virtual learning resources
* Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction- HRP
* The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health
* Timeline of global health
* United Nations Interagency Task Force on the Prevention and Control of NCDs
* Wellbeing economy
* WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
* WHO Guidelines for drinking-water quality
* WHO Pesticide Evaluation Scheme
* WHO SMART guidelines
* World Hearing Day
== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* &quot;Covid-19: WHO Really Calls the Shots,&quot; video by the Swiss Government Information Service, 2021</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="4" end="29" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="31" end="34" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q14638071" start="41" end="59" title="list of specialized agencies of the United Nations" label="specialized agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="67" end="81" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="105" end="118" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="143" end="149" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041745" start="936" end="955" title="Establishment of the World Health Organization" label="WHO was established"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="1081" end="1098" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q50018" start="1161" end="1201" title="International Classification of Diseases" label="International Classification of Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035805" start="1666" end="1685" title="World Health Report" label="World Health Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347969" start="1833" end="1844" title="eradication of infectious diseases" label="eradication"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="1848" end="1856" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209788" start="1867" end="1887" title="Polio eradication" label="eradication of polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553092" start="1915" end="1928" title="Ebola vaccine" label="Ebola vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="1961" end="1981" title="communicable disease" label="communicable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="1992" end="2000" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q51993" start="2002" end="2007" title="Ebola" label="Ebola"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="2009" end="2016" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="2021" end="2033" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137154" start="2035" end="2059" title="non-communicable disease" label="non-communicable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="2087" end="2093" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906358" start="2095" end="2107" title="healthy eating" label="healthy diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="2124" end="2137" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="2139" end="2158" title="occupational health" label="occupational health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="2164" end="2179" title="substance abuse" label="substance abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="2206" end="2227" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="2272" end="2285" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="2364" end="2374" title="well-being" label="well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="2414" end="2435" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196017" start="2643" end="2669" title="Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus" label="Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="2673" end="2681" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055274" start="3085" end="3119" title="International Sanitary Conferences" label="International Sanitary Conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="3310" end="3317" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5850078" start="3418" end="3423" title="cause (medicine)" label="cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="3893" end="3903" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="4020" end="4034" title="bubonic plague" label="bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="4119" end="4126" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q62589" start="4128" end="4141" title="Sweden-Norway" label="Sweden-Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="4437" end="4449" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q156050" start="4451" end="4462" title="brucellosis" label="brucellosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="4464" end="4471" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="4473" end="4485" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="4491" end="4498" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856835" start="4561" end="4589" title="Pan-American Sanitary Bureau" label="Pan-American Sanitary Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079125" start="4615" end="4653" title="International Office of Public Hygiene" label="International office of Public Hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="4705" end="4722" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4814" end="4826" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="4832" end="4846" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="4987" end="4995" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q7664568" start="5258" end="5269" title="Szeming Sze" label="Szeming Sze"/>
<link wikidata="Q549966" start="5495" end="5505" title="Alger Hiss" label="Alger Hiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q476734" start="6188" end="6204" title="World Health Day" label="World Health Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="6349" end="6370" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q923514" start="6451" end="6468" title="G. Brock Chisholm" label="G. Brock Chisholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254170" start="6605" end="6620" title="Andrija Štampar" label="Andrija Štampar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="6713" end="6720" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="6722" end="6734" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="6739" end="6769" title="sexually transmitted infection" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786626" start="6787" end="6795" title="maternal health" label="maternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741837" start="6800" end="6812" title="child health" label="child health"/>
<link wikidata="Q223377" start="7026" end="7042" title="Rod of Asclepius" label="Rod of Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="7122" end="7156" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592962" start="7251" end="7286" title="Women in Europe for a Common Future" label="Women in Europe for a Common Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q275459" start="7357" end="7393" title="Acute radiation syndrome" label="effects on human health of radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="7415" end="7428" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610105" start="7459" end="7476" title="Lists of nuclear disasters and radioactive incidents" label="nuclear disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="7480" end="7489" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q171178" start="7494" end="7503" title="Fukushima nuclear disaster" label="Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="7893" end="7908" title="Epidemiology" label="epidemiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="7933" end="7938" title="telex" label="telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7951" end="7963" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="8063" end="8073" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="8130" end="8142" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q798309" start="8171" end="8182" title="BCG vaccine" label="BCG vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700441" start="8378" end="8392" title="Viktor Zhdanov" label="Viktor Zhdanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8428" end="8432" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="8448" end="8469" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347969" start="8506" end="8515" title="Eradication of infectious diseases" label="eradicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="8587" end="8604" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="8629" end="8672" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="International Agency for Research on Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q594846" start="8740" end="8757" title="Palace of Nations" label="Palace of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="8853" end="8861" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555250" start="8953" end="8973" title="disease surveillance" label="disease surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110883" start="9297" end="9327" title="1972 Yugoslav smallpox outbreak" label="outbreak in Yugoslavia in 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407058" start="9524" end="9558" title="Expanded Programme on Immunization" label="Expanded Programme on Immunization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137321" start="9588" end="9602" title="onchocerciasis" label="onchocerciasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="9653" end="9686" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="9698" end="9734" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="9751" end="9761" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9791" end="9834" title="Tropical disease#Health programmes" label="Special Programme for Research and Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345671" start="9838" end="9854" title="Tropical disease" label="Tropical disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="9883" end="9889" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="10313" end="10323" title="disability" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678675" start="10339" end="10353" title="Physical medicine and rehabilitation" label="rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35456" start="10428" end="10447" title="essential medicines" label="essential medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041748" start="10507" end="10521" title="Health For All" label="Health For All"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="10587" end="10595" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q588982" start="10688" end="10730" title="Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS" label="Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895628" start="10763" end="10798" title="Global Polio Eradication Initiative" label="Global Polio Eradication Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815447" start="10908" end="10934" title="Eradication of dracunculiasis" label="Dracunculiasis Eradication"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="11262" end="11278" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="11290" end="11305" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="11369" end="11374" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619759" start="11560" end="11579" title="Stop TB Partnership" label="Stop TB Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="11636" end="11664" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="11677" end="11684" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414657" start="11789" end="11844" title="The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria" label="The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q600315" start="11917" end="11949" title="International Health Regulations" label="International Health Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q834456" start="12018" end="12038" title="2002–2004 SARS outbreak" label="2002/3 SARS epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076801" start="12106" end="12154" title="Public Health Emergency of International Concern" label="Public Health Emergency of International Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077789" start="12334" end="12347" title="AIDS pandemic" label="AIDS pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97188294" start="12377" end="12418" title="Global action plan for influenza vaccines" label="Global action plan for influenza vaccines"/>
<link wikidata="Q97188294" start="12430" end="12471" title="Global action plan for influenza vaccines" label="Global action plan for influenza vaccines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989108" start="12724" end="12750" title="Western African Ebola virus epidemic" label="West Africa Ebola outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="12999" end="13025" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="novel coronavirus outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q84497971" start="13085" end="13102" title="novel coronavirus" label="novel coronavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57751738" start="13123" end="13134" title="coronavirus" label="coronavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="13223" end="13231" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q382370" start="13485" end="13489" title="mpox" label="mpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076801" start="13542" end="13565" title="Public health emergency of international concern" label="public health emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="14000" end="14013" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q51744847" start="14567" end="14606" title="civil registration and vital statistics" label="civil registration and vital statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="14769" end="14779" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402412" start="14880" end="14886" title="President&amp;#x27;s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief" label="PEPFAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="15967" end="15974" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277881" start="16078" end="16083" title="RTS,S" label="RTS,S"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741353" start="16104" end="16119" title="malaria vaccine" label="malaria vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="16141" end="16152" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q696265" start="16161" end="16173" title="mosquito net" label="mosquito net"/>
<link wikidata="Q521616" start="16248" end="16266" title="antimalarial drugs" label="antimalarial drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="16422" end="16427" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="16516" end="16536" title="Rotary International" label="Rotary International"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="16542" end="16587" title="US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="16599" end="16634" title="United Nations Children&amp;#x27;s Fund" label="United Nations Children&amp;#x27;s Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="17674" end="17685" title="Roman Curia" label="Roman Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="17743" end="17749" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053113" start="17975" end="18064" title="Roman Catholic Church and AIDS" label="Catholic Church remains opposed to increasing the use of contraception to combat HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111376" start="18146" end="18161" title="Leslie Ramsammy" label="Leslie Ramsammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="18173" end="18193" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q383260" start="18397" end="18414" title="influenza vaccine" label="influenza vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="18435" end="18449" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q101452" start="18508" end="18518" title="2009 swine flu pandemic" label="A pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031900" start="18533" end="18553" title="Pandemic H1N1/09 virus" label="H1N1 influenza virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q270650" start="18596" end="18609" title="Margaret Chan" label="Margaret Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="19429" end="19450" title="communicable diseases" label="communicable diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="19582" end="19590" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="19592" end="19599" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="19604" end="19616" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q588982" start="19687" end="19693" title="UNAIDS" label="UNAIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="19816" end="19824" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137154" start="20529" end="20552" title="noncommunicable disease" label="noncommunicable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="20555" end="20570" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q373494" start="20586" end="20594" title="injury prevention" label="injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="20600" end="20617" title="visual impairment" label="visual impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q126372337" start="20905" end="20943" title="United Nations drug control conventions" label="international drug control conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273678" start="20945" end="20986" title="Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs" label="Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429332" start="20991" end="21028" title="Convention on Psychotropic Substances" label="Convention on Psychotropic Substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260003" start="21104" end="21116" title="Drug policy" label="drug control"/>
<link wikidata="Q35138872" start="21130" end="21176" title="WHO Expert Committee on Drug Dependence (ECDD)" label="WHO Expert Committee on Drug Dependence (ECDD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q469618" start="21238" end="21281" title="United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs" label="United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q212734" start="21813" end="21827" title="soil pollution" label="soil pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837092" start="21974" end="22000" title="List of pollution-related diseases" label="pollution-related diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="22410" end="22419" title="morbidity" label="morbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="22424" end="22433" title="Death" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="22517" end="22532" title="Infant" label="neonatal period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569" start="22534" end="22543" title="childhood" label="childhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501817" start="22573" end="22579" title="Sexual health" label="sexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501817" start="22584" end="22603" title="reproductive health" label="reproductive health"/>
<link wikidata="Q56721121" start="22690" end="22729" title="Special Programme on Human Reproduction" label="Special Programme on Human Reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q318529" start="22934" end="22944" title="unsafe sex" label="unsafe sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q909821" start="22989" end="23000" title="food safety" label="food safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="23005" end="23018" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="23063" end="23076" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="23081" end="23104" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537256" start="24175" end="24204" title="WHO Surgical Safety Checklist" label="WHO Surgical Safety Checklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="24584" end="24589" title="Poliomyelitis" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q51993" start="24777" end="24782" title="Ebola" label="Ebola"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989108" start="25069" end="25088" title="2014 Ebola outbreak" label="2014 Ebola outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q96380454" start="25726" end="25754" title="Health Emergencies Programme (WHO)" label="Health Emergencies Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076801" start="27023" end="27071" title="Public Health Emergency of International Concern" label="Public Health Emergency of International Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="27195" end="27203" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236204" start="27592" end="27608" title="David L. Heymann" label="David L. Heymann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126189" start="27662" end="27710" title="London School of Hygiene &amp;amp; Tropical Medicine" label="London School of Hygiene &amp;amp; Tropical Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="27912" end="27932" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="27999" end="28016" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="28060" end="28072" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="28880" end="28889" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519812" start="29372" end="29385" title="health policy" label="health policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519812" start="29959" end="29972" title="health policy" label="health policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q600315" start="30020" end="30052" title="International Health Regulations" label="International Health Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518464" start="30080" end="30102" title="medical classification" label="medical classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q50018" start="30182" end="30234" title="International Statistical Classification of Diseases" label="International Statistical Classification of Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q917426" start="30246" end="30312" title="International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health" label="International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505045" start="30327" end="30379" title="International Classification of Health Interventions" label="International Classification of Health Interventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667595" start="30454" end="30512" title="International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes" label="International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520145" start="30532" end="30571" title="Framework Convention on Tobacco Control" label="Framework Convention on Tobacco Control"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30594" end="30670" title="Health Human Resources#Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel" label="Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="30704" end="30741" title="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines" label="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314236" start="30750" end="30771" title="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for Children" label="pediatric counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="31389" end="31426" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="31458" end="31461" title="Information and communications technology" label="ICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149216" start="31763" end="31769" title="MPOWER tobacco control" label="MPOWER"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="32424" end="32434" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050881" start="32494" end="32526" title="International Health Partnership" label="International Health Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="32676" end="32696" title="developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052298" start="32757" end="32774" title="aid effectiveness" label="aid effectiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950348" start="32957" end="33007" title="WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization" label="WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950351" start="33013" end="33044" title="WHO Expert Committee on Leprosy" label="WHO Expert Committee on Leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33054" end="33129" title="Interprofessional education#WHO Study Group on Interprofessional Education &amp;amp; Collaborative Practice" label="WHO Study Group on Interprofessional Education &amp;amp; Collaborative Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q30259576" start="33145" end="33192" title="Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research" label="Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519812" start="33216" end="33229" title="health policy" label="health policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000047" start="33234" end="33241" title="health system" label="systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124860" start="33354" end="33360" title="HINARI" label="HINARI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414657" start="33393" end="33448" title="The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria" label="The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="33467" end="33480" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q85816285" start="34159" end="34201" title="Worldwide Hospice Palliative Care Alliance" label="Worldwide Hospice Palliative Care Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q29483" start="34269" end="34284" title="palliative care" label="palliative care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519812" start="34315" end="34328" title="health policy" label="health policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q476734" start="34684" end="34700" title="World Health Day" label="World Health Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851928" start="34746" end="34762" title="health promotion" label="health promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="34894" end="34915" title="Vector (epidemiology)" label="vector-borne diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147416" start="34950" end="34965" title="drug resistance" label="drug resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q518978" start="35043" end="35065" title="World Tuberculosis Day" label="World Tuberculosis Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q14326700" start="35067" end="35090" title="World Immunization Week" label="World Immunization Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634633" start="35092" end="35109" title="World Malaria Day" label="World Malaria Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q233249" start="35111" end="35131" title="World No Tobacco Day" label="World No Tobacco Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q930278" start="35133" end="35154" title="World Blood Donor Day" label="World Blood Donor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364034" start="35156" end="35175" title="World Hepatitis Day" label="World Hepatitis Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q192373" start="35181" end="35195" title="World AIDS Day" label="World AIDS Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="35285" end="35313" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628420" start="35880" end="35918" title="Study on Global Ageing and Adult Health" label="Study on Global Aging and Adult Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000047" start="36421" end="36434" title="health system" label="health system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054975" start="36440" end="36457" title="Health Human Resources" label="health workforces"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086425" start="36969" end="36991" title="Health Metrics Network" label="Health Metrics Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418313" start="37236" end="37268" title="Evidence-Informed Policy Network" label="Evidence-Informed Policy Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856835" start="37284" end="37316" title="Pan American Health Organization" label="Pan American Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q206206" start="37536" end="37552" title="Human Rights Day" label="Human Rights Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035805" start="38263" end="38282" title="World Health Report" label="World Health Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725393" start="38360" end="38373" title="global health" label="global health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928049" start="38425" end="38466" title="Bulletin of the World Health Organization" label="Bulletin of the World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330283" start="38484" end="38520" title="Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal" label="Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937394" start="38557" end="38583" title="Human Resources for Health" label="Human Resources for Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q463494" start="38623" end="38637" title="BioMed Central" label="BioMed Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129605" start="38654" end="38691" title="Pan American Journal of Public Health" label="Pan American Journal of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="40282" end="40302" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="40307" end="40335" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50018" start="40360" end="40440" title="International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems" label="International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="40558" end="40581" title="evidence-based medicine" label="evidence-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="41238" end="41244" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787017" start="41254" end="41262" title="Cancer registry" label="collects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555250" start="41277" end="41289" title="Disease surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="41346" end="41355" title="Monograph" label="Monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="41391" end="41397" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="41427" end="41443" title="Carcinogen" label="causes of cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187686" start="41534" end="41566" title="United Nations Development Group" label="United Nations Development Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="41671" end="41684" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="41711" end="41723" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="41728" end="41732" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="41910" end="41921" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="41926" end="41933" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q818553" start="42067" end="42082" title="observer status" label="observer status"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="42084" end="42093" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="42173" end="42194" title="League of Arab States" label="League of Arab States"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="42237" end="42270" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Sovereign Military Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="42342" end="42350" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="42506" end="42512" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q216923" start="42568" end="42582" title="Chinese Taipei" label="Chinese Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="42696" end="42708" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q52395487" start="42847" end="42859" title="Javier Milei" label="Javier Milei"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="42875" end="42884" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="42967" end="42988" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="43598" end="43638" title="International Committee of the Red Cross" label="International Committee of the Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="43643" end="43707" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="43936" end="43953" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589404" start="43967" end="43977" title="Government of the Republic of China" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="43989" end="44003" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="44045" end="44051" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334327" start="44217" end="44264" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758" label="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="44346" end="44377" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="44490" end="44506" title="One-China policy" label="One-China policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559326" start="44529" end="44539" title="Two Chinas" label="lay claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q697240" start="44605" end="44650" title="Department of Health (Republic of China)" label="Department of Health of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="44693" end="44714" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q216923" start="44751" end="44765" title="Chinese Taipei" label="Chinese Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q591903" start="44873" end="44895" title="cross-strait relations" label="cross-strait relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19216" start="44902" end="44914" title="Ma Ying-jeou" label="Ma Ying-jeou"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="44926" end="44960" title="president of the Republic of China" label="president of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q20683626" start="45063" end="45079" title="2016 Taiwanese presidential election" label="election in 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q903822" start="45117" end="45145" title="Democratic Progressive Party" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="45373" end="45392" title="World Health Assembly" label="WHO annual assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q24850576" start="45429" end="45442" title="The News Lens" label="The News Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="45690" end="45728" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="46238" end="46248" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="46639" end="46653" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q132345" start="46744" end="46754" title="Shinzo Abe" label="Shinzo Abe"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="46776" end="46790" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q87914789" start="46984" end="46997" title="Bruce Aylward" label="Bruce Aylward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153480" start="47032" end="47036" title="RTHK" label="RTHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="47503" end="47520" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="47663" end="47691" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (New Zealand)" label="New Zealand Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396178" start="47692" end="47706" title="Winston Peters" label="Winston Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329618" start="47989" end="48000" title="Eliot Engel" label="Eliot Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="48006" end="48016" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973577" start="48033" end="48081" title="United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs" label="United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q539509" start="48083" end="48097" title="Michael McCaul" label="Michael McCaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="48134" end="48144" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q721871" start="48161" end="48170" title="Jim Risch" label="Jim Risch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="48203" end="48254" title="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" label="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q888132" start="48268" end="48280" title="Bob Menendez" label="Bob Menendez"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="48689" end="48697" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="48807" end="48819" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="49440" end="49449" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q131844421" start="49590" end="49605" title="Withdrawing the United States from the World Health Organization" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="49812" end="49833" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="50636" end="50657" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196017" start="50805" end="50831" title="Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus" label="Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="50949" end="50970" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="51053" end="51096" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="International Agency for Research on Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520145" start="51365" end="51404" title="Framework Convention on Tobacco Control" label="Framework Convention on Tobacco Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035807" start="51467" end="51487" title="World Health Organization Goodwill Ambassador" label="Goodwill Ambassadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q159577" start="51673" end="51679" title="Jet Li" label="Jet Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215367" start="51681" end="51694" title="Nancy Brinker" label="Nancy Brinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q430911" start="51696" end="51707" title="Peng Liyuan" label="Peng Liyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150994" start="51709" end="51723" title="Yohei Sasakawa" label="Yohei Sasakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q154685" start="51732" end="51761" title="Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q154222" start="51827" end="51838" title="Craig David" label="Craig David"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196017" start="51883" end="51909" title="Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus" label="Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="51950" end="51963" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035807" start="51969" end="51992" title="World Health Organization Goodwill Ambassador" label="WHO Goodwill Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q95380705" start="52708" end="52726" title="S. William A. Gunn" label="S. William A. Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q102317800" start="52760" end="52771" title="Murray Eden" label="Murray Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="53074" end="53081" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="53083" end="53099" title="Gates Foundation" label="Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="53101" end="53114" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="53116" end="53130" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="53135" end="53154" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="54245" end="54278" title="Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation" label="Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="54287" end="54309" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="55063" end="55083" title="Associated Press" label="The Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="55210" end="55218" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="55220" end="55232" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="55237" end="55244" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q270650" start="55264" end="55277" title="Margaret Chan" label="Margaret Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="55550" end="55578" title="United States Department of State" label="U.S. State Department&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="55673" end="55685" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="55921" end="55938" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q311440" start="56097" end="56113" title="António Guterres" label="António Guterres"/>
<link wikidata="Q108447" start="56160" end="56170" title="Heiko Maas" label="Heiko Maas"/>
<link wikidata="Q58117" start="56205" end="56224" title="Moussa Faki" label="Moussa Faki Mahamat"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="57116" end="57122" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q117124" start="57172" end="57184" title="Jean Tschumi" label="Jean Tschumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="57549" end="57563" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="57613" end="57623" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="57628" end="57655" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="57678" end="57721" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="International Agency for Research on Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="57725" end="57729" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950344" start="57747" end="57780" title="WHO Centre for Health Development" label="WHO Centre for Health Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="57784" end="57788" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25270" start="57833" end="57841" title="Pristina" label="Pristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="57847" end="57856" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="57861" end="57865" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="57904" end="57911" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435890" start="58330" end="58352" title="Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" label="Libyan Arab Jamahiriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q854218" start="58759" end="58768" title="United Nations System" label="UN system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315434" start="58820" end="58840" title="Resident Coordinator" label="Resident Coordinator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59274" end="59306" title="Pan American Health Organization#History" label="Pan American Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="59927" end="59936" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330286" start="59961" end="59998" title="Eastern Mediterranean Regional office of World Health Organization" label="Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="60849" end="60870" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="61795" end="61830" title="Bill &amp;amp; Melinda Gates Foundation" label="Bill &amp;amp; Melinda Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732373" start="61930" end="61957" title="Alliance for Healthy Cities" label="Alliance for Healthy Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570863" start="61987" end="62007" title="Global mental health" label="Global mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851928" start="62010" end="62026" title="Health promotion" label="Health promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690661" start="62029" end="62051" title="Health Sciences Online" label="Health Sciences Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625620" start="62082" end="62094" title="Healthy city" label="Healthy city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426924" start="62097" end="62112" title="High 5s Project" label="High 5s Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="62147" end="62180" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q21714388" start="62183" end="62260" title="List of most polluted cities in the world by particulate matter concentration" label="List of most polluted cities in the world by particulate matter concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096110" start="62263" end="62292" title="Open Learning for Development" label="Open Learning for Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q120069191" start="62323" end="62414" title="Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction- HRP" label="Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction- HRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386832" start="62417" end="62471" title="The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health" label="The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037227" start="62474" end="62499" title="Timeline of global health" label="Timeline of global health"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468812" start="62502" end="62577" title="United Nations Interagency Task Force on the Prevention and Control of NCDs" label="United Nations Interagency Task Force on the Prevention and Control of NCDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q122998582" start="62580" end="62597" title="Wellbeing economy" label="Wellbeing economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520145" start="62600" end="62643" title="WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control" label="WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307745" start="62646" end="62687" title="WHO Guidelines for drinking-water quality" label="WHO Guidelines for drinking-water quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="62690" end="62721" title="WHO Pesticide Evaluation Scheme" label="WHO Pesticide Evaluation Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q131319957" start="62724" end="62744" title="WHO SMART guidelines" label="WHO SMART guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5815639" start="62747" end="62764" title="World Hearing Day" label="World Hearing Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33584" wikidata="Q170424" url="?curid=33584" title="World Meteorological Organization">
<text>The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations responsible for promoting international cooperation on atmospheric science, climatology, hydrology and geophysics.

The WMO originated from the International Meteorological Organization (IMO), a nongovernmental organization founded in 1873 as a forum for exchanging weather data and research. Proposals to reform the status and structure of the IMO culminated in the World Meteorological Convention of 1947, which formally established the World Meteorological Organization. The Convention entered into force on 23 March 1950, and the following year the WMO began operations as an intergovernmental organization within the UN system.

The WMO is made up of 193 countries and territories, and facilitates the &quot;free and unrestricted&quot; exchange of data, information, and research between the respective meteorological and hydrological institutions of its members. It also collaborates with nongovernmental partners and other international organizations on matters related to environmental protection, climate change, resource management, and socioeconomic development.

Headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, the WMO is governed by the World Meteorological Congress, composed of member states, which meets every four years to set policies and priorities. The Congress is led by an Executive Council led by the President, currently Abdulla Al Mandous of UAE.

==Governance==

The WMO was established by the Convention of the World Meteorological Organization, signed 11 October 1947 and ratified on 23 March 1950. The Convention serves as the constituent treaty of the WMO, setting forth its purposes, governance, and general framework.

The WMO hierarchy:
*The World Meteorological Congress, the supreme body of the Organization, determines policy. Each member state and territory is represented by a Permanent Representative with WMO when Congress meets every four years. Congress elects the President and vice-presidents of the Organization and members of the Executive Council; and appoints the Secretary-General. 
*The Executive Council (EC) implements Congress decisions. 
*The Secretariat is an eight-department organization with a staff of 200 headed by a Secretary-General, who can serve a maximum of two four-year terms.

The annually published WMO Statement on the status of the World Climate provides details of global, regional and national temperatures and extreme weather events. It also provides information on long-term climate change indicators including atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, sea level rise, and sea ice extent. The year 2016 was the hottest year on record, with many weather and climate extremes, according to the most recent WMO report.

As of August 2023, the WMO has a membership of 193 member states and territories.

=== List of secretaries-general ===

* 1952–1955 Gustav Swoboda ()
* 1956–1979 David Arthur Davies ()
* 1980–1983 Aksel C. Wiin-Nielsen ()
* 1984–2003 Godwin Obasi ()
* 2004–2015 ()
* 2016–2023 Petteri Taalas ()
* 2024–present Celeste Saulo ()

==WMO Strategic Plan==
* Disaster risk reduction
* The Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS)
* The WMO Integrated Global Observing System (WIGOS)
* Aviation meteorological services
* Polar and high mountain regions
* Capacity development
* Governance

==Meteorological codes==
In keeping with its mandate to promote the standardization of meteorological observations, the WMO maintains numerous code forms for the representation and exchange of meteorological, oceanographical, and hydrological data. The traditional code forms, such as SYNOP, CLIMAT and TEMP, are character-based and their coding is position-based. Newer WMO code forms are designed for portability, extensibility and universality. These are BUFR, and, for gridded geo-positioned data, GRIB.

==Recognitions received==
In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a joint creation of the WMO and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), received the Nobel Peace Prize &quot;for their efforts to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about anthropogenic (man-made) climate change, and to lay the foundations for the measures that are needed to counteract such change.&quot;

==World Meteorological Day==

The World Meteorological Day is held annually on 23 March.

== Use of the International System of Units ==
WMO states that &quot;the International System of Units (SI) should be used as the system of units for the evaluation of meteorological elements included in reports for international exchange.&quot; The following units, which include units which are not SI units, are recommended by the WMO for meteorological observations:
* Degrees Celsius (°C) for temperature, or alternatively Kelvin (K).
* Metres per second (m/s) for wind speed.
* Degrees clockwise from north (°) for wind direction, or alternatively on the scale 0–36, where 36 is the wind directly from north and 09 is the directly wind from east.
* Hectopascals (hPa) for atmospheric pressure.
* Percent (%) for relative humidity.
* Millimetres (mm) for precipitation (or the equivalent unit kilograms per square metre (kg/m2)).
* Millimetres (mm) for evaporation.
* Millimetres per hour (mm/h) for precipitation intensity, or alternatively kilograms per square metre per second (kg m−2 s−1).
* Hours (h) for sunshine duration.
* Metres (m) for visibility.
* Metres (m) for cloud height.
* Standard geopotential metre (m&#x27;) for geopotential height.
* Kilograms per square metre (kg/m2) for snow water equivalent.
* Watts per square metre (W/m2) for irradiance.
* Joules per square metre (J/m2) for radiant exposure.
* Oktas for cloud cover.

==Main public outreach materials==

* The World Meteorological Organization at a Glance
* WMO for Youth
* WMO Bulletin (twice annually)
* WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletin (annually)
* WMO Statements on the Status of the World Climate (annually)
* In September 2020 the WMO published a high-level brief compilation of the latest climate science information from the WMO, GCP, UNESCO-IOC, IPCC, UNEP and the Met Office. The &quot;United in Science 2020 Report&quot; is subdivided into 7 chapters, which each have a list of key messages.

==WMO awards and prizes==
*International Meteorological Organization Prize
*Professor Dr Vilho Väisälä Awards
*Norbert Gerbier-Mumm International Award (suspended in 2014)
*WMO Research Award for Young Scientists
*Professor Mariolopoulus Award

== Membership ==
As of 2023, WMO Members include a total of 187 Member States and 6 Member Territories.

Eight United Nations member states are not members of WMO: Equatorial Guinea, Grenada, Liechtenstein, Marshall Islands, Palau, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and San Marino. Cook Islands and Niue are WMO Members but non-members of the United Nations. Vatican City and State of Palestine and the states with limited recognition are not members of either organization.

The six WMO Member Territories are the British Caribbean Territories (joint meteorological organization and membership), French Polynesia, Hong Kong, Macau, Curaçao and Sint Maarten (joint meteorological service and membership) and New Caledonia. (List of all members with admission dates.)

=== Membership by regional associations ===

====Regional Association I (Africa)====
Region I consists of the states of Africa and a few former colonial powers. Region I has 57 member states and no member territories:
Non-member
*Equatorial Guinea

====Regional Association II (Asia)====
Region II has 33 member states and 2 member territories. The member states are:

The member territories are:

*Hong Kong 
*Macau

====Regional Association III (South America)====
Region III consists of the states of South America, including France as French Guiana is an overseas region of France. It has a total of 13 member states and no member territories:
====Regional Association IV (North America, Central America and the Caribbean)====
Region IV consists of the states of North America, Central America, and the Caribbean, including three European states with dependencies within the region. It has a total of 25 member states and 2 member territories. The member states are:

====Regional Association V (South-West Pacific)====
Region V consists of 23 member states and 2 member territories. The member states are:

====Regional Association VI (Europe)====
Region VI consists consist of all the states in Europe as well as some Western Asia. It has 50 member states:

====States with membership in more than one region====
A total of ten member states have membership in more than one region. Two nations are members to four different regions, while eight are members of two regions. These nations, with their regions, are as follows:
== See also ==
*Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR)
*Cloud atlas
*Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP)
*Global Climate Observing System
*International Cloud Atlas
*Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* (as of October 2018, this functions as a WMO Extranet for the WMO Community as an interim solution until a new WMO Community website can be launched)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="4" end="37" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="39" end="42" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q14638071" start="49" end="67" title="List of specialized agencies of the United Nations" label="specialized agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="75" end="89" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q757520" start="145" end="164" title="atmospheric science" label="atmospheric science"/>
<link wikidata="Q52139" start="166" end="177" title="climatology" label="climatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="179" end="188" title="hydrology" label="hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="193" end="203" title="geophysics" label="geophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356059" start="234" end="275" title="International Meteorological Organization" label="International Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="285" end="313" title="nongovernmental organization" label="nongovernmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="670" end="700" title="intergovernmental organization" label="intergovernmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q854218" start="712" end="721" title="UN system" label="UN system"/>
<link wikidata="Q832237" start="1070" end="1094" title="environmental protection" label="environmental protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1096" end="1110" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="1137" end="1162" title="economic development" label="socioeconomic development"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2910" end="2924" title="Gustav Swoboda" label="Gustav Swoboda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2940" end="2959" title="David Arthur Davies" label="David Arthur Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q939119" start="2975" end="2996" title="Aksel C. Wiin-Nielsen" label="Aksel C. Wiin-Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17106223" start="3012" end="3024" title="Godwin Obasi" label="Godwin Obasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990750" start="3055" end="3069" title="Petteri Taalas" label="Petteri Taalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q55266687" start="3088" end="3101" title="Celeste Saulo" label="Celeste Saulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q643874" start="3650" end="3655" title="SYNOP" label="SYNOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012755" start="3657" end="3663" title="CLIMAT" label="CLIMAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669996" start="3668" end="3672" title="TEMP (meteorology)" label="TEMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836790" start="3823" end="3827" title="BUFR" label="BUFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q753666" start="3867" end="3871" title="GRIB" label="GRIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="3913" end="3954" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="3999" end="4035" title="United Nations Environment Programme" label="United Nations Environment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="4057" end="4074" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="4151" end="4164" title="Human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="4176" end="4190" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135422" start="4320" end="4344" title="World Meteorological Day" label="World Meteorological Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="4449" end="4478" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="4749" end="4764" title="Degrees Celsius" label="Degrees Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="4774" end="4785" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="4804" end="4810" title="Kelvin" label="Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182429" start="4818" end="4835" title="Metres per second" label="Metres per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464943" start="4846" end="4856" title="wind speed" label="wind speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="4860" end="4867" title="Degree (angle)" label="Degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057900" start="4897" end="4911" title="wind direction" label="wind direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="5031" end="5043" title="Pascal (unit)" label="Hectopascals"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="5054" end="5074" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="5094" end="5111" title="relative humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="5136" end="5149" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="5234" end="5245" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5281" end="5304" title="Rain#Intensity" label="precipitation intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11714837" start="5391" end="5408" title="sunshine duration" label="sunshine duration"/>
<link wikidata="Q654068" start="5427" end="5437" title="visibility" label="visibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810412" start="5456" end="5468" title="cloud height" label="cloud height"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740341" start="5472" end="5499" title="Standard geopotential metre" label="Standard geopotential metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432978" start="5514" end="5533" title="geopotential height" label="geopotential height"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898432" start="5576" end="5597" title="snow water equivalent" label="snow water equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="5601" end="5605" title="Watt" label="Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="5635" end="5645" title="irradiance" label="irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="5649" end="5654" title="Joule" label="Joule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418023" start="5684" end="5700" title="radiant exposure" label="radiant exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q674173" start="5704" end="5708" title="Okta" label="Okta"/>
<link wikidata="Q830457" start="5714" end="5725" title="cloud cover" label="cloud cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q472328" start="5996" end="6005" title="science communication" label="published"/>
<link wikidata="Q579488" start="6008" end="6036" title="Information management" label="high-level brief compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q52139" start="6051" end="6066" title="climate science" label="climate science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570159" start="6093" end="6096" title="Global Carbon Project" label="GCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666085" start="6098" end="6108" title="Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission" label="UNESCO-IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="6110" end="6114" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="IPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="6116" end="6120" title="United Nations Environment Programme" label="UNEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851405" start="6129" end="6139" title="Met Office" label="Met Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="6668" end="6685" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="6687" end="6694" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="6696" end="6709" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="6711" end="6727" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="6729" end="6734" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="6736" end="6757" title="Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="Saint Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q757" start="6759" end="6791" title="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines" label="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="6796" end="6806" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="6808" end="6820" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="6825" end="6829" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="6885" end="6897" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="6902" end="6920" title="State of Palestine" label="State of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="6929" end="6960" title="List of states with limited recognition" label="states with limited recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="7041" end="7048" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="7123" end="7139" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="7152" end="7157" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="7159" end="7166" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="7171" end="7183" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="7234" end="7247" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="7798" end="7811" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="7833" end="7846" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="8061" end="8074" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="8076" end="8091" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="8101" end="8110" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="8518" end="8530" title="Western Asia" label="Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828268" start="8841" end="8875" title="Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay" label="Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135690" start="8885" end="8896" title="Cloud atlas" label="Cloud atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369249" start="8898" end="8933" title="Global Atmospheric Research Program" label="Global Atmospheric Research Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531589" start="8942" end="8973" title="Global Climate Observing System" label="Global Climate Observing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348053" start="8975" end="9000" title="International Cloud Atlas" label="International Cloud Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326212" start="9002" end="9044" title="Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre" label="Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre"/>
</links>
</doc>
