<doc id="33685" wikidata="Q41304" url="?curid=33685" title="Weimar Republic">
<text>The Weimar Republic, officially known as the German Reich, was the German state from 1918 to 1933, during which it was a constitutional republic for the first time in history; hence it is also referred to, and unofficially proclaimed itself, as the German Republic. The period&#x27;s informal name is derived from the city of Weimar, which hosted the constituent assembly that established its government. In English, the republic was usually simply called &quot;Germany&quot;, with &quot;Weimar Republic&quot; (a term introduced by Adolf Hitler in 1929) not commonly used until the 1930s. The Weimar Republic had a semi-presidential system.

Toward the end of the First World War (1914–1918), Germany was exhausted and sued for peace in desperate circumstances. Awareness of imminent defeat sparked a revolution, the abdication of Kaiser Wilhelm II, the proclamation of the Weimar Republic on 9 November 1918, and formal cessation of hostilities with the Allies by the Armistice of 11 November 1918.

In its initial years, grave problems beset the Republic, such as hyperinflation and political extremism, including political murders and two attempted seizures of power by contending paramilitaries; internationally, it suffered isolation, reduced diplomatic standing and contentious relationships with the great powers. By 1924, a great deal of monetary and political stability was restored, and the republic enjoyed relative prosperity for the next five years; this period, sometimes known as the Golden Twenties, was characterized by significant cultural flourishing, social progress, and gradual improvement in foreign relations. Under the Locarno Treaties of 1925, Germany moved toward normalizing relations with its neighbors, recognizing most territorial changes under the 1919 Treaty of Versailles and committing never to go to war. The following year, it joined the League of Nations, which marked its reintegration into the international community. Nevertheless, especially on the political right, there remained strong and widespread resentment against the treaty and those who had signed and supported it.

The Great Depression of October 1929 severely impacted Germany&#x27;s tenuous progress; high unemployment and subsequent social and political unrest led to the collapse of Chancellor Hermann Müller&#x27;s grand coalition and the beginning of the presidential cabinets. From March 1930 onwards, President Paul von Hindenburg used emergency powers to back Chancellors Heinrich Brüning, Franz von Papen and General Kurt von Schleicher. The Great Depression, exacerbated by Brüning&#x27;s policy of deflation, led to a surge in unemployment. On 30 January 1933, Hindenburg appointed Adolf Hitler as Chancellor to head a coalition government; his Nazi Party held two out of ten cabinet seats. Von Papen, as Vice-Chancellor and Hindenburg&#x27;s confidant, was to serve as the &quot;éminence grise&quot; who would keep Hitler under control; these intentions severely underestimated Hitler&#x27;s political abilities. By the end of March 1933, the Reichstag Fire Decree and the Enabling Act of 1933 were used in the perceived state of emergency to effectively grant the new Chancellor broad power to act outside parliamentary control. Hitler promptly used these powers to thwart constitutional governance and suspend civil liberties, which brought about the swift collapse of democracy at the federal and state level, and the creation of a one-party dictatorship under his leadership.

Until the end of World War II in Europe in 1945, the Nazis  governed Germany under the pretense that all the extraordinary measures and laws they implemented were constitutional; notably, there was never an attempt to replace or substantially amend the Weimar Constitution. Nevertheless, Hitler&#x27;s seizure of power (&quot;Machtergreifung&quot;) had effectively ended the republic, replacing its constitutional framework with , the principle that &quot;the Führer&#x27;s word is above all written law&quot;.

==Name and symbols==
The Weimar Republic is so called because the Weimar National Assembly that adopted its constitution met in Weimar from 6 February to 11 August 1919, but the name only became mainstream after 1933.

===Terminology===

Even though the National Assembly chose to retain the old name (Art. 1 of the Constitution), hardly anyone used it during the Weimar period, and no single name for the new state gained widespread acceptance. To the right of the spectrum, the politically engaged rejected the new democratic model and were appalled to see the honor of the traditional word &quot;Reich&quot; associated with it. The Catholic Centre Party favored the term (German People&#x27;s State), while on the moderate left, Chancellor Friedrich Ebert&#x27;s Social Democratic Party of Germany preferred (German Republic). By the mid-1920s, most Germans referred to their government informally as the , but for many, especially on the right, the word &quot;&quot; was a painful reminder of a government structure that they believed had been imposed by foreign statesmen and of the expulsion of Emperor Wilhelm II in the wake of a massive national humiliation.

The first recorded mention of the term (Republic of Weimar) came during a speech delivered by Adolf Hitler at a Nazi Party rally in Munich on 24 February 1929. A few weeks later, the term was first used again by Hitler in a newspaper article. Only during the 1930s did the term become mainstream, both within and outside Germany.

According to historian Richard J. Evans:
The continued use of the term &#x27;German Empire&#x27;, &quot;Deutsches Reich&quot;, by the Weimar Republic ... conjured up an image among educated Germans that resonated far beyond the institutional structures Bismarck created: the successor to the Roman Empire; the vision of God&#x27;s Empire here on earth; the universality of its claim to suzerainty; and a more prosaic but no less powerful sense, the concept of a German state that would include all German speakers in Central Europe&#x27;one People, one Reich, one Leader&#x27;, as the Nazi slogan was to put it.

=== Flag and coat of arms ===
The black-red-gold tricolour of the 1848 German revolutions was named as the national flag in the Weimar Constitution of 1919. It was abolished after the entry into force of the Enabling Act of 1933 when the Nazi Party gained total power, and replaced with the reintroduced pre-1919 black-white-red flag of the German Empire. Alongside the black-white-red national flag, if possible, the party flag of the Nazi Party was ordered to be flown, depicting a black swastika in a centred white disc on a red background. From 1935 the swastika flag with a centred disc remained the party flag of the Nazi Party whilst an alternative version with an off-centred disc became the national flag of the Third Reich, replacing the imperial tricolour, and after World War II, both newly established German states: the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany till 1990, then reunified Germany) and the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) readopted the black-red-gold flag from the Weimar Republic era (East Germany with the addition of its coat of arms since 1959). The coat of arms was initially based on the &quot;Reichsadler&quot; (&quot;imperial eagle&quot;) introduced by the Paulskirche Constitution of 1849, and announced in November 1919. In 1928, a new design by Karl-Tobias Schwab was adopted as national coat of arms, which was used until being replaced by the Nazi &quot;Reichsadler&quot; in 1935, and readopted by the Federal Republic of Germany in 1950.

==Armed forces==
Following Germany&#x27;s defeat in World War I, several million soldiers of the Imperial German Army either simply dispersed on their own or were formally demobilized. The provisional civilian government and the Supreme Army Command (OHL) planned to transfer the remaining units to a peacetime army. Under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, the new army, the &quot;Reichswehr,&quot; was limited to 100,000 men and the &quot;Reichsmarine&quot; (navy), to 15,000. The treaty prohibited an air force, submarines, large warships and armored vehicles.

The official formation of the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; took place on 1 January 1921, after the limitations had been met. The soldiers of the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; took their oath to the Weimar Constitution. The commander-in-chief was the Reich president, while the Reich minister of the armed forces exercised command authority. Military right of command () was in the hands of the OHL. The resulting dualism between civilian power and military command was to become a heavy burden on the Republic. Whereas &quot;Reichswehr&quot; Minister Otto Gessler was content with limited political and administrative duties during his tenure (1920–1928), Colonel General Hans von Seeckt, Chief of Army Command from 1920 to 1926, succeeded in largely removing the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; from the control of the Reichstag. Under Seeckt the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; developed into what many historians consider a &quot;state within the state&quot;.

During the 1920 Kapp Putsch, Seeckt refused to deploy the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; against the Freikorps involved in the putsch, but immediately afterwards had the Ruhr Red Army brutally suppressed during the Ruhr uprising. In 1921, the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; organized the Black Reichswehr, a secret reserve networked within the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; and organized as labor battalions () to circumvent the Treaty of Versailles&#x27; 100,000 man limit on the German army. The Black Reichswehr was never involved in direct military action and was dissolved in 1923 after a group of its members attempted to overthrow the government in the Küstrin Putsch. The &quot;Reichswehr&quot; also developed far-reaching cooperation with the Soviet Red Army, leading among other things to the secret training of German military pilots in clear violation of the Treaty of Versailles.

With Seeckt&#x27;s fall in 1926, the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; made a change in course for which Colonel (later General) Kurt von Schleicher was primarily responsible. The goal was to arouse broad social support for rearmament and to militarize society itself for the purpose of future warfare. Under Paul von Hindenburg&#x27;s Reich presidency, &quot;Reichswehr&quot; leadership gained increasing political influence and eventually helped determine the composition of the Reich governments. As a result, the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; contributed significantly to the development of an authoritarian presidential system during the final phase of the Weimar Republic.

After Adolf Hitler announced the &quot;regaining of military sovereignty&quot; (reintroduction of conscription etc.) in 1935, two years after his rise to power, the &quot;Reichswehr&quot; was absorbed into the new &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;. It was the unified armed forces of the Nazi regime.

==History==
===Background===

Germany and the Central Powers fought the Allies of WWI between 28 July 1914 and 11 November 1918. The war ended with 20 million military and civilian deaths, including 2,037,000 German soldiers and from 424,000 to 763,000 civilians, many of them from disease and starvation as a result of the Allied blockade of Germany.

After four years of war on multiple fronts in Europe and around the world, the final Allied offensive began in August 1918, and the position of Germany and the Central Powers deteriorated, leading them to sue for peace. After initial offers were rejected by the Allied Powers, the hunger and privation of the war years came together with the awareness of an impending military defeat to help spark the German Revolution. On 9 November 1918, a republic was proclaimed, and the abdication of Kaiser Wilhelm II was announced, marking the end of Imperial Germany and the beginning of the Weimar Republic. The armistice that ended the fighting was signed on 11 November.

Germany lost the war because its allies were facing defeat and its economic resources were running out, while by late summer 1918 fresh American troops were arriving in France at the rate of 10,000 per day. Support among the population had begun to crumble in 1916, and by mid-1918, many Germans wanted an end to the war. Increasing numbers of them began to associate with the political left, such as the Social Democratic Party and the more radical Independent Social Democratic Party, which demanded an end to the war. When it became obvious to the generals that defeat was at hand, General Erich Ludendorff convinced the Kaiser that Germany needed to pursue an armistice and that the majority parties in the Reichstag, not the OHL, had to take responsibility for it. Although in retreat, the German armies were still on French and Belgian territory when the war ended on 11 November. Ludendorf and Paul von Hindenburg then began proclaiming that it was the defeatism of the civilian population – especially the socialists – that had made defeat inevitable. The stab-in-the-back myth was spread by the Right throughout the 1920s and ensured that many monarchists and conservatives would refuse to support the government of what they called the &quot;November criminals&quot;. The destabilizing effect of the stab-in-the-back myth on the Weimar democracy was an important factor in the rise of National Socialism.

===November Revolution (1918-1919)===

On 29 October 1918, a rebellion broke out among sailors at Wilhelmshaven; similar unrest then spread to become the Kiel mutiny on 3 November. Sailors, soldiers and workers began electing workers&#x27; and soldiers&#x27; councils () modelled after the soviets of the 1917 Russian Revolution. The revolution spread throughout Germany, and participants seized military and civil power in individual cities. The power takeovers were achieved everywhere without loss of life.

At the time, the socialist movement, which represented mostly laborers, was split among two major left-wing parties: the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD), which called for immediate peace negotiations and favored a soviet-style command economy, and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), also known as the Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany (MSPD), which had supported the war and favoured a parliamentary system. The rebellion caused great fear among supporters of the monarchy and in the middle classes because of the soviet-style aspirations of the councils. To centrist and conservative citizens, the country looked to be on the verge of a communist revolution.

By 7 November, the revolution had reached Munich, resulting in the flight of King Ludwig III of Bavaria. The MSPD decided to make use of their support at the grassroots level and put themselves at the front of the movement. They joined the calls for Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicate, and when he refused, Chancellor Maximilian of Baden made a public announcement that the Kaiser and Crown Prince Wilhelm had already done so. Gustav Noske (MSPD) was sent to Kiel to prevent any further unrest and took on the task of controlling the mutinous sailors and their supporters in the Kiel barracks. The sailors and soldiers welcomed him, and he was able to defuse the situation.

On 9 November 1918, the German Republic was proclaimed by MSPD member Philipp Scheidemann at the Reichstag building in Berlin, angering Friedrich Ebert, the leader of the MSPD, who thought that the question of monarchy or republic should be answered by a national assembly. Two hours later, a Free Socialist Republic was proclaimed at the Berlin Palace. The proclamation was issued by Karl Liebknecht, co-leader with Rosa Luxemburg of the communist (Spartacus League), a group of a few hundred supporters of the Russian Revolution that had allied itself with the USPD in 1917. On the same day, in a move that was contrary to the constitution because only the Kaiser could appoint a chancellor, Prince Max of Baden, at Ebert&#x27;s request, transferred his powers as chancellor to him. In view of the mass support for more radical reforms among the workers&#x27; councils, a coalition government called the Council of the People&#x27;s Deputies () was established, consisting of three MSPD and three USPD members. Led by Ebert for the MSPD and Hugo Haase for the USPD, it governed Germany from November 1918 to January 1919. Although the new government was confirmed by the Berlin Workers&#x27; and Soldiers&#x27; Council, it was opposed by the Spartacus League.

On 11 November 1918, an armistice was signed at Compiègne by German representatives. It effectively ended military operations between the Allies and Germany. It amounted to a German capitulation, without any concessions by the Allies; the naval blockade was to continue until complete peace terms were agreed on.

The Executive Council of the Workers&#x27; and Soldiers&#x27; Council of Greater Berlin called for a National Congress of Councils () which took place from 16 to 21 December 1918. Against the opposition of the more radical members who demanded a socialist republic, Ebert, backed by the large MSPD majority at the Congress, was able to schedule the election for a provisional National Assembly that would act as an interim parliament and be given the task of writing a democratic constitution for a parliamentary government.

To ensure that the fledgling government maintained control over the country, Ebert and General Wilhelm Groener, Ludendorff&#x27;s successor as leader of the Supreme Army Command (OHL), concluded the secret Ebert–Groener pact on 10 November. Over the telephone, Ebert promised that he would allow sole command of the troops to remain with the officer corps, while Groener pledged that the military would be loyal to the government and that it would help it in its fight against left-wing revolutionaries. The agreement marked the acceptance of the new government by the military, but the new &quot;Reichswehr&quot; armed forces, limited by the Treaty of Versailles to 100,000 army soldiers and 15,000 sailors, remained fully under the control of the German officer class.

A rift developed between the MSPD and USPD after Ebert called upon the OHL for troops to put down a mutiny by a leftist military unit on 23/24 December 1918 in which members of the &quot;Volksmarinedivision&quot; (People&#x27;s Navy Division) captured the city&#x27;s garrison commander Otto Wels of the MSPD and occupied the Reich Chancellery where the Council of the People&#x27;s Deputies had its offices. The ensuing street fighting left 11 members and 56 members of the regular army dead. The USPD leaders were angered by what they believed was treachery by the MSPD, which in their view had joined with the anti-communist military to suppress the revolution. As a result, the USPD left the Council of the People&#x27;s Deputies after only seven weeks. On 30 December, the split deepened when the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) was formed out of a number of radical left-wing groups, including the Spartacus League and the left wing of the USPD.

In January, the Spartacus League, in what was known as the Spartacist uprising, took advantage of a large strike in Berlin and attempted to establish a communist government. The uprising was put down by paramilitary &quot;Freikorps&quot; units consisting of volunteer soldiers. Following bloody street fights, Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht were summarily killed after their arrests on 15 January. With the affirmation of Ebert, those responsible were not tried before a court-martial, leading to lenient sentences, which made Ebert unpopular among radical leftists.

The National Assembly election, in which women were allowed to vote for the first time, took place on 19 January 1919. The MSPD won the largest share of the votes at 37.9%, with the USPD fifth at 7.6%. To avoid the ongoing fights in Berlin, the National Assembly convened in the city of Weimar, giving the future Republic its unofficial name. The Weimar Constitution created a parliamentary republic with the Reichstag elected by proportional representation.

During the debates in Weimar, fighting continued sporadically across Germany. On 7 April 1919, the Bavarian Soviet Republic was declared in Munich but quickly put down by &quot;Freikorps&quot; and remnants of the regular army. The fall of the Munich Soviet Republic to these units, many of which were on the extreme right, resulted in the growth of far-right, anti-Semitic movements and organizations in Bavaria, including Organisation Consul, the Nazi Party, and societies of exiled Russian monarchists. Revolutionary sentiment also arose in the eastern states where interethnic discontent between Germans and minority Poles led to the Silesian Uprisings and the Greater Poland uprising in the German Province of Posen, which became part of the Second Polish Republic under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles.

===Years of crisis (1919–1923)===

====Burden from the First World War====
In the four years following the First World War, the situation of most German civilians remained dire. The post-war economic crisis was a result of lost pre-war industrial exports, the loss of imported raw materials and foodstuffs due to the continental blockade, the loss of Germany&#x27;s overseas colonies and the worsening debt balances that had been exacerbated by Germany&#x27;s heavy reliance on bonds to pay for the war. The economic losses can be attributed in part to the extension of the Allied blockade of Germany until the Treaty of Versailles was signed on 28 June 1919. It is estimated that between 100,000 and 250,000 German civilians died of disease or starvation between the end of the war and the signing of the treaty. Many German civilians expected life to return to pre-war normality after it was lifted, but the severe food shortages continued. In 1922, for example, meat consumption had not increased since the war years. At 22 kilograms per person per year, it was less than half of the 52 kilograms consumed in 1913. German citizens felt the food shortages more deeply than during the war because the reality contrasted so starkly with their expectations.

Immediate post-war industrial production fell to the levels of the 1880s, or 57 percent of its value in 1913. The 1919 per capita GDP was only 73 percent of the comparable 1913 figure. Controlled demobilization kept unemployment initially at around one million. By January 1922, the unemployment rate had sunk to just 0.9%, but inflation caused most workers&#x27; real wages to be significantly lower than they were in 1913. The hyperinflation that peaked in late 1923 had its worst effects on government workers, whose wages did not keep pace with private sector workers, and on middle class Germans who had invested in war bonds or who relied on savings, investments or pensions for their living. What had once been substantial savings became essentially worthless due to the enormous fall in the Papiermark&#x27;s value.

After four years of war and famine, many German workers were disenchanted with the capitalist system and hoped for a new era under socialism or communism. Socialists dominated the new revolutionary government in Berlin, and numerous short-lived council republics were set up in cities across Germany. Even after they were suppressed, ideological conflicts between the Left and supporters of the former empire led to political violence and extremism. The young republic found itself in a nearly constant economic and political crisis until 1924.

====Treaty of Versailles====

The Treaty of Versailles ended the state of war between Germany and most of the Allied powers and set the conditions for peace. It was signed 28 June 1919 and can be divided into four main categories: territorial issues, disarmament, reparations and assignment of guilt.
Territorially, Germany had to renounce sovereignty over its colonies and in Europe lost 65,000 km2 (25,000 sq mi) or about 13% of its former territory – including 48% of its iron and 10% of its coal resources – along with 7 million people, or 12% of its population. The Saarland was put under the control of the League of Nations for 15 years, and the output of the area&#x27;s coal mines went to France. Alsace–Lorraine, which Prussia had annexed following the Franco-Prussian War of 1870/71, once again became French. The northern part of Schleswig-Holstein went to Denmark following a plebiscite. In the east, a significant amount of territory was lost to a restored Poland. The Memel Territory was ceded to the Allied powers, and Danzig went to the League of Nations as the Free City of Danzig. The Polish Corridor left East Prussia physically separated from the rest of Germany.

 Under the terms of both the Armistice of 1918 and of the Treaty of Versailles, French, British, Belgian and American troops occupied the Rhineland, the area of Germany on the west bank of the Rhine river, together with bridgeheads on the east bank near Cologne, Mainz and Koblenz. In addition, the Rhineland and an area stretching 50 kilometers east of the Rhine was to be demilitarized. France had demanded the occupation both to protect itself from a renewed German attack and as collateral for German reparations. The occupation was to last 5 years in the British zone, 10 in the American and 15 years in the French and Belgian zones, until 1934, but the last foreign troops evacuated the Rhineland on 30 June 1930.

The treaty&#x27;s disarmament provisions were intended to make the future German army incapable of offensive action. It was limited to no more than 100,000 men with only 4,000 officers and no general staff; the navy could have at most 15,000 men and 1,500 officers. All fortifications in the Rhineland and 50 kilometers (31 miles) east of the river were to be demolished. Germany was prohibited from having an air force, tanks, poison gas, heavy artillery, submarines or dreadnoughts. A large number of its ships and all of its air-related armaments were to be surrendered.

Germany had to compensate the Allied Powers for the losses and damages of the war, with the exact amount left to be determined at a later date (Article 233). In the short term it was required to pay the equivalent of 20 billion gold marks in installments through April 1921 (Article 235).

The most contentious article of the treaty, the so-called War Guilt Clause, did not use the word &quot;guilt&quot;. It stated that Germany accepted full responsibility for all the loss and damage from a war that was imposed on the Allies by the aggression of Germany and its allies (Article 231).

The implications of Article 231 and the territorial losses especially angered the Germans. The treaty was reviled as a dictated rather than a negotiated peace. Philipp Scheidemann, then minister president of Germany, said to the Weimar National Assembly on 12 May 1919, &quot;What hand should not wither that puts this fetter on itself and on us?&quot; He resigned rather than accept the terms, but after the Allies threatened to resume hostilities, the National Assembly voted to approve the treaty on 23 June. It was signed in Paris five days later.

Explaining the rise of extreme nationalist movements in Germany shortly after the war, British historian Ian Kershaw pointed to the &quot;national disgrace&quot; that was &quot;felt throughout Germany at the humiliating terms imposed by the victorious Allies and reflected in the Versailles Treaty...with its confiscation of territory on the eastern border and even more so its &#x27;guilt clause&#x27;.&quot; Adolf Hitler repeatedly blamed the Republic and its democracy for accepting the oppressive terms of the treaty.

==== War guilt ====
Article 231 of the Versailles Treaty was widely perceived not only as a legal legitimization of reparations but also as a moral condemnation of Germany, and it triggered a storm of indignation among the German public. The hostility towards it came from across the political spectrum, from the far right to the moderate governing parties to the KPD.

After the treaty came into force, the Foreign Office continued the state&#x27;s control of the debate over war guilt. The War Guilt Department financed and directed the Centre for the Study of the Causes of the War, which was to provide &quot;scientific&quot; support for the &quot;campaign of innocence&quot; abroad. For war-innocence propaganda at home, a &quot;Working Committee of German Associations&quot; was founded with representatives of many groups considered &quot;fit for good society&quot;. In 1919, the Weimar National Assembly established a parliamentary committee to inquire into the events that had led to the &quot;outbreak, prolongation and loss of the First World War&quot;. Its results were of questionable value due to a lack of cooperation from the civil service and military and to increasing interference from the government, which wanted to prevent a German admission of guilt before the world public. The committee met until 1932.

During the course of World War I, war reporting was the responsibility of the German General Staff and after 1918, of the Potsdam Reich Archives founded by General Hans von Seeckt, which dedicated itself to the task of &quot;disproving&quot; German war guilt and war crimes. As a result, it was the leadership of the Reichswehr with its largely anti-democratic civil service personnel that, along with the Foreign Office, determined the portrayal of the war in the Weimar Republic.

All in all, there was little objective and critical questioning of the causes of the war or of Germany&#x27;s responsibility for it in academia, politics or the media during the Weimar period. The official view of history continued to follow the argument issued by the OHL in 1914 that Germany had been threatened by invasion and encirclement. Revising the conditions of the Versailles Treaty became the main goal of German foreign policy.

The consensus opposing the &quot;war guilt clause&quot; did much to promote agitation against foreign countries and the Weimar Constitution. Both the DNVP and, in particular, the NSDAP questioned the entire post-war order and propagated a &quot;war guilt lie&quot;. In line with national conservative and bourgeois right-wing parties, they accused the governing parties of having contributed to Germany&#x27;s humiliation by signing the treaty and of denying it the right to self-determination.

==== Political turmoil: Kapp Putsch and Ruhr uprising ====
The young republic was exposed from the beginning to attacks from both the extreme right and extreme left. The Left accused the Social Democrats of betraying the ideals of the labor movement because of their alliance with the old elites; the Right held the supporters of the Republic responsible for Germany&#x27;s defeat in the First World War, denigrating them as &quot;November criminals&quot; and insinuating that the German army, which was still fighting on enemy soil when the war ended, had been stabbed in the back by them and the revolution (the stab-in-the-back myth).
In the March 1920 Kapp Putsch, Freikorps units under General von Lüttwitz occupied the government quarter in Berlin. In an attempt to reverse the revolution and install an autocratic government, the former Prussian civil servant Wolfgang Kapp appointed himself Reich chancellor and Lüttwitz Reichswehr minister and commander-in-chief of the Reichswehr. The legal government fled Berlin and called for a general strike. The putsch quickly failed due in large part to the refusal of the ministerial bureaucracy to obey Kapp&#x27;s orders. The Reichswehr, however, proved itself to be unreliable. It adopted a wait-and-see attitude under General von Seeckt, the head of the Troop Office, who said that &quot;Reichswehr do not fire on Reichswehr&quot;.

Some among the working class did not limit themselves to passive resistance to the Kapp Putsch. Especially in the Ruhr, where dissatisfaction with the lack of nationalization of key industries was particularly high, councils were formed that sought to seize local power. In the Ruhr uprising, civil war-like fighting broke out when the Ruhr Red Army, made up of some 50,000 armed workers, mostly adherents of the KPD and USPD, used the disruption caused by the general strike to take control of the industrial district. After bloody battles in which an estimated 1,000 insurgents and 200 soldiers died, Reichswehr and Freikorps units suppressed the revolt in early April.

In Bavaria, the Kapp Putsch led to an anti-republican government reshuffle that made the Free State a so-called &quot;cell of order&quot; () within the Weimar state and a rallying point for right-wing conservative and reactionary forces. The unstable political conditions in the early phase of the Weimar Republic were also evident in the Reichstag election of 1920, in which the centre-left Weimar Coalition, which until then had had a three-quarters majority, lost 125 seats to parties on both the left and right.

==== Political assassinations ====
The sharp political polarization that had occurred was visible in the assassinations of important representatives of the Republic by members of the right-wing extremist Organisation Consul. Finance Minister Matthias Erzberger was assassinated in August 1921 and Foreign Minister Walther Rathenau in June 1922. Both men had been defamed as compliant to Germany&#x27;s former enemies in the matter of reparations payments. Erzberger was also attacked for signing the armistice agreement in 1918, and Rathenau had sought to break Germany&#x27;s external isolation after the First World War through the Treaty of Rapallo, which opened diplomatic relations with the new Soviet Union, renounced all war claims and mutually cancelled pre-war debts. Rathenau also attracted right-wing extremist hatred because he was a Jew. The passing of the Law for the Protection of the Republic, which increased the punishments for politically motivated acts of violence, established a special court for the protection of the Republic and prohibited organizations, printed material and rallies that opposed the constitutional republican form of government, was intended to put a stop to the Republic&#x27;s right-wing enemies. The conservative judiciary from the imperial era that still remained in place and passed lenient sentences against right-wing state criminals contributed to the fact that their activities could not be permanently deterred.

==== Reparations and the occupation of the Ruhr ====
After a series of international conferences to determine the reparations for which Germany was liable, an amount of 132 billion Reichsmarks was presented in May 1921, to be paid either in gold or commodities such as iron, steel and coal. Chancellor Joseph Wirth had no choice other than to accept, but in an attempt to have the amount lowered, he began the German policy of &quot;fulfilment&quot; (). By attempting to meet the payments, it intended to show the Allies that the demands were beyond Germany&#x27;s economic means. In May 1922, when the Reichsmark was rapidly losing value, Germany was granted a payment moratorium over strong French objections.

In January 1923, France declared Germany in default. The French minister president Raymond Poincaré saw Germany&#x27;s failure to pay reparations as a lever that he could use to achieve the separation of the Rhineland from the German Reich, a French demand that had been refused by the British at Versailles. After the Reparation Commission determined that German coal deliveries were short, French and Belgian troops marched into the Rhineland on 11 January 1923, Germany&#x27;s most productive industrial region, and took control of most of its mining and manufacturing companies. The German government under Chancellor Wilhelm Cuno responded with a policy of non-violent passive resistance to the occupation. It underwrote the costs of idled factories and mines and paid the workers who were on strike. Unable to meet the enormous costs by any other means, it resorted to printing money. Along with the debts the state had incurred during the war, it was one of the major causes of the hyperinflation that followed.

Realizing that continuing the course was untenable, the new Reich Chancellor Gustav Stresemann called off the passive resistance in September 1923. The French and Belgian occupation ended in August 1925, following an agreement (the Dawes Plan) to restructure Germany&#x27;s payments. The total reparations payout from 1920 to 1931 (when payments were suspended indefinitely) was 20 billion marks. 12.5 billion was cash that came mostly from loans provided by New York bankers. The rest was goods such as coal and chemicals, or from assets like railway equipment.

==== Hyperinflation ====

The hyperinflation fueled by the government&#x27;s response to the occupation of the Ruhr caused the cost of a loaf of bread to rise from 3 Reichsmarks in 1922 to 80 billion Reichsmarks in November 1923. Prices were rising so rapidly that people rushed to spend their pay at lunch breaks before it lost any more of its value. Foreign trade became all but impossible, as did German ability to pay reparations. While personal savings became virtually worthless, so did fixed debts. Middle class owners of land or houses often came out ahead because their debts lost value along with the currency. Large industrial concerns profited in the same manner, and wealth concentrated in fewer hands. The classic example was Hugo Stinnes, who earned the title of Inflation King by taking advantage of its effects on debt to amass controlling interests in 1,535 businesses with 2,890 different plants by 1924. Stinnes&#x27; empire collapsed after the government-sponsored inflation was stopped by the introduction of the Rentenmark on 15 November 1923. One U.S. dollar was equivalent to 4.20 Rentenmarks; the exchange rate was 1 Rentenmark to one trillion paper marks. The new money was backed by the Reich&#x27;s gold reserves along with a 3.2 billion Rentenmark mortgage on the land holdings of agriculture, industry and trade. The introduction of the Rentenmark was successful at stabilizing German currency and the economy.

==== Additional political violence and the Hitler putsch ====

With the proclamation on 21 October 1923 of the Rhenish Republic came a short-lived secessionist movement in the wake of which sections of the labor force became increasingly radicalized. In Saxony and Thuringia, Communists won enough seats to participate in governments under Social Democratic minister presidents. In both states the Communists were expelled by Reich executions () using Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution. In the Reichstag, the Social Democrats withdrew their support from Cuno&#x27;s government and entered a grand coalition under DVP Chancellor Gustav Stresemann.

The nationalist right, especially in Bavaria, branded the breaking off of the Ruhr resistance as treason. In a breach of the Weimar constitution, Bavaria declared a state of emergency, and executive power was transferred to Gustav Ritter von Kahr as state commissioner general. The Reichswehr under the Chief of Army Command, General Hans von Seeckt, who had his own governmental ambitions directed against left-wing parties and Weimar parliamentary, behaved loyally towards the Stresemann government only with respect to his own interests. In spite of the moves against the governments in Saxony and Thuringia, no action was taken against Bavaria, where Kahr was preparing a military coup aimed at overthrowing the Reich government in cooperation with the Bavarian military under district commander Otto von Lossow.

In 1920, the German Workers&#x27; Party had become the National Socialist German Workers&#x27; Party (NSDAP), or Nazi Party, which would eventually become a driving force in the collapse of the Weimar Republic. Adolf Hitler named himself chairman of the party in July 1921. On 8 November 1923, in a pact with Erich Ludendorff, a league of nationalist fighting societies called the &quot;Kampfbund,&quot; took over a meeting that Kahr and Lossow were holding at a beer hall in Munich. Ludendorff and Hitler declared that the Weimar government was deposed and that they were planning to take control of Munich the following day. Kahr and Lossow organized the resistance to Hitler, with the result that the coup attempt was easily stopped. Hitler was arrested and sentenced to five years in prison for high treason, the minimum sentence for the charge. He served less than eight months in a comfortable cell, receiving a daily stream of visitors until his release on 20 December 1924. While in jail Hitler dictated &quot;Mein Kampf&quot;, which laid out his ideas and future policies. Hitler decided to focus in the future on legal methods of gaining power.

=== Golden Era (1924–1929) ===
From 1924 to 1929, the Weimar Republic was relatively stable. Known in Germany as the &quot;&quot; (Golden Twenties), its prominent features were internal consolidation and rapprochement in foreign affairs, along with a growing economy and a consequent decrease in civil unrest, although the improvements came about without establishing a sustainable foundation for the parliamentary democracy. While Germany&#x27;s recognition of its reparations obligations promoted reintegration into the contemporary state system and world markets, it also developed a strong dependence on American capital. The stability was partly borrowed and, in the end, only superficial.

==== Framework for economic policy ====
An essential basis for the relative stabilization was the restructuring of reparations through the Dawes Plan. Without fixing a final total sum, the plan regulated the scope, composition and the security of transfers for future annual reparations payments. The latter was to be guaranteed by the American financial expert Parker Gilbert who, as reparations agent, could directly influence German fiscal and financial policy in order to secure monetary stability. The acceptance of the Dawes Plan in the Reichstag had long been uncertain – parts of the Right spoke of a &quot;new enslavement of the German people&quot; and the KPD of the enslavement of the German proletariat. Once the plan had been passed, it brought the Weimar Republic a significant inflow of American loans from state funds as well as private investors. The money served as both start-up financing for reparations and as aid for an economic revival. German railways, the National Bank and many industries were mortgaged as security for the loans.

The economic consolidation that occurred after the period of hyperinflation was largely at the expense of wage earners and the economic middle class. The eight-hour day, one of the main social achievements of the 1918/19 revolution, was in many cases watered down or abandoned; the civil service was affected by massive job cuts and salary reductions; and rationalization and concentration in large industries continued and deprived many small and medium-sized enterprises of their livelihoods. Savers and creditors who had been hurt by inflation were effectively left without any significant compensation. Real wages, however, grew faster than the cost of living between 1924 and 1929. One study found that by 1928–29 they &quot;had reached or exceeded their pre-war level&quot;.

The declarations of social guarantees contained in the Weimar Constitution had only a limited effect and stood in striking contrast to the many experiences of social decline. From 1924 onwards, small savers who had been impoverished or economically ruined by inflation were at least able to take advantage of the state-organized social welfare system, which replaced the former poor relief. The new system, however, was characterized by &quot;petty means tests under an anonymous social bureaucracy&quot; and by benefits that only secured existence at a subsistence level. In the brief peak phase of overall economic recovery and economic optimism, unemployment insurance was introduced in 1927. In some respects it was the &quot;high point of the Republic&#x27;s social expansion&quot;, although it benefitted only a portion of the workforce and did not cover permanent unemployment. In the meantime, the state had also introduced a new system of social security.

The parliamentary system of Weimar democracy was the expression of a party landscape that was strongly characterized and fragmented by class and social milieus. Reichstag members as representatives of the interests of their respective electorates often had narrow limits to their willingness to compromise. Such class and status consciousness was part of the legacy of the imperial era and continued to have an effect, although it was also partly reshaped by a consumer and leisure-oriented mass culture that emerged in the 1920s and was driven by the new media forms of records, film and radio. People of all classes and strata went to the cinema or sat in front of the radio. Mass culture pointed in the direction of democratisation and was interpreted by conservatives as intellectual flattening and a decline in values. The class fronts were gradually softened by mass culture, marking a &quot;class society in transition&quot;.

==== Unstable political system ====
After Reich President Ebert died at the beginning of 1925 at the age of 54, the candidate of the parties that supported the Republic, Wilhelm Marx of the Centre Party, was defeated in the second round of the 1925 Reich presidential election by the candidate of the nationalist right, Paul von Hindenburg, 48.3% to 45.3%. Despite the fact that Hindenburg had declared in advance that he intended to hold office in accordance with the Weimar Constitution, his electoral success showed how far the country had shifted to the right since Weimar&#x27;s beginnings with a socialist president.

The Reichstag elections in May 1924 and December 1924 were once again failures for the Weimar Coalition (SDP, DDP and Centre), which had started so comfortably in 1919 and which maintained its position as a &quot;bulwark of democracy&quot; only in Prussia. In the May election, the Coalition partners lost a total of 13 seats, while the right wing DNVP and left wing KPD picked up 82 seats. After the SPD left Gustav Stresemann&#x27;s cabinet in November 1923 in protest of the Reich executions against Saxony and Thuringia, it did not take part in a government again until June 1928. From 1924 to 1928, there were three chancellors: Wilhelm Marx of the Centre party (twice), the non-partisan Hans Luther and Hermann Müller of the SPD. Altogether there were seven cabinets under the three men.

==== Foreign policy ====

Despite the frequent changes of personnel in the Reich chancellery and in the government cabinets between 1923 and 1928, there was nevertheless an effective constant in Foreign Minister Gustav Stresemann of the German People&#x27;s Party. With his change from &quot;monarchist of the heart&quot; to &quot;republican of reason&quot;, as he himself expressed it, Stresemann exercised a stabilizing influence on the political development of the Republic not only as Reich chancellor in 1923 but throughout the entire period of his participation in government.

He sought a release from the restraints of the Treaty of Versailles exclusively by peaceful means and through mutual understanding, although without abandoning long-term revisionist intentions such as regaining the territory ceded to Poland. He took the initiative for the 1925 Locarno Treaties, which settled Germany&#x27;s western borders but left the issue of the eastern ones open. Through reaching an understanding with France and securing Germany an equal position in the League of Nations in 1926, he led the Weimar Republic out of isolation. Germany signed arbitration conventions with France and Belgium and arbitration treaties with Poland and Czechoslovakia, undertaking to refer any future disputes to an arbitration tribunal or to the Permanent Court of International Justice. As a result of the Dawes Plan, foreign troops left the Ruhr in 1925. In addition, the 1926 Treaty of Berlin ensured that relations with the Soviet Union remained unencumbered. Beginning in 1925 there was secret and illegal cooperation between the Reichswehr and the Red Army. Germany tested weapons in the Soviet Union that had been banned by the Treaty of Versailles, including aircraft, tanks and poison gas.

The favourable effects expected from the Locarno Treaties were to a certain extent realized. The first Rhineland zone was vacated in 1925, Franco-German economic relations were expanded through agreements, and the Military Inter-Allied Commission of Control, which monitored German disarmament, left Germany in 1927. In 1928 Stresemann played an important mediating role between the US and France in the negotiations on the Kellogg–Briand Pact, an international agreement on peace.

After the full reparations schedule under the Dawes Plan was drawn up in 1928/29, new negotiations took place. In the resulting Young Plan, the question of possible relief was combined with a plan for the final settlement of the reparations question. Instead of the annual payment of 2.5 billion Reichsmarks envisaged in the Dawes Plan, an average of 2 billion – initially 1.7 billion – was to be paid over a period of 59 years. With the prospect of what was thought to be a final reparations plan, and in view of Germany&#x27;s willingness to accept the liability until 1988, France in parallel negotiations conceded a withdrawal of troops from the occupied Rhineland five years earlier than under the Versailles Treaty. For the nationalist right in Germany, it was above all the reparations burden extending across generations that provided propaganda fuel for their agitation against the Weimar Republic. The DNVP and Nazi Party carried out a referendum against the Young Plan, which failed by a large margin due to the low turnout, but through it the National Socialists were able to use their propaganda to draw nationwide attention to themselves and to make their mark on the right-wing fringe of the party spectrum.

===Culture===

The 1920s saw a remarkable cultural renaissance in Germany. During the worst phase of hyperinflation in 1923, the clubs and bars were full of speculators who spent their daily profits so they would not lose the value the following day. Berlin intellectuals responded by condemning the excesses of what they considered capitalism and demanding revolutionary changes on the cultural scenery.
Influenced by the cultural explosion in the Soviet Union, German literature, cinema, theatre and musical works entered a phase of great creativity. Innovative street theatre brought plays to the public, and the cabaret scene and jazz bands became very popular. According to the cliché, modern young women were Americanized, wearing makeup, short hair, smoking and breaking with traditional mores. The euphoria surrounding Josephine Baker in the metropolis of Berlin for instance, where she was declared an &quot;erotic goddess&quot; and in many ways admired and respected, kindled further &quot;ultramodern&quot; sensations in the minds of the German public. Art and a new type of architecture taught at &quot;Bauhaus&quot; schools reflected the new ideas of the time, with artists such as George Grosz being fined for defaming the military and for blasphemy.
Artists in Berlin were influenced by other contemporary progressive cultural movements, such as the Impressionist and Expressionist painters in Paris, as well as the Cubists. Likewise, American progressive architects were admired. Many of the new buildings built during this era followed a straight-lined, geometrical style. Examples of the new architecture include the Bauhaus Building by Gropius, Grosses Schauspielhaus, and the Einstein Tower.

Not everyone, however, was happy with the changes taking place in Weimar culture. Conservatives and reactionaries feared that Germany was betraying its traditional values by adopting popular styles from abroad, particularly those Hollywood was popularizing in American films, while New York became the global capital of fashion.

In 1929, three years after receiving the 1926 Nobel Peace Prize, Stresemann died of a heart attack at age 51. When the New York Stock Exchange crashed in October 1929, American loans dried up and the sharp decline of the German economy brought the &quot;Golden Twenties&quot; to an abrupt end.

===Social policy under Weimar===
A wide range of progressive social reforms were carried out during and after the revolutionary period. The Executive Council of the Workers&#x27; and Soldiers&#x27; Councils – a coalition that included Majority Social Democrats, Independent Social Democrats, workers and soldiers – introduced the eight-hour work day, reinstated demobilized workers, released political prisoners, abolished press censorship, increased workers&#x27; old-age, sick and unemployment benefits, and gave labor the unrestricted right to organize into unions. It was made harder for estates to sack workers and prevent them from leaving when they wanted to. Under the Provisional Act for Agricultural Labour of 23 November 1918, the normal period of notice for management and most resident laborer was set at six weeks. In addition, a supplementary directive of December 1918 specified that female and child workers were entitled to a fifteen-minute break if they worked between four and six hours, thirty minutes for workdays lasting six to eight hours, and one hour for longer days. A decree on 23 December 1918 established committees (composed of workers&#x27; representatives &quot;in their relation to the employer&quot;) to safeguard the rights of workers. The right to bargain collectively was also established, while it was made obligatory &quot;to elect workers&#x27; committees on estates and establish conciliation committees&quot;. A decree on 3 February 1919 removed the right of employers to acquire exemption for domestic servants and agricultural workers. In 1919, legislation provided for a maximum working 48-hour workweek, restrictions on night work, a half-holiday on Saturday, and a break of thirty-six hours of continuous rest during the week.

With the decree of 3 February 1919, the Ebert government reintroduced the original structure of the health insurance boards according to an 1883 law, with one-third employers and two-thirds workers. As of 28 June 1919, health insurance committees were elected by the workers themselves. That same year, health insurance was extended to wives and daughters without their own income, people only partially capable of gainful employment, people employed in private cooperatives, and people employed in public cooperatives.

The Provisional Order of January 1919 concerning agricultural labor conditions fixed 2,900 hours as a maximum per year, distributed as eight, ten, and eleven hours per day in four month periods. A code of January 1919 bestowed on land laborer the same legal rights that industrial workers enjoyed, while a bill ratified the same year obligated the states to set up agricultural settlement associations which &quot;were endowed with the priority right of purchase of farms beyond a specified size&quot;. In October 1919, a law was enacted that provided various kinds of financial support in relation to pregnancy, childbirth, confinement compensation, and maternity care. That same year, free legal representation to the poor was introduced.

A series of progressive tax reforms were introduced under the auspices of Matthias Erzberger, including increases in taxes on capital and an increase in the highest income tax rate from 4% to 60%. Under a governmental decree of 3 February 1919, the German government met the demand of the veterans&#x27; associations that all aid for the disabled and their dependents be taken over by the central government (thus assuming responsibility for this assistance) and extended into peacetime the nationwide network of state and district welfare bureaus that had been set up during the war to coordinate social services for war widows and orphans.

The Youth Welfare Act of 1922 obliged all municipalities and states to set up youth offices in charge of child protection, and also codified a right to education for all children, while laws were passed to regulate rents and increase protection for tenants in 1922 and 1923. Health insurance coverage was extended to other categories of the population during the existence of the Weimar Republic, including seamen, people employed in the educational and social welfare sectors, and all primary dependents. Various improvements were also made in unemployment benefits, although in June 1920 the maximum amount of unemployment benefit that a family of four could receive in Berlin, 90 marks, was well below the minimum cost of subsistence of 304 marks.

In 1923, unemployment relief was consolidated into a regular programme of assistance following economic problems that year. In 1924, a modern public assistance programme was introduced, and in 1925 the accident insurance programme was reformed, allowing diseases that were linked to certain kinds of work to become insurable risks. Other amendments to accident insurance in 1925 also introduced rehabilitation benefits, together with benefits for the dependent children of permanently disabled workers whose earning capacity had fallen by at least 50%. In addition, paid maternity leave and a national unemployment insurance programme were both introduced in 1927. Housing construction was also greatly accelerated during the Weimar period, with over 2 million new homes constructed between 1924 and 1931 and a further 195,000 modernized.

The Weimar years witnessed a major rise in overall public spending, which grew to an annual average of 13.7 billion Marks (in 1913 prices) from 1919 to 1929, compared with 6.8 billion Marks from 1909 to 1913. Government expenditure as a proportion of GNP also rose; standing at 25% in 1925, 30.6% in 1929, and 36.6% in 1932. According to one study, &quot;This expansion was first and foremost a consequence of &quot;social interventionism,&quot; the chief manifestation of which, apart from house building and job creation measures during the crisis of 1925–26, was the extension of social insurance.&quot;


=== Renewed crisis and decline (1930–1933) ===

====Onset of the Great Depression====

In 1929, the onset of the Great Depression produced a severe economic shock in Germany which was made worse by the European banking crisis of 1931. Germany&#x27;s fragile economy had been sustained by the granting of loans through the Dawes Plan (1924) and the Young Plan (1929). When American banks withdrew their line of credit to German companies, the rapid rise in unemployment could not be checked by conventional economic measures. Unemployment thereafter grew dramatically, to 4 million in 1930, and in the Reichstag election of September 1930, the National Socialist German Workers&#x27; Party (NSDAP, Nazi Party), until then a minor far-right party, increased its share of the votes to 19%, becoming Germany&#x27;s second largest party, while the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) gained 23 seats. The shift to the political extremes made the unstable coalition system by which every Weimar chancellor had governed increasingly unworkable. The last years of the Weimar Republic were marred by even more systemic political instability than previous years, and political violence increased. Four chancellors (Heinrich Brüning, Franz von Papen, Kurt von Schleicher and, from 30 January to 23 March 1933, Adolf Hitler) governed through presidential decree rather than parliamentary consultation. It effectively rendered parliament powerless as a means of enforcing constitutional checks and balances.

====Brüning and the first presidential cabinet (1930–1932)====

On 29 March 1930, at the instigation of General Kurt von Schleicher, President Paul von Hindenburg appointed finance expert Heinrich Brüning as successor to Hermann Müller (SPD), whose five-party coalition had broken down on 27 March over how to finance the increased costs of unemployment compensation. The new government was expected to lead a political shift towards conservatism.

As Brüning had no majority support in the Reichstag, he became, through the use of the emergency powers granted to the Reich president by Article 48 of the constitution, the first Weimar chancellor to operate independently of parliament. After a bill to reform Germany&#x27;s finances was opposed by the Reichstag, it was made into an emergency decree by Hindenburg. On 18 July, as a result of opposition from the SPD, KPD, DNVP and the small contingent of NSDAP members, the Reichstag again rejected the bill by a slim margin. Immediately afterward, Brüning submitted a decree from the President to dissolve the Reichstag. The consequent general election on 14 September resulted in an enormous political shift within the Reichstag: 18.3% of the vote went to the NSDAP, five times the percentage it had won in 1928. As a result, it was no longer possible, even with a grand coalition, to form a pro-republican majority that excluded the KPD, DNVP and NSDAP. The situation led an increase in the number of public demonstrations and instances of paramilitary violence organized by the NSDAP.

Between 1930 and 1932, Brüning enacted a policy of austerity including drastic cuts in state expenditures, tax increases, mandated wage reductions in both the public and private sectors, and credit restrictions. Among other measures, he completely halted all obligatory public payments to the unemployment insurance program introduced in 1927, resulting in higher contributions from the workers and fewer benefits for the unemployed. Benefits for the sick, invalids and pensioners were also sharply reduced. Since the Young Plan did not allow the &quot;Reichsmark&quot; to be devalued, he triggered an internal devaluation by forcing the economy to reduce prices, rents, salaries and wages by 20%.

By late 1931, Hindenburg and Schleicher had begun to contemplate dropping Brüning in favor of accommodating Alfred Hugenberg of the DNVP and Adolf Hitler. On 30 May 1932, Brüning finally lost Hindenburg&#x27;s support over the question of Eastern Aid and resigned as chancellor.

The consensus today is that Brüning&#x27;s policies exacerbated the German economic crisis and the population&#x27;s growing frustration with democracy, contributing considerably to the increase in support for Hitler&#x27;s NSDAP.

==== Papen cabinet ====
Hindenburg then appointed Franz von Papen as the new chancellor. He was closely associated with the industrialist and land-owning classes and the military. General Kurt von Schleicher – who became Reichswehr minister – handpicked the members of the Papen cabinet, which came to be known as the &quot;Cabinet of Barons&quot;. It continued to govern by presidential decree as had the Brüning cabinets.

On 16 June, Papen lifted the ban on the Nazi &quot;Sturmabteilung&quot; (SA) and &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS) that had been imposed on 13 April under the Brüning government. Using the political violence that took place during the Reichstag election campaign as a pretext, he ousted the SPD-led coalition government of Prussia in the Prussian coup d&#x27;état () of 20 July. By emergency decree, he declared himself Reich Commissioner () of Prussia, a step that further weakened the democracy of the Weimar Republic.

==== Election of July 1932 ====

Per a prior agreement with Hindenburg and Hitler, Papen dissolved the Reichstag on 4 June 1932 and called for a new election in the hope that the Nazi Party would win the most seats and allow him to set up an authoritarian government. The general election on 31 July 1932 yielded major gains for the Communist Party and the Nazis, who won 37.3% of the vote, their high-water mark in a free election. The Nazi party supplanted the Social Democrats as the largest party in the Reichstag, although it did not gain a majority.

The immediate question was what part the Nazi Party would play in the government of the country. Hitler refused a ministry under Papen and demanded the chancellorship for himself but was rejected by Hindenburg on 13 August 1932. Since there was still no majority in the Reichstag for any government, the Reichstag was again dissolved, and an election was scheduled in the hope that a stable majority would result.

==== Schleicher cabinet ====
In the 6 November 1932 election, the Nazis received two million fewer votes than in the previous election. Kurt von Schleicher, a retired army general who for many years had worked politically behind the scenes to further the interests of Germany&#x27;s military, maneuvered Papen out of office and was appointed chancellor by Hindenburg on 3 December. He tried to cause a split within the Nazi Party that would force Hitler to support his government but failed in the attempt.

One of the main initiatives of Schleicher&#x27;s government was a public works program intended to counter the effects of the Great Depression. The various projects, which are often wrongly attributed to Hitler, created 2 million jobs for unemployed Germans by July 1933. In foreign policy, Schleicher&#x27;s main interest was in winning (&quot;equality of status&quot;) for Germany at the World Disarmament Conference by doing away with Part V of the Treaty of Versailles, which had disarmed Germany.

Schleicher&#x27;s relations with his cabinet were poor because of his secretiveness and open contempt for his ministers. Papen had become Schleicher&#x27;s bitter enemy when he was forced out of office but retained Hindenburg&#x27;s confidence. He advised him to sack Schleicher and appoint Hitler chancellor in a coalition with the German National People&#x27;s Party (DNVP) which, together with Papen, would work to rein in Hitler. On 28 January 1933, Schleicher told his cabinet that he needed a decree from the President to dissolve the Reichstag in order to keep his government from being defeated in a no-confidence vote, but Hindenburg refused the request.

Knowing that his government was about to fall and fearing that Papen would get the chancellorship, Schleicher began to favor Hitler. Hitler was initially willing to support Schleicher as his minister of Defense but was convinced by an associate of Schleicher that he was about to launch a putsch to keep Hitler out of power. Amid rumors that Schleicher was moving troops into Berlin to depose Hindenburg, Papen convinced him to appoint Hitler chancellor. The President dismissed Schleicher and appointed Hitler on 30 January 1933.

===End of the Weimar Republic===

====Hitler&#x27;s chancellorship (1933)====

Hitler was sworn in as chancellor on the morning of 30 January 1933. By early February, the government had begun to clamp down on the opposition. Meetings of the left-wing parties were banned and even some of the moderate parties found their members threatened and assaulted. Measures with an appearance of legality suppressed the Communist Party in mid-February and included the plainly illegal arrests of Reichstag deputies.

On 27 February 1933 the Reichstag was gutted by a fire which was blamed on an act of arson by Marinus van der Lubbe, a Dutch council communist. Hitler blamed the fire on the KPD (although Van der Lubbe was not a member of the party) and convinced Hindenburg to issue the Reichstag Fire Decree the following day. The decree invoked Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution and &quot;suspended until further notice&quot; a number of constitutional protections of civil liberties, allowing the Nazi government to take swift action against political meetings and to arrest both socialists and communists.

In the Reichstag election which took place on 5 March 1933, the NSDAP obtained 17 million votes and a scant majority of 16 seats for the NSDAP-DNVP coalition. The Communist, Social Democrat and Catholic Centre votes changed little. It was the last multi-party election of the Weimar Republic and the last in a united Germany for 57 years.

==== Enabling Act ====

In March Hitler submitted a proposal to the Reichstag for an enabling act that granted all legislative powers to the cabinet and by extension to Hitler. It in effect allowed Hitler&#x27;s government to act without regard for the constitution. Since it formally amended the Weimar Constitution, it required a two-thirds majority to pass, which it obtained (68%) on 23 March, with only the SPD voting against (the KPD had been banned). The combined effect of the Enabling Act and the Reichstag Fire Decree transformed Hitler&#x27;s government into a legal dictatorship and laid the groundwork for his totalitarian regime. Since July 1933, the NSDAP was the only legally permitted party in Germany. The Reichstag from 1933 onward effectively became the rubber stamp parliament that Hitler had desired.

The passage of the Enabling Act of 1933 is widely considered to mark the end of the Weimar Republic and the beginning of Nazi Germany. It effectively destroyed the checks and balances of the democratic system, concentrating all the power in the hands of Hitler and his inner circle. The Enabling Act played a significant role in the establishment of Hitler&#x27;s dictatorship and the subsequent events that unfolded during the Nazi era.

====Nazification====

In the months following the passage of the Enabling Act, all German parties aside from the NSDAP were banned or forced to disband themselves, all trade unions were dissolved and all media were brought under the control of the Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda. The Reichstag was then dissolved by Hindenburg and a snap one-party election was called in November 1933. It gave the NSDAP 100% of the seats in the chamber. In February 1934, the Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich abolished all state parliaments and passed state sovereignty to the Reich government.

The constitution of 1919 was never formally repealed, but the Enabling Act meant that it was a dead letter. The Reichstag was effectively eliminated as an active player in German politics. It met only sporadically until the end of World War II, held no debates and enacted only a few laws; for all purposes, it was reduced to a mere stage for Hitler&#x27;s speeches. The other chamber of the German parliament (the Reichsrat) was officially abolished on 14 February 1934 by the Law on the Abolition of the Reichsrat. It was in clear violation of the Enabling Act, which stipulated (Article 2) that any laws passed under its authority could not affect the institutions of either chamber. By then, however, the Nazis had become law unto themselves, and the actions were never challenged in court.

Hindenburg&#x27;s death on 2 August 1934 eliminated any remaining obstacle to full Nazi dominance. The day before he died, the Hitler cabinet passed the Law Concerning the Head of State of the German Reich, the final major part in the Nazification process called &quot;Gleichschaltung&quot; (&quot;coordination&quot;). It transferred the president&#x27;s powers upon his death, including as Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, to the new post of &quot;&quot;Führer&quot; and Reich Chancellor&quot;, giving Hitler complete power over the entire Reich without any possibility of checks and balances. The action was later ratified by a highly non-democratic referendum which shed the last remains of the Weimar Republic.

==Reasons for failure==
The reasons for the Weimar Republic&#x27;s collapse are the subject of continuing debate. It may have been doomed from the beginning since even some moderates disliked it and extremists on both the left and right loathed it, a situation often referred to as a &quot;democracy without democrats&quot;. Germany had limited democratic traditions, and Weimar democracy was widely seen as chaotic. Since Weimar&#x27;s early left of center politicians had been blamed for the &quot;Dolchstoß&quot; (&quot;stab-in-the-back&quot;), a widely believed theory that Germany&#x27;s surrender in the First World War had been unnecessary and the act of traitors, the popular legitimacy of the government was on shaky ground from the start. As normal parliamentary lawmaking broke down and was replaced around 1930 by a series of emergency decrees, the decreasing popular legitimacy of the government further drove voters to extremist parties.

No single reason can explain the failure of the Weimar Republic. The most commonly asserted causes can be grouped into three categories: economic problems, institutional problems, and the roles of specific individuals.

===Economic problems===
The Weimar Republic had some of the most serious economic problems ever experienced by any Western democracy. It experienced a period of rampant hyperinflation, sometimes high unemployment, and a large drop in living standards. From 1923 to 1929, there was a period of economic recovery, but the Great Depression of the 1930s led to a worldwide recession. Germany was particularly affected because it depended heavily on American loans.

The Weimar Republic was severely affected by the Great Depression. In 1926, about two million Germans were unemployed, which rose to around six million in 1932, with many blaming the Weimar Republic. As the Weimar Republic was very fragile throughout its existence, the depression was devastating and played a major role in the Nazi takeover.

Most Germans thought the Treaty of Versailles was a punishing and degrading document because it forced them to surrender resource-rich areas and pay massive amounts of compensation. The punitive reparations caused consternation and resentment, but the actual economic damage resulting from the Treaty of Versailles is difficult to determine. While the official reparations were considerable, Germany ended up paying only a fraction of them. However, the reparations damaged Germany&#x27;s economy by discouraging market loans. A number of factors came together in 1923, including printing currency to finance the costs of passive resistance to the occupation of the Ruhr, to cause rampant hyperinflation. At the beginning of 1920, one US dollar was equivalent to fifty marks. By the end of 1923, one US dollar was equal to 4,200,000,000,000 marks. Princeton historian Harold James argues that there was a clear link between economic decline and people turning to extremist politics. That was made apparent when political parties on both the far right and far left wanted to disband the Republic altogether, making any democratic majority in Parliament impossible.

===Institutional problems===
It is widely believed that the 1919 constitution had several weaknesses, making the eventual establishment of a dictatorship likely, but it is impossible to know whether a different constitution could have prevented the rise of the Nazi party. The 1949 West German constitution (the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany) is generally viewed as a strong response to these flaws.
* The Weimar presidency was frequently considered an &quot;Ersatzkaiser&quot; (&quot;substitute emperor&quot;), an attempt to replace the emperors with a similarly strong institution meant to diminish party politics. Article 48 of the Constitution gave the president power to &quot;take all necessary steps&quot; if &quot;public order and security are seriously disturbed or endangered&quot;. Although it was intended as an emergency clause, it was often used before 1933 to issue decrees without the support of Parliament and also made Hitler&#x27;s &quot;Gleichschaltung&quot; easier.
* During the Weimar Republic, it was accepted that a law did not have to conform to the constitution as long as it had the support of two-thirds of Parliament, the same majority needed to change the constitution. That was a precedent for the Enabling Act of 1933. The Basic Law of 1949 requires an explicit change of the wording, and it prohibits abolishing the basic rights or the federal structure of the republic.
* The use of a proportional representation without large thresholds meant a party with a small amount of support could gain entry into the Reichstag. That led to many small parties, some extremist, building political bases within the system, and made it difficult to form and maintain a stable coalition government, further contributing to instability. To counter the problem, the modern German Bundestag introduced a 5% threshold limit for a party to gain parliamentary representation. However, the Reichstag of the monarchy was fractioned to a similar degree even if it was elected by majority vote (under a two-round system).
* The Reichstag could remove the chancellor from office even if it was unable to agree on a successor. With the Reichstag increasingly fractured, President Hindenburg rather than the Reichstag chose the Republic&#x27;s last four chancellors (Brüning, Papen, Schleicher and Hitler). They all governed by presidential decree. The 1949 Basic Law stipulates that a chancellor may not be removed by Parliament unless a successor is elected at the same time, a procedure known as a &quot;constructive vote of no confidence&quot;.
* The fundamental rights of &quot;habeas corpus&quot;, sanctity of the home, inviolability of the mail, freedom of speech and the press, freedom of assembly, freedom of association (including religious associations) and the inviolability of property – Articles 114, 115, 117, 118, 123, 124 and 153 of the Weimar Constitution – could be suspended under Article 48. The Basic Law lists them as basic rights that cannot legally be nullified and in Article 20 (4) includes the right to resist attempts to abolish the constitutional order.

===Role of individuals and parties===
Chancellor Heinrich Brüning&#x27;s deflationary economic policy from 1930 to 1932 has been the subject of much debate. It caused many Germans to identify the Republic with cuts in social spending.

Franz von Papen, who was chancellor of Germany from 30 May to 17 November 1932, ousted the elected government of the Free State of Prussia in the 1932 Prussian coup d&#x27;état, which eliminated one of the last potential bastions of resistance to Hitler&#x27;s seizure of power. Prussia was led by the Social Democratic Party, was home to the federal capital Berlin and had 61% of the Weimar Republic&#x27;s population. Papen also pressured Hindenburg to appoint Hitler as chancellor and himself as vice chancellor in 1933 in a cabinet ostensibly not under Nazi Party domination. Papen and his allies were quickly marginalized by Hitler.

Paul von Hindenburg became president of Germany in 1925. As he was an old-style monarchist conservative, he had little love for the Republic, but for the most part, he acted formally within the bounds of the constitution. However, he ultimately — on the advice of his son and others close to him — appointed Hitler chancellor, thereby effectively ending the Republic after the passage of the Enabling Act of 1933. Additionally, Hindenburg&#x27;s death in 1934 ended the last obstacle for Hitler to assume full power in the Weimar Republic.

The German National People&#x27;s Party (DNVP) has also been blamed as responsible for the downfall of the Weimar Republic because of its ultranationalist positions and its unwillingness to accept the Republic because of its monarchist ideology. In his book, &quot;The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich&quot;, journalist and historian William L. Shirer wrote that the DNVP&#x27;s status as a far-right party rather than a mainstream conservative party was one of the main reasons for the Weimar Republic&#x27;s downfall. In Shirer&#x27;s view, the DNVP&#x27;s refusal to &quot;take a responsible position either in the government or in the opposition&quot; during most of Weimar&#x27;s existence denied Weimar &quot;that stability provided in many other countries by a truly conservative party.&quot; Similarly, conservative British historian Sir John Wheeler-Bennett blamed the DNVP for failing to reconcile with the Republic, stating that &quot;Under the cloak of loyalty to the Monarchy, they either held aloof or sabotaged the efforts of successive Chancellors to give a stable government to the Republic. The truth is that after 1918 many German Nationalists were more influenced by feelings of disloyalty to the Republic than of loyalty to the Kaiser, and it was this motive which led them to make their fatal contribution to bringing Hitler to power.&quot;

== Legacy ==
Nazi propaganda tended to describe the Weimar Republic as a period of treason, degeneration, and corruption. The whole period from 1918 to 1933 was described in propaganda as &quot;The time of the System&quot; (&quot;Systemzeit&quot;), while the Republic itself was known as &quot;The System&quot; (&quot;Das System&quot;), a term that was adopted into everyday use after 1933. Another Nazi phrase used for the republic and its politicians was &quot;the November criminals&quot; or &quot;the regime of the November criminals&quot; (German: &quot;November-Verbrecher&quot;), referring to the month the republic was founded in (November 1918).

According to &quot;Foreign Policy&quot;, the Weimar Republic is seen as &quot;the best-known historical example of a &#x27;failed&#x27; democracy that ceded to fascism&quot;.

==Constituent states==
Prior to the First World War, the constituent states of the German Empire were 22 smaller monarchies, three republican city-states, and the Imperial Territory of Alsace–Lorraine. After the territorial losses of the Treaty of Versailles and the German revolution of 1918–1919, the remaining states continued as federal states of the new Republic. The former Ernestine duchies merged to form the state of Thuringia in 1920, except for Saxe-Coburg, which became part of Bavaria.

The states were gradually abolished under the Nazi regime via the Gleichschaltung process, whereby they were effectively replaced by Gaue. There were two notable &quot;de jure&quot; changes, however. At the end of 1933, Mecklenburg-Strelitz was merged with Mecklenburg-Schwerin to form a united Mecklenburg. Second, in April 1937, the city-state of Lübeck was formally incorporated into Prussia by the Greater Hamburg Act. Most of the remaining states, notably Prussia (see Abolition of Prussia) were formally dissolved by the Allies at the end of the Second World War and ultimately reorganized into the modern states of Germany.

==See also==

* Weimar political parties
* Democracy in Europe
* Intellectuals and Nazism

==References==
=== Explanatory notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited sources ===
* 




==Further reading==
* Bennett, Edward W. &quot;Germany and the diplomacy of the financial crisis, 1931&quot; (1962) Online free to borrow.
* 
* 
* 
* online free to borrow
* Evans, Richard J. &quot;The Coming of the Third Reich&quot; (2003), a standard scholarly survey; part of three volume history 1919–1945.
* Eyck, Erich. &quot;A history of the Weimar Republic: v. 1. From the collapse of the Empire to Hindenburg&#x27;s election.&quot; (1962)online free to borrow
* 
* Halperin, S. William. &quot;Germany Tried Democracy: A Political History of the Reich from 1918 to 1933&quot; (1946) online.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Rosenberg, Arthur. &quot;A History of the German Republic&quot; (1936) 370pp online
* ch 18–25.
* 
* 
* 

===Primary sources===
* Kaes, Anton, Martin Jay and Edward Dimendberg, eds. &quot;The Weimar Republic Sourcebook,&quot;(U of California Press, 1994).
* Price, Morgan Philips. &quot;Dispatches from the Weimar Republic: Versailles and German Fascism&quot; (1999), reporting by an English journalist

===Historiography===
* Bryden, Eric Jefferson. &quot;In search of founding fathers: Republican historical narratives in Weimar Germany, 1918–1933&quot; (PhD thesis. University of California, Davis, 2008).
* Gerwarth, Robert. &quot;The past in Weimar History&quot; &quot;Contemporary European History&quot; 15#1 (2006), pp. 1–22 online
* Graf, Rüdiger. &quot;Either-or: The narrative of &#x27;crisis&#x27; in Weimar Germany and in historiography.&quot; &quot;Central European History&quot; 43.4 (2010): 592–615. online
* Haffert, Lukas, Nils Redeker, and Tobias Rommel. &quot;Misremembering Weimar: Hyperinflation, the Great Depression, and German collective economic memory.&quot; &quot;Economics &amp; Politics&quot; 33.3 (2021): 664–686. online
* Von der Goltz, Anna. &quot;Hindenburg: Power, Myth, and the Rise of the Nazis&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2009)
==External links==

* Documentarchiv.de: Historical documents 
* National Library of Israel.org: Weimar Republic collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="4" end="19" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="45" end="57" title="Weimar Republic" label="German Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206012" start="67" end="79" title="German Reich" label="German state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="121" end="144" title="constitutional republic" label="constitutional republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="249" end="264" title="Weimar Republic" label="German Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955" start="326" end="332" title="Weimar" label="Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="351" end="371" title="constituent assembly" label="constituent assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="532" end="544" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="615" end="639" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="664" end="679" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q25638012" start="719" end="733" title="suing for peace" label="sued for peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="801" end="811" title="German Revolution of 1918–1919" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187577" start="813" end="827" title="Abdication of Wilhelm II" label="the abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="831" end="848" title="Kaiser Wilhelm II" label="Kaiser Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="955" end="961" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="969" end="998" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="Armistice of 11 November 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q695052" start="1066" end="1080" title="Hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466439" start="1085" end="1104" title="Extremism" label="political extremism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="1152" end="1169" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="seizures of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980217" start="1184" end="1198" title="Weimar paramilitary groups" label="paramilitaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q702442" start="1499" end="1514" title="Golden Twenties" label="Golden Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q152925" start="1644" end="1660" title="Locarno Treaties" label="Locarno Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="1785" end="1805" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="1875" end="1892" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="1991" end="2006" title="political right" label="political right"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2123" end="2139" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q57158" start="2302" end="2323" title="Hermann Müller (politician, born 1876)" label="Hermann Müller&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184704" start="2324" end="2339" title="grand coalition" label="grand coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716332" start="2365" end="2386" title="Presidential cabinets of the Weimar Republic" label="presidential cabinets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="2423" end="2442" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q316140" start="2448" end="2464" title="Article 48 (Weimar Constitution)" label="emergency powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155398" start="2485" end="2501" title="Heinrich Brüning" label="Heinrich Brüning"/>
<link wikidata="Q150552" start="2503" end="2518" title="Franz von Papen" label="Franz von Papen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57133" start="2531" end="2550" title="Kurt von Schleicher" label="Kurt von Schleicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q161081" start="2614" end="2623" title="deflation" label="deflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="2643" end="2655" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2698" end="2710" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="2761" end="2771" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543753" start="2896" end="2910" title="éminence grise" label="éminence grise"/>
<link wikidata="Q696629" start="3060" end="3081" title="Reichstag Fire Decree" label="Reichstag Fire Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q310218" start="3090" end="3110" title="Enabling Act of 1933" label="Enabling Act of 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="3452" end="3461" title="One-party state" label="one-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="3508" end="3537" title="end of World War II in Europe" label="end of World War II in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3551" end="3557" title="Nazis " label="Nazis "/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="3751" end="3770" title="Weimar Constitution" label="Weimar Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="3824" end="3839" title="Machtergreifung" label="Machtergreifung"/>
<link wikidata="Q649746" start="4076" end="4100" title="Weimar National Assembly" label="Weimar National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955" start="4138" end="4144" title="Weimar" label="Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q157537" start="4654" end="4666" title="Centre Party (Germany)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646" start="4753" end="4768" title="Friedrich Ebert" label="Friedrich Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="4776" end="4810" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="5119" end="5129" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q607427" start="5532" end="5548" title="Richard J. Evans" label="Richard J. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5801" end="5813" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="5895" end="5905" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699" start="6188" end="6211" title="1848 German Revolution" label="1848 German revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="6250" end="6277" title="Weimar Constitution" label="Weimar Constitution of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q310218" start="6330" end="6350" title="Enabling Act of 1933" label="Enabling Act of 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="6360" end="6370" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q316128" start="6435" end="6455" title="Flag of the German Empire" label="black-white-red flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="6612" end="6620" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073388" start="6822" end="6854" title="Flag of Nazi Germany" label="national flag of the Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6900" end="6912" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="6985" end="6997" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7024" end="7031" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="7069" end="7081" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624391" start="7147" end="7197" title="Flag of East Germany" label="East Germany with the addition of its coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139378" start="7261" end="7272" title="Reichsadler" label="Reichsadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q695379" start="7326" end="7350" title="Paulskirche Constitution" label="Paulskirche Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q133018" start="7517" end="7545" title="Coat of arms of Nazi Germany" label="Nazi &amp;quot;Reichsadler&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="7711" end="7731" title="Imperial German Army" label="Imperial German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q641853" start="7843" end="7863" title="Supreme Army Command" label="Supreme Army Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="7954" end="7974" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q157608" start="8000" end="8010" title="Reichswehr" label="Reichswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q643834" start="8059" end="8071" title="Reichsmarine" label="Reichsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="8368" end="8387" title="Weimar Constitution" label="Weimar Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q157740" start="8420" end="8435" title="Reich President" label="Reich president"/>
<link wikidata="Q60909" start="8721" end="8733" title="Otto Gessler" label="Otto Gessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q57204" start="8842" end="8857" title="Hans von Seeckt" label="Hans von Seeckt"/>
<link wikidata="Q637829" start="8981" end="8990" title="Reichstag (Weimar Republic)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q161141" start="9132" end="9143" title="Kapp Putsch" label="Kapp Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q156611" start="9209" end="9218" title="Freikorps" label="Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q74251" start="9278" end="9291" title="Ruhr Red Army" label="Ruhr Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q266909" start="9323" end="9336" title="Ruhr uprising" label="Ruhr uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q465965" start="9388" end="9404" title="Black Reichswehr" label="Black Reichswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494320" start="9753" end="9767" title="Küstrin Putsch" label="Küstrin Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="9852" end="9860" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q57133" start="10105" end="10124" title="Kurt von Schleicher" label="Kurt von Schleicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="10285" end="10311" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716332" start="10581" end="10600" title="Presidential cabinets of the Weimar Republic" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="10655" end="10667" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="10791" end="10808" title="Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s rise to power" label="his rise to power"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="10869" end="10878" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="10985" end="10999" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="11011" end="11024" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies of WWI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906848" start="11270" end="11289" title="Blockade of Germany (1914–1919)" label="blockade of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130507" start="11377" end="11393" title="Hundred Days Offensive" label="Allied offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="11694" end="11711" title="German Revolution of 1918–1919" label="German Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q779851" start="11733" end="11758" title="Proclamation of the republic in Germany" label="a republic was proclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="11782" end="11799" title="Kaiser Wilhelm II" label="Kaiser Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="11834" end="11850" title="Imperial Germany" label="Imperial Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="11897" end="11906" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="12364" end="12387" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q310296" start="12409" end="12444" title="Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Independent Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q58579" start="12552" end="12568" title="Erich Ludendorff" label="Erich Ludendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="12860" end="12879" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q160944" start="13023" end="13044" title="stab-in-the-back myth" label="stab-in-the-back myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="13354" end="13372" title="National-socialism" label="National Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857" start="13473" end="13486" title="Wilhelmshaven" label="Wilhelmshaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q702250" start="13529" end="13540" title="Kiel mutiny" label="Kiel mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994403" start="13601" end="13642" title="German workers&amp;#x27; and soldiers&amp;#x27; councils 1918–1919" label="workers&amp;#x27; and soldiers&amp;#x27; councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q211201" start="13665" end="13672" title="soviet (council)" label="soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="13685" end="13703" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q310296" start="14007" end="14053" title="Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="14160" end="14194" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="14632" end="14638" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q44393" start="14672" end="14693" title="Ludwig III of Bavaria" label="Ludwig III of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="14847" end="14857" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q76908" start="14900" end="14919" title="Maximilian of Baden" label="Maximilian of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q57621" start="14967" end="14987" title="Crown Prince Wilhelm" label="Crown Prince Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q57353" start="15009" end="15021" title="Gustav Noske" label="Gustav Noske"/>
<link wikidata="Q779851" start="15281" end="15311" title="Proclamation of the republic in Germany" label="German Republic was proclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q70581" start="15327" end="15346" title="Philipp Scheidemann" label="Philipp Scheidemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646" start="15393" end="15408" title="Friedrich Ebert" label="Friedrich Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15550" end="15588" title="Proclamation of the republic in Germany#Liebknecht&amp;#x27;s proclamation" label="Free Socialist Republic was proclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q170119" start="15596" end="15609" title="Berlin Palace" label="Berlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q75886" start="15642" end="15657" title="Karl Liebknecht" label="Karl Liebknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231" start="15674" end="15688" title="Rosa Luxemburg" label="Rosa Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156607" start="15707" end="15723" title="Spartacus League" label="Spartacus League"/>
<link wikidata="Q481601" start="16163" end="16200" title="Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Deputies" label="Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q438913" start="16300" end="16310" title="Hugo Haase" label="Hugo Haase"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="16541" end="16577" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="an armistice was signed at Compiègne"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="16654" end="16664" title="Allies of World War I" label="the Allies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16935" end="16964" title="German workers&amp;#x27; and soldiers&amp;#x27; councils 1918–1919#Reich Congress of Workers&amp;#x27; and Soldiers&amp;#x27; Councils" label="National Congress of Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q649746" start="17210" end="17227" title="Weimar National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q57513" start="17455" end="17470" title="Wilhelm Groener" label="Wilhelm Groener"/>
<link wikidata="Q449346" start="17566" end="17584" title="Ebert–Groener pact" label="Ebert–Groener pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="18003" end="18023" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555496" start="18232" end="18238" title="1918 Christmas crisis" label="mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532093" start="18319" end="18338" title="Volksmarinedivision" label="Volksmarinedivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q61719" start="18419" end="18428" title="Otto Wels" label="Otto Wels"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="18934" end="18960" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q156607" start="19037" end="19053" title="Spartacus League" label="Spartacus League"/>
<link wikidata="Q313329" start="19145" end="19164" title="Spartacist uprising" label="Spartacist uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q156611" start="19308" end="19317" title="Freikorps" label="Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231" start="19396" end="19410" title="Rosa Luxemburg" label="Rosa Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q75886" start="19415" end="19430" title="Karl Liebknecht" label="Karl Liebknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q567087" start="19662" end="19688" title="1919 German federal election" label="National Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955" start="19945" end="19951" title="Weimar" label="Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="20005" end="20024" title="Weimar Constitution" label="Weimar Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="20088" end="20115" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58738" start="20217" end="20241" title="Bavarian Soviet Republic" label="Bavarian Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58738" start="20361" end="20383" title="Munich Soviet Republic" label="Munich Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="20522" end="20529" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702202" start="20541" end="20560" title="Organisation Consul" label="Organisation Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="20566" end="20576" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q703893" start="20755" end="20773" title="Silesian Uprisings" label="Silesian Uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q698027" start="20782" end="20805" title="Greater Poland uprising (1918–1919)" label="Greater Poland uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q635253" start="20820" end="20837" title="Province of Posen" label="Province of Posen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="20864" end="20886" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="21544" end="21564" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q695052" start="22620" end="22634" title="Hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q705983" start="22990" end="23000" title="Papiermark" label="Papiermark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="23099" end="23109" title="capitalist" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="23147" end="23156" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="23171" end="23180" title="Socialist" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075404" start="23261" end="23278" title="Soviet republic (system of government)" label="council republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399774" start="23432" end="23450" title="political violence" label="political violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q466439" start="23455" end="23464" title="extremism" label="extremism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="23672" end="23685" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170361" start="24133" end="24141" title="Territory of the Saar Basin" label="Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="24175" end="24192" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="24268" end="24283" title="Alsace–Lorraine" label="Alsace–Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="24291" end="24298" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="24325" end="24344" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="24404" end="24422" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="24533" end="24539" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161334" start="24545" end="24560" title="Klaipėda Region" label="Memel Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="24641" end="24660" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q156654" start="24666" end="24681" title="Polish Corridor" label="Polish Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="24687" end="24699" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828519" start="24873" end="24895" title="Occupation of the Rhineland" label="occupied the Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="24941" end="24952" title="Rhine river" label="Rhine river"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="25002" end="25009" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="25011" end="25016" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104" start="25021" end="25028" title="Koblenz" label="Koblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="25940" end="25952" title="dreadnoughts" label="dreadnoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247294" start="26392" end="26408" title="War Guilt Clause" label="War Guilt Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247294" start="26617" end="26628" title="Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles" label="Article 231"/>
<link wikidata="Q70581" start="26792" end="26811" title="Philipp Scheidemann" label="Philipp Scheidemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q312532" start="27290" end="27301" title="Ian Kershaw" label="Ian Kershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062635" start="28247" end="28292" title="Centre for the Study of the Causes of the War" label="Centre for the Study of the Causes of the War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16650756" start="28442" end="28482" title="Working Committee of German Associations" label="Working Committee of German Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q79120752" start="28634" end="28657" title="Reichstag inquiry into guilt for World War I" label="parliamentary committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q10572199" start="29115" end="29135" title="German General Staff" label="German General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29159" end="29181" title="War guilt question#Potsdam Reichsarchiv" label="Potsdam Reich Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q57204" start="29201" end="29216" title="Hans von Seeckt" label="Hans von Seeckt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160944" start="31071" end="31092" title="stab-in-the-back myth" label="stab-in-the-back myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q161141" start="31113" end="31124" title="Kapp Putsch" label="Kapp Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q63103" start="31148" end="31168" title="Walther von Lüttwitz" label="General von Lüttwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q58863" start="31324" end="31337" title="Wolfgang Kapp" label="Wolfgang Kapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386803" start="31766" end="31778" title="Troop Office" label="Troop Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="31959" end="31963" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q266909" start="32123" end="32136" title="Ruhr uprising" label="Ruhr uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q74251" start="32181" end="32194" title="Ruhr Red Army" label="Ruhr Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q29337" start="32857" end="32883" title="1920 German federal election" label="Reichstag election of 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q562011" start="32910" end="32926" title="Weimar Coalition" label="Weimar Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q702202" start="33239" end="33258" title="Organisation Consul" label="Organisation Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q57755" start="33277" end="33295" title="Matthias Erzberger" label="Matthias Erzberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q135645" start="33349" end="33365" title="Walther Rathenau" label="Walther Rathenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q155796" start="33669" end="33686" title="Treaty of Rapallo (1922)" label="Treaty of Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="33735" end="33747" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512712" start="33905" end="33943" title="Law for the Protection of the Republic" label="Law for the Protection of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60150" start="34802" end="34814" title="Joseph Wirth" label="Joseph Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q191974" start="35296" end="35312" title="Raymond Poincaré" label="Raymond Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144947" start="35532" end="35553" title="Reparation Commission" label="Reparation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q77179" start="35835" end="35847" title="Wilhelm Cuno" label="Wilhelm Cuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q103955" start="36310" end="36327" title="Gustav Stresemann" label="Gustav Stresemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q156528" start="36465" end="36475" title="Dawes Plan" label="Dawes Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q560355" start="36623" end="36628" title="German gold mark" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q66864" start="37537" end="37549" title="Hugo Stinnes" label="Hugo Stinnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q260447" start="37832" end="37842" title="Rentenmark" label="Rentenmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q481492" start="38351" end="38367" title="Rhenish Republic" label="Rhenish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="38494" end="38500" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="38505" end="38514" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q896299" start="38666" end="38682" title="Reichsexekution" label="Reich executions"/>
<link wikidata="Q316140" start="38692" end="38702" title="Article 48 (Weimar Constitution)" label="Article 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595255" start="38835" end="38850" title="Grand coalition (Germany)" label="grand coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q58860" start="39116" end="39138" title="Gustav Ritter von Kahr" label="Gustav Ritter von Kahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q57204" start="39226" end="39241" title="Hans von Seeckt" label="Hans von Seeckt"/>
<link wikidata="Q62546" start="39692" end="39707" title="Otto von Lossow" label="Otto von Lossow"/>
<link wikidata="Q631205" start="39723" end="39749" title="German Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="German Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="39765" end="39810" title="National Socialist German Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Socialist German Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="39823" end="39833" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="39921" end="39933" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q58579" start="40019" end="40035" title="Erich Ludendorff" label="Erich Ludendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643648" start="40097" end="40106" title="Kampfbund" label="Kampfbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="40414" end="40426" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="coup attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="40728" end="40738" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q702442" start="40997" end="41012" title="Golden Twenties" label="Golden Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q987363" start="41070" end="41083" title="rapprochement" label="rapprochement"/>
<link wikidata="Q156528" start="41701" end="41711" title="Dawes Plan" label="Dawes Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275923" start="41924" end="41938" title="Seymour Parker Gilbert" label="Parker Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q77183" start="45472" end="45484" title="Wilhelm Marx" label="Wilhelm Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q31672" start="45546" end="45578" title="1925 German presidential election" label="1925 Reich presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="45622" end="45641" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28890" start="45953" end="45961" title="May 1924 German federal election" label="May 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q28887" start="45966" end="45979" title="December 1924 German federal election" label="December 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q562011" start="46013" end="46029" title="Weimar Coalition" label="Weimar Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q103955" start="46336" end="46353" title="Gustav Stresemann" label="Gustav Stresemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q77183" start="46560" end="46572" title="Wilhelm Marx" label="Wilhelm Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q155419" start="46619" end="46630" title="Hans Luther" label="Hans Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q57158" start="46635" end="46649" title="Hermann Müller (politician, born 1876)" label="Hermann Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q103955" start="46933" end="46950" title="Gustav Stresemann" label="Gustav Stresemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q316533" start="46958" end="46984" title="German People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="German People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q152925" start="47583" end="47599" title="Locarno Treaties" label="Locarno Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="47959" end="47973" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q838946" start="48053" end="48093" title="Permanent Court of International Justice" label="Permanent Court of International Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q695215" start="48186" end="48202" title="Treaty of Berlin (1926)" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="48361" end="48369" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665892" start="48721" end="48764" title="Military Inter-Allied Commission of Control" label="Military Inter-Allied Commission of Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q205073" start="48931" end="48950" title="Kellogg–Briand Pact" label="Kellogg–Briand Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q165119" start="49118" end="49128" title="Young Plan" label="Young Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273161" start="49936" end="49969" title="1929 German referendum" label="referendum against the Young Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="50830" end="50837" title="cabaret" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q459318" start="50929" end="50941" title="Americanized" label="Americanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115221" start="51009" end="51014" title="mores" label="mores"/>
<link wikidata="Q151972" start="51041" end="51056" title="Josephine Baker" label="Josephine Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="51138" end="51145" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="51329" end="51336" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107194" start="51409" end="51421" title="George Grosz" label="George Grosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="51468" end="51477" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441998" start="51849" end="51865" title="Bauhaus Dessau Foundation" label="Bauhaus Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q61071" start="51869" end="51876" title="Walter Gropius" label="Gropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q566365" start="51878" end="51900" title="Großes Schauspielhaus" label="Grosses Schauspielhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q321789" start="51910" end="51924" title="Einstein Tower" label="Einstein Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699337" start="51993" end="52007" title="Weimar culture" label="Weimar culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="52303" end="52320" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="52376" end="52399" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="58548" end="58564" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202188" start="58637" end="58668" title="European banking crisis of 1931" label="European banking crisis of 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q156528" start="58757" end="58767" title="Dawes Plan" label="Dawes Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165119" start="58783" end="58793" title="Young Plan" label="Young Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29236" start="59036" end="59072" title="1930 German federal election" label="Reichstag election of September 1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="59078" end="59123" title="Nazi Party" label="National Socialist German Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="59278" end="59304" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q155398" start="59637" end="59653" title="Heinrich Brüning" label="Heinrich Brüning"/>
<link wikidata="Q150552" start="59655" end="59670" title="Franz von Papen" label="Franz von Papen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57133" start="59672" end="59691" title="Kurt von Schleicher" label="Kurt von Schleicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="59731" end="59743" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716332" start="59762" end="59781" title="Presidential cabinets of the Weimar Republic" label="presidential decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="59906" end="59925" title="checks and balances" label="checks and balances"/>
<link wikidata="Q57133" start="60040" end="60059" title="Kurt von Schleicher" label="Kurt von Schleicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="60071" end="60090" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155398" start="60116" end="60132" title="Heinrich Brüning" label="Heinrich Brüning"/>
<link wikidata="Q57158" start="60149" end="60163" title="Hermann Müller (politician, born 1876)" label="Hermann Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q316140" start="60460" end="60525" title="Article 48 (Weimar Constitution)" label="the emergency powers granted to the Reich president by Article 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="60533" end="60545" title="Weimar Constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="60796" end="60799" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="KPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q158227" start="60801" end="60805" title="German National People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="DNVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q29236" start="61016" end="61048" title="1930 German federal election" label="general election on 14 September"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184704" start="61246" end="61261" title="grand coalition" label="grand coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q165119" start="61987" end="61997" title="Young Plan" label="Young Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155009" start="62022" end="62032" title="Reichsmark" label="Reichsmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047833" start="62071" end="62091" title="internal devaluation" label="internal devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121" start="62276" end="62292" title="Alfred Hugenberg" label="Alfred Hugenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q616815" start="62407" end="62418" title="Eastern Aid" label="Eastern Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q150552" start="62730" end="62745" title="Franz von Papen" label="Franz von Papen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57133" start="62868" end="62887" title="Kurt von Schleicher" label="Kurt von Schleicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q449751" start="62953" end="62966" title="Papen cabinet" label="Papen cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="63156" end="63170" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Sturmabteilung"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="63192" end="63205" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q161036" start="63425" end="63432" title="Free State of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q451046" start="63440" end="63465" title="1932 Prussian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Prussian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q702170" start="63896" end="63928" title="German federal election, July 1932" label="general election on 31 July 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="63957" end="63972" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64021" end="64055" title="Nazi Party#Ascension and consolidation" label="high-water mark in a free election"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="64087" end="64103" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q698540" start="64632" end="64656" title="German federal election, November 1932" label="6 November 1932 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="65230" end="65246" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q691249" start="65494" end="65522" title="World Disarmament Conference" label="World Disarmament Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="65556" end="65576" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q158227" start="65940" end="65975" title="German National People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="German National People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q153992" start="67335" end="67365" title="Reichstag fire" label="Reichstag was gutted by a fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q157888" start="67405" end="67426" title="Marinus van der Lubbe" label="Marinus van der Lubbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q933306" start="67436" end="67453" title="Council communism" label="council communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q696629" start="67582" end="67603" title="Reichstag Fire Decree" label="Reichstag Fire Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q316140" start="67642" end="67652" title="Article 48 (Weimar Constitution)" label="Article 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="67660" end="67679" title="Weimar Constitution" label="Weimar Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q689220" start="67917" end="67935" title="German federal election, March 1933" label="Reichstag election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357989" start="68335" end="68347" title="enabling act" label="enabling act"/>
<link wikidata="Q310218" start="68735" end="68747" title="Enabling Act of 1933" label="Enabling Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="69195" end="69207" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q158689" start="69761" end="69814" title="Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda" label="Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q638389" start="69867" end="69903" title="November 1933 German parliamentary election" label="a snap one-party election was called"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518983" start="69996" end="70034" title="Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich" label="Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="70353" end="70365" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q565039" start="70537" end="70546" title="Reichsrat (Germany)" label="Reichsrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19208470" start="70600" end="70637" title="Law on the Abolition of the Reichsrat" label="Law on the Abolition of the Reichsrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19208438" start="71071" end="71123" title="Law Concerning the Head of State of the German Reich" label="Law Concerning the Head of State of the German Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q313768" start="71187" end="71202" title="Gleichschaltung" label="Gleichschaltung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305909" start="71552" end="71586" title="1934 German referendum" label="a highly non-democratic referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q160944" start="72163" end="72179" title="Stab-in-the-back myth" label="stab-in-the-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q316140" start="72478" end="72495" title="Article 48 (Weimar Constitution)" label="emergency decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="72982" end="72996" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="73133" end="73149" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="73603" end="73607" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="73644" end="73664" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q40625" start="74267" end="74289" title="occupation of the Ruhr" label="occupation of the Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="74467" end="74476" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q884284" start="74487" end="74499" title="Harold James (historian)" label="Harold James"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="74844" end="74861" title="Weimar Constitution" label="1919 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="75096" end="75140" title="Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q316140" start="75416" end="75426" title="Article 48 (Weimar Constitution)" label="Article 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q313768" start="75756" end="75771" title="Gleichschaltung" label="Gleichschaltung"/>
<link wikidata="Q310218" start="76028" end="76048" title="Enabling Act of 1933" label="Enabling Act of 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="76218" end="76245" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217032" start="76260" end="76270" title="election threshold" label="thresholds"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="76497" end="76517" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738411" start="76790" end="76803" title="majoritarian system" label="majority vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="76813" end="76829" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872987" start="77314" end="77348" title="constructive vote of no confidence" label="constructive vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="77390" end="77403" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="77460" end="77477" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="77486" end="77491" title="Freedom of the press" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="77493" end="77512" title="freedom of assembly" label="freedom of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="77514" end="77536" title="freedom of association" label="freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="77724" end="77733" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q708363" start="77829" end="77844" title="right to resist" label="right to resist"/>
<link wikidata="Q155398" start="77941" end="77957" title="Heinrich Brüning" label="Heinrich Brüning"/>
<link wikidata="Q150552" start="78128" end="78143" title="Franz von Papen" label="Franz von Papen"/>
<link wikidata="Q161036" start="78245" end="78266" title="Free State of Prussia" label="Free State of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q451046" start="78274" end="78304" title="1932 Prussian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1932 Prussian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="78767" end="78786" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q310218" start="79159" end="79179" title="Enabling Act of 1933" label="Enabling Act of 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q158227" start="79312" end="79347" title="German National People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="German National People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="79446" end="79462" title="Ultranationalism" label="ultranationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q655921" start="79573" end="79609" title="The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich" label="The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q327287" start="79642" end="79659" title="William L. Shirer" label="William L. Shirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263713" start="80154" end="80174" title="John Wheeler-Bennett" label="John Wheeler-Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="80685" end="80700" title="Propaganda in Nazi Germany" label="Nazi propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767830" start="80966" end="80976" title="The System (Nazism)" label="The System"/>
<link wikidata="Q160944" start="81139" end="81157" title="November criminals" label="November criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="81347" end="81361" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057683" start="81573" end="81600" title="states of the German Empire" label="states of the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="81667" end="81704" title="Alsace–Lorraine" label="Imperial Territory of Alsace–Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="81742" end="81762" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q672502" start="81884" end="81901" title="Ernestine duchies" label="Ernestine duchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="81930" end="81939" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q616804" start="81960" end="81971" title="Saxe-Coburg" label="Saxe-Coburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="81994" end="82001" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q313768" start="82070" end="82085" title="Gleichschaltung" label="Gleichschaltung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252884" start="82137" end="82141" title="Gau (country subdivision)" label="Gaue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751106" start="82224" end="82244" title="Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024667" start="82261" end="82281" title="Mecklenburg-Schwerin" label="Mecklenburg-Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q950240" start="82353" end="82359" title="Free City of Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q509333" start="82406" end="82425" title="Greater Hamburg Act" label="Greater Hamburg Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783342" start="82478" end="82498" title="Abolition of Prussia" label="Abolition of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="82531" end="82537" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="82616" end="82633" title="states of Germany" label="states of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980218" start="82652" end="82676" title="Weimar political parties" label="Weimar political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q127378018" start="82679" end="82698" title="Democracy in Europe" label="Democracy in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722887" start="82701" end="82725" title="Intellectuals and Nazism" label="Intellectuals and Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q607427" start="83001" end="83018" title="Richard J. Evans" label="Evans, Richard J."/>
<link wikidata="Q1788578" start="83025" end="83054" title="The Third Reich Trilogy" label="The Coming of the Third Reich"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33687" wikidata="Q3699337" url="?curid=33687" title="Weimar culture">
<text>Weimar culture was the emergence of the arts and sciences that happened in Germany during the Weimar Republic, the latter during that part of the interwar period between Germany&#x27;s defeat in World War I in 1918 and Hitler&#x27;s rise to power in 1933. 1920s Berlin was at the hectic center of the Weimar culture. Although not part of the Weimar Republic, German-speaking Austria, and particularly Vienna, is also sometimes included as part of Weimar culture.

Germany, and Berlin in particular, was fertile ground for intellectuals, artists, and innovators from many fields during the Weimar Republic years. The social environment was chaotic, and politics were passionate. German university faculties became universally open to Jewish scholars in 1918. Leading Jewish intellectuals on university faculties included physicist Albert Einstein; sociologists Karl Mannheim, Erich Fromm, Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer, and Herbert Marcuse; philosophers Ernst Cassirer and Edmund Husserl; political theorists Arthur Rosenberg and Gustav Meyer; and many others. Nine German citizens were awarded Nobel Prizes during the Weimar Republic, five of whom were Jewish scientists, including two in medicine. Jewish intellectuals and creative professionals were among the prominent figures in many areas of Weimar culture.

With the rise of Nazism and the ascent to power of Adolf Hitler in 1933, many German intellectuals and cultural figures, both Jewish and non-Jewish, fled Germany for the United States, the United Kingdom, and other parts of the world. The intellectuals associated with the Institute for Social Research (also known as the Frankfurt School) fled to the United States and reestablished the Institute at the New School for Social Research in New York City. In the words of Marcus Bullock, Emeritus Professor of English at University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee, &quot;Remarkable for the way it emerged from a catastrophe, more remarkable for the way it vanished into a still greater catastrophe, the world of Weimar represents modernism in its most vivid manifestation.&quot; The culture of the Weimar period was later reprised by 1960s left-wing intellectuals, especially in France. Gilles Deleuze, Félix Guattari, and Michel Foucault reprised Wilhelm Reich; Jacques Derrida reprised Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger; Guy Debord and the Situationist International reprised the subversive-revolutionary culture.

==Social environment==
By 1919, an influx of labor had migrated to Berlin turning it into a fertile ground for the modern arts and sciences, leading to booms in trade, communications and construction. A trend that had begun before the Great War was given powerful impetus by fall of the Kaiser and royal power. In response to the shortage of pre-war accommodation and housing, tenements were built not far from the Kaiser&#x27;s Stadtschloss and other majestic structures erected in honor of former nobles. Average people began using their backyards and basements to run small shops, restaurants, and workshops. Commerce expanded rapidly, and included the establishment of Berlin&#x27;s first department stores, prior to World War I. An &quot;urban petty bourgeoisie&quot; along with a growing middle class grew and flourished in wholesale commerce, retail trade, factories and crafts.

Types of employment were becoming more modern, shifting gradually but noticeably towards industry and services. Before World War I, in 1907, 54.9% of German workers were manual labourers. This dropped to 50.1% by 1925. Office workers, managers, and bureaucrats increased their share of the labour market from 10.3% to 17% over the same period. Germany was slowly becoming more urban and middle class. Still, by 1925, only a third of Germans lived in large cities; the other two-thirds of the population lived in the smaller towns or in rural areas. The total population of Germany rose from 62.4 million in 1920 to 65.2 million in 1933.

The Wilhelminian values were further discredited as a consequence of World War I and the subsequent inflation, since the new youth generation saw no point in saving for marriage in such conditions, and preferred instead to spend and enjoy. According to cultural historian Bruce Thompson, the Fritz Lang movie &quot;Dr. Mabuse the Gambler&quot; (1922) captures Berlin&#x27;s postwar mood: 

Politically and economically, the nation was struggling with the terms and reparations imposed by the Treaty of Versailles (1919) that ended World War I and endured punishing levels of inflation.
== Sociology ==

During the era of the Weimar Republic, Germany became a center of intellectual thought at its universities, and most notably social and political theory (especially Marxism) was combined with Freudian psychoanalysis to form the highly influential discipline of critical theory—with its development at the Institute for Social Research (also known as the Frankfurt School) founded at the University of Frankfurt am Main.

The most prominent philosophers with which the so-called &#x27;Frankfurt School&#x27; is associated were Erich Fromm, Herbert Marcuse, Theodor Adorno, Walter Benjamin, Jürgen Habermas and Max Horkheimer. Among the prominent philosophers not associated with the Frankfurt School were Martin Heidegger and Max Weber.

The German philosophical anthropology movement also emerged at this time.

== Science ==


Many foundational contributions to quantum mechanics were made in Weimar Germany or by German scientists during the Weimar period. While temporarily at the University of Copenhagen, German physicist Werner Heisenberg formulated his Uncertainty principle, and, with Max Born and Pascual Jordan, accomplished the first complete and correct definition of quantum mechanics, through the invention of Matrix mechanics.

Göttingen was the center of research in aero- and fluid-dynamics in the early 20th century. Mathematical aerodynamics was founded by Ludwig Prandtl before World War I, and the work continued at Göttingen until interfered with in the 1930s and prohibited in the late 1940s. It was there that compressibility drag and its reduction in aircraft was first understood. A striking example of this is the Messerschmitt Me 262, which was designed in 1939, but resembles a modern jet transport more that it did other tactical aircraft of its time.

Albert Einstein rose to public prominence during his years in Berlin, being awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1921. He was forced to flee Germany and the Nazi regime in 1933.

Physician Magnus Hirschfeld established the Institut für Sexualwissenschaft (Institute for Sexology) in 1919, and it remained open until 1933. Hirschfeld believed that an understanding of homosexuality could be arrived at through science. Hirschfeld was a vocal advocate for homosexual, bisexual, and transgender legal rights for men and women, repeatedly petitioning parliament for legal changes. His Institute also included a museum. The Institute, museum and the Institute&#x27;s library and archives were all destroyed by the Nazi regime in 1933.

In German-speaking Vienna, Mathematician Kurt Gödel published his groundbreaking &quot;Incompleteness Theorem&quot; during the Weimar years.

==Education==

New schools were frequently established in Weimar Germany to engage students in experimental methods of learning. Some were part of an emerging trend that combined research into physical movement and overall health, for example Eurythmy ensembles in Stuttgart that spread to other schools. Philosopher Rudolf Steiner established the first Waldorf education school in 1919, using a pedagogy also known as the Steiner method, which spread worldwide. Many Waldorf schools are in existence today.

== The arts ==

The fourteen years of the Weimar era were also marked by explosive intellectual productivity. German artists made multiple cultural contributions in the fields of literature, art, architecture, music, dance, drama, and the new medium of the motion picture. Political theorist Ernst Bloch described Weimar culture as a &quot;Periclean Age&quot;.

German visual art, music, and literature were all strongly influenced by German Expressionism at the start of the Weimar Republic. By 1920, a sharp turn was taken towards the New Objectivity outlook. New Objectivity was not a strict movement in the sense of having a clear manifesto or set of rules. Artists gravitating towards this aesthetic defined themselves by rejecting the themes of expressionism—romanticism, fantasy, subjectivity, raw emotion and impulse—and focused instead on precision, deliberateness, and depicting the factual and the real.

&quot;Kirkus Reviews&quot; remarked upon how much Weimar art was political: 

One of the first major events in the arts during the Weimar Republic was the founding of the (November Group) on December 3, 1918. This organization was established in the aftermath of the November beginning of the German Revolution of 1918–1919, when communists, anarchists and pro-republic supporters fought in the streets for control of the government. In 1919, the Weimar Republic was established. Around 100 artists of many genres who identified themselves as avant-garde joined the November Group. They held 19 exhibitions in Berlin until the group was banned by the Nazi regime in 1933. The group also had chapters throughout Germany during its existence, and brought the German avant-garde art scene to world attention by holding exhibits in Rome, Moscow and Japan.

Its members also belonged to other art movements and groups during the Weimar Republic era, such as architect Walter Gropius (founder of Bauhaus), and Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht (agitprop theatre). The artists of the November Group kept the spirit of radicalism alive in German art and culture during the Weimar Republic. Many of the painters, sculptors, music composers, architects, playwrights, and filmmakers who belonged to it, and still others associated with its members, were the same ones whose art would later be denounced as &quot;degenerate art&quot; by Adolf Hitler.

===Visual arts===
The Weimar Republic era began in the midst of several major movements in the fine arts that continued into the 1920s. German Expressionism had begun before World War I and continued to have a strong influence throughout the 1920s, although artists were increasingly likely to position themselves in opposition to expressionist tendencies as the decade went on.

Dada had begun in Zurich during World War I, and became an international phenomenon. Dada artists met and reformed groups of like-minded artists in Paris, Berlin, Cologne, and New York City. In Germany, Richard Huelsenbeck established the Berlin group, whose members included Jean Arp, John Heartfield, Wieland Hertzfelde, Johannes Baader, Raoul Hausmann, George Grosz and Hannah Höch. Machines, technology, and a strong Cubism element were features of their work. Jean Arp and Max Ernst formed a Cologne Dada group, and held a Dada Exhibition there that included a work by Ernst that had an axe &quot;placed there for the convenience of anyone who wanted to attack the work&quot;. Kurt Schwitters established his own solitary one-man Dada &quot;group&quot; in Hanover, where he filled two stories of a house (the &quot;Merzbau&quot;) with sculptures cobbled together with found objects and ephemera, each room dedicated to a notable artist friend of Schwitter&#x27;s. The house was destroyed by Allied bombs in 1943.

The New Objectivity artists did not belong to a formal group. However, various Weimar Republic artists were oriented towards the concepts associated with it. Broadly speaking, artists linked with New Objectivity include Käthe Kollwitz, Otto Dix, Max Beckmann, George Grosz, John Heartfield, Conrad Felixmüller, Christian Schad, and Rudolf Schlichter, who all &quot;worked in different styles, but shared many themes: the horrors of war, social hypocrisy and moral decadence, the plight of the poor and the rise of Nazism&quot;.

Otto Dix and George Grosz referred to their own movement as Verism, a reference to the Roman classical Verism approach called &quot;verus&quot;, meaning &quot;truth&quot;, warts and all. While their art is recognizable as a bitter, cynical criticism of life in Weimar Germany, they were striving to portray a sense of realism that they saw missing from expressionist works. New Objectivity became a major undercurrent in all of the arts during the Weimar Republic.

===Design===
The design field during the Weimar Republic witnessed some radical departures from styles that had come before it. Bauhaus-style designs are distinctive, and synonymous with modern design. Designers from these movements turned their energy towards a variety of objects, from furniture, to typography, to buildings. Dada&#x27;s goal of critically rethinking design was similar to Bauhaus, but whereas the earlier Dada movement was an aesthetic approach, the Bauhaus was literally a school, an institution that combined a former school of industrial design with a school of arts and crafts. The founders intended to fuse the arts and crafts with the practical demands of industrial design, to create works reflecting the New Objectivity aesthetic in Weimar Germany. Walter Gropius, a founder of the Bauhaus school, stated: &quot;we want an architecture adapted to our world of machines, radios and fast cars.&quot; Berlin and other parts of Germany still have many surviving landmarks of the architectural style at the Bauhaus. The mass housing projects of Ernst May and Bruno Taut are evidence of markedly creative designs being incorporated as a major feature of new planned communities. Erich Mendelsohn and Hans Poelzig are other prominent Bauhaus architects, while Mies van der Rohe is noted for his architecture and his industrial and household furnishing designs.

Painter Paul Klee was a faculty member of Bauhaus. His lectures on modern art (now known as the Paul Klee Notebooks) at the Bauhaus have been compared for importance to Leonardo&#x27;s &quot;Treatise on Painting&quot; and Newton&#x27;s &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot;, constituting the Principia Aesthetica of a new era of art;

Bruno Taut and Adolf Behne founded the Arbeitsrat für Kunst (Workers&#x27; Council for Art) in 1919. Their aim was to assert pressure for political change on the Weimar Republic government, that would benefit the management of architecture and arts management, similar to Germany&#x27;s large councils for workers and soldiers. This Berlin organization had around 50 members.

Still another influential affiliation of architects was the group Der Ring (The Ring) established by ten architects in Berlin in 1923-24, including: Otto Bartning, Peter Behrens, Hugo Häring, Erich Mendelsohn, Mies van der Rohe, Bruno Taut and Max Taut. The group promoted the progress of modernism in architecture.

===Literature===
Writers such as Alfred Döblin, Erich Maria Remarque and the brothers Heinrich and Thomas Mann presented a bleak look at the world and the failure of politics and society through literature. Foreign writers also travelled to Berlin, lured by the city&#x27;s dynamic, freer culture. The decadent cabaret scene of Berlin was documented by Britain&#x27;s Christopher Isherwood, such as in his novel &quot;Goodbye to Berlin&quot; which was later adapted as the play &quot;I Am a Camera&quot;.

Eastern religions such as Buddhism were becoming more accessible in Berlin during the era, as Indian and East Asian musicians, dancers, and even visiting monks came to Europe. Hermann Hesse embraced Eastern philosophies and spiritual themes in his novels.

Cultural critic Karl Kraus, with his brilliantly controversial magazine &quot;Die Fackel&quot;, advanced the field of satirical journalism, becoming the literary and political conscience of this era.

Weimar Germany also saw the publication of some of the world&#x27;s first openly gay literature. In 1920 Erwin von Busse published a collection of stories about sexually charged encounters between men and it was promptly censored. Other authors of such material include Klaus Mann, Anna Elisabet Weirauch, Christa Winsloe, Erich Ebermayer, and Max René Hesse.

===Theatre===
The theatres of Berlin and Frankfurt am Main were graced with drama by Ernst Toller, Bertolt Brecht, cabaret, and stage direction by Max Reinhardt and Erwin Piscator. Many theatre works were sympathetic towards Marxist themes, or were overt experiments in propaganda, such as the agitprop theatre by Brecht and Weill. Agitprop theatre is named through a combination of the words &quot;agitation&quot; and &quot;propaganda&quot;. Its aim was to add elements of public protest (agitation) and persuasive politics (propaganda) to the theatre, in the hope of creating a more activist audience. Among other works, Brecht and Kurt Weill collaborated on the musical or opera &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot; (1928), also filmed, which remains a popular evocation of the period.

Toller was the leading German expressionist playwright of the era. He later became one of the leading proponents of New Objectivity in the theatre. The avant-garde theater of Bertolt Brecht and Max Reinhardt in Berlin was the most advanced in Europe, being rivaled only by that of Paris.

The Weimar years saw a flourishing of political and grotesque cabaret which, at least for the English-speaking world, has become iconic for the period through works such as &quot;The Berlin Stories&quot; by the English writer Christopher Isherwood, who lived in Berlin from 1929-33. The musical and then the film &quot;Cabaret&quot; were based upon Isherwood&#x27;s misadventures at Nollendorfstrasse 17 in the Schöneberg district where he lived with cabaret singer Jean Ross. The main center for political cabaret was Berlin, with performers like comedian Otto Reutter. Karl Valentin was a master of grotesque cabaret.

Historian Peter Jelavich has written extensively about minstrelsy in the Weimar cabaret. In his book &quot;Berlin Cabaret&quot; he writes that in 1920s Germany &quot;blacks became symbols of a radically new cultural sensibility&quot; and that the reception of minstrelsy in the revue cemented in the idea in Germany that &quot;the United States was both the most modern and the most &#x27;primitive&#x27; of nations.&quot;

===Music===
Concert halls heard the atonal and modern music of Alban Berg, Arnold Schoenberg, and Kurt Weill. Hanns Eisler and Paul Dessau were other modernist composers of the era. Richard Strauss, in his 50s at the start of the period, continued to compose, his work mostly operas including &quot;Intermezzo&quot; (1924) and &quot;Die ägyptische Helena&quot; (1928).

===Modern dance===
Rudolf von Laban and Mary Wigman laid the foundations for the development of contemporary dance.

===Cinema===
At the beginning of the Weimar era, cinema meant silent films. Expressionist films featured plots exploring the dark side of human nature. They had elaborate expressionist design sets, and the style was typically nightmarish in atmosphere. &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot; (1919), directed by Robert Wiene, is usually credited as the first German expressionist film. The sets depict distorted, warped-looking buildings in a German town, while the plot centres around a mysterious, magical cabinet that has a clear association with a casket. F. W. Murnau&#x27;s vampire horror film &quot;Nosferatu&quot; was released in 1922. Fritz Lang&#x27;s &quot;Dr. Mabuse the Gambler&quot; (1922) was described as &quot;a sinister tale&quot; that portrays &quot;the corruption and social chaos so much in evidence in Berlin and more generally, according to Lang, in Weimar Germany&quot;. Futurism is another favourite expressionist theme, shown corrupted into a force of oppression in the dystopia of &quot;Metropolis&quot; (1927). The self-deluded lead characters in many expressionist films echo Goethe&#x27;s Faust, and Murnau indeed retold the tale in his film &quot;Faust&quot;.

German expressionism was not the dominant type of popular film in Weimar Germany and were outnumbered by the production of costume dramas, often about folk legends, which were enormously popular with the public. The Weimar era&#x27;s most groundbreaking film studio was the UFA studio.

Silent films continued to be made throughout the 1920s, in parallel with the early years of sound films during the final years of the Weimar Republic. Silent films had certain advantages for filmmakers, such as the ability to hire an international cast, since spoken accents were irrelevant. Thus, American and British actors were easily able to collaborate with German directors and cast-members on films made in Germany (for example, the collaborations of Georg Pabst and Louise Brooks). When sound films started being produced in Germany, some filmmakers experimented with versions in more than one language, filmed simultaneously. 
When the musical &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot; was filmed by director Georg Pabst, he filmed the first version with a French-speaking cast (1930), then a second version with a German-speaking cast (1931). An English version was planned but never materialized. The Nazis destroyed the original negative print of the German version in 1933, and it was reconstructed after the War ended. &quot;The Blue Angel&quot; (1930), directed by Josef von Sternberg with the leads played by Marlene Dietrich and Emil Jannings, was filmed simultaneously in English and German (a different supporting cast was used for each version). Although it was based on a 1905 story written by Heinrich Mann, the film is often seen as topical in that it depicts the doomed romance between a Berlin professor and a cabaret dancer. However, critics differ on this interpretation, with the absence of modern urban amenities such as automobiles being noted.

Cinema in Weimar culture did not shy away from controversial topics, but dealt with them explicitly. &quot;Diary of a Lost Girl&quot; (1929) directed by Georg Wilhelm Pabst and starring Louise Brooks, deals with a young woman who is thrown out of her home after having an illegitimate child, and is then forced to become a prostitute to survive. This trend of dealing frankly with provocative material in cinema began immediately after the end of the War. In 1919, Richard Oswald directed and released two films, that met with press controversy and action from police vice investigators and government censors. &quot;Prostitution&quot; dealt with women forced into &quot;white slavery&quot;, while &quot;Different from the Others&quot; dealt with a homosexual man&#x27;s conflict between his sexuality and social expectations; and in October 1920 censors ended its release to the public. By the end of the decade, similar material met with little, if any opposition when it was released in Berlin theatres. William Dieterle&#x27;s &quot;Sex in Chains&quot; (1928), and Pabst&#x27;s &quot;Pandora&#x27;s Box&quot; (1929) deal with homosexuality among men and women, respectively, and were not censored. Homosexuality was also present more tangentially in other films from the period.

==Philosophy==
Philosophy during the Weimar Republic pursued paths of enquiry into scientific fields such as mathematics and physics. Leading scientists became associated as a group that was called the Berlin Circle. Among many influential thinkers, Carl Hempel was a strong influence in the group. Born in Berlin, Hempel attended the University of Göttingen and the University of Heidelberg, then returned to Berlin, where he was taught by influential physicists Hans Reichenbach and Max Planck, and logistics with mathematician John von Neumann. Reichenbach introduced Hempel to the Vienna Circle, who were an existing informal association of &quot;scientifically interested philosophers and philosophically interested scientists&quot;, as Hempel put it. Hempel was intrigued by the logical positivism ideas discussed by the Vienna Circle, and he developed a similar network, the Berlin Circle. Hempel&#x27;s reputation has grown to the extent that he is now considered one of the leading scientific philosophers of the 20th century. Richard von Mises was active in both groups.

Germany&#x27;s most influential philosopher during the Weimar Republic years, and perhaps of the 20th century, was Martin Heidegger. Heidegger published one of the cornerstones of 20th-century philosophy during this period, &quot;Being and Time&quot; (1927). &quot;Being and Time&quot; influenced successive generations of philosophers in Europe and the United States, particularly in the areas of phenomenology, existentialism, hermeneutics and deconstruction. Heidegger&#x27;s work built on, and responded to, the earlier explorations of phenomenology by another Weimar era philosopher, Edmund Husserl.

The intersection of politics and philosophy inspired other philosophers in Weimar Germany, when radical politics included many thinkers and activists across the political spectrum. During his 20s, Herbert Marcuse was a student in Freiburg, where he went to study under Martin Heidegger, one of Germany&#x27;s most prominent philosophers. Marcuse himself later became a driving force in the New Left in the United States. Ernst Bloch, Max Horkheimer and Walter Benjamin all wrote about Marxism and politics in addition to other philosophical topics. From the perspective of Jewish philosophers in Germany, they also considered the problems posed by the &quot;Jewish question&quot;. Political philosophers Leo Strauss and Hannah Arendt received their university education during the Weimar Republic and moved in Jewish intellectual circles in Berlin, and were associated with Norbert Elias, Leo Löwenthal, Karl Löwith, Julius Guttmann, Hans-Georg Gadamer, Franz Rosenzweig, Gershom Scholem, and Alexander Altmann. Strauss and Arendt, along with Marcuse and Benjamin, were among the Jewish intellectuals who managed to flee the Nazi regime, eventually emigrating to the United States. Carl Schmitt, a legal and political scholar, was also a vocal fascist supporter of both the Nazi regime and Spain&#x27;s Franco; however, he published works of political philosophy that remained studied by philosophers and political scholars with radically different views, such as Alain Badiou, Slavoj Žižek, and his contemporaries Hannah Arendt, Walter Benjamin, and Leo Strauss.

==Health and self-improvement==

Germany had many innovators in health treatment, some more questionable than others, in the decades leading up to World War I. As a group, they were collectively known as part of the Lebensreform, or Life Reform, movement. During the Weimar years, some of these found traction with the German public, particularly in Berlin.

Some innovations had lasting influence. Joseph Pilates developed much of his Pilates system of physical training during the 1920s. Expressionist dance teachers such as Rudolf Laban had an important impact on Pilates&#x27; theories.

&quot;Nacktkultur&quot;, called naturism or modern nudism in English, was pioneered by Karl Wilhelm Diefenbach in Vienna in the late 1890s. Resorts for naturists were established at a rapid pace along the northern coast of Germany during the 1920s, and by 1931, Berlin itself had 40 naturists&#x27; societies and clubs. A variety of periodicals on the topic were also regularly published.

Philosopher Rudolf Steiner, like Diefenbach, was a follower of Theosophy. Steiner had an enormous influence on the alternative health movement before his death in 1925 and far beyond. With Ita Wegman, he developed anthroposophical medicine. The integration of spirituality and homeopathy is controversial and has been criticized for having no basis in science.

Steiner was also an early proponent of organic agriculture, in the form of a holistic concept later called biodynamic agriculture. In 1924 he delivered a series of public lectures on the topic, which were then published.

&quot;Aufklärungsfilme&quot; (enlightenment films) supported the idea of teaching the public about important social problems, such as alcohol and drug addiction, venereal disease, homosexuality, prostitution, and prison reform.

== Status of homosexuality==

Weimar Germany experienced an increase in the vocalization and congregation of the homosexual community, partially due to the leniency of federal censorship. The period marked an influx in lesbian and gay media as publishers took advantage of ambiguously-worded censorship laws in the Weimar Constitution. Then, in 1921, the German Reichsgericht ruled that homosexual themes in press were not necessarily obscene unless erotic in nature.

Gay magazines disseminated meeting spots for homosexuals to gather and enabled the formation of clubs referred to as &quot;friendship leagues.&quot; Some of these leagues would eventually integrate with the German League for Human Rights.

Weimar-era Germany also witnessed the emergence of the world’s first lesbian magazine, &quot;Die Freundin&quot;. Although there were at least five lesbian magazines available at the time to more than one million readers across German-speaking countries, &quot;Die Freundin&quot; was the most popular. Published from 1924 to 1933, the magazine featured short stories as well as information about lesbian meetings and nightspots before it was ultimately shut down after the Nazis rose to power.

In 1928, the first guide to the lesbian club scene was published by Ruth Roellig entitled “&quot;Ruth Roellig’s Berlins lesbische Frauen&quot; (Berlin’s Lesbian Women).” This guide allowed women in Berlin to connect and learn more about the lesbian community.

Despite the illegality of homosexuality during this time period, references to homosexual relationships in cinema grew substantially. Two well-known films from Weimar Germany that centered around homosexual relationships are &quot;Anders als die Andern&quot; (&quot;Different from the Others&quot;), which centered around a relationship between two men, and &quot;Mädchen in Uniform&quot; (&quot;Girls in Uniform&quot;), which focused on a lesbian relationship between a teacher and student. Both of these films received positive critical reviews and were commercial hits, opening in Berlin’s top theatres. Despite the positive reviews, there was still public outcry over &quot;Anders als die Andern&quot;, including riots at the cinemas where it opened, and it was even banned in various theatres including in Munich, Vienna, and Stuttgart.

==Berlin&#x27;s reputation for decadence==
Prostitution rose in Berlin and elsewhere in the areas of Europe left ravaged by World War I. This means of survival for desperate women, and sometimes men, became normalized to a degree in the 1920s. During the war, venereal diseases such as syphilis and gonorrhea spread at a rate that warranted government attention. Soldiers at the front contracted these diseases from prostitutes, so the German army responded by granting approval to certain brothels that were inspected by their own medical doctors, and soldiers were rationed coupon books for sexual services at these establishments. Homosexual behaviour was also documented among soldiers at the front. Soldiers returning to Berlin at the end of the War had a different attitude towards their own sexual behaviour than they had a few years previously. Prostitution was frowned on by respectable Berliners, but it continued to the point of becoming entrenched in the city&#x27;s underground economy and culture. First women with no other means of support turned to the trade, then youths of both genders.

Crime in general developed in parallel with prostitution in the city, beginning as petty thefts and other crimes linked to the need to survive in the war&#x27;s aftermath. Berlin eventually acquired a reputation as a hub of drug dealing (cocaine, heroin, tranquilizers) and the black market. The police identified 62 organized criminal gangs in Berlin, called &quot;Ringvereine&quot;. The German public also became fascinated with reports of homicides, especially &quot;lust murders&quot; or &quot;Lustmord&quot;. Publishers met this demand with inexpensive criminal novels called &quot;Krimi&quot;, which like the film noir of the era (such as the classic &quot;M&quot;), explored methods of scientific detection and psychosexual analysis.

Apart from the new tolerance for behaviour that was technically still illegal, and viewed by a large part of society as immoral, there were other developments in Berlin culture that shocked many visitors to the city. Thrill-seekers came to the city in search of adventure, and booksellers sold many editions of guide books to Berlin&#x27;s erotic night entertainment venues. There were an estimated 500 such establishments, that included a large number of homosexual venues for men and for women; sometimes transvestites of one or both genders were admitted, otherwise there were at least 5 known establishments that were exclusively for a transvestite clientele. There were also several nudist venues. Berlin also had a museum of sexuality during the Weimar period, at Dr. Magnus Hirschfeld&#x27;s Institute of Sexology. These were nearly all closed when the Nazi regime was instored in 1933.

Artists in Berlin became fused with the city&#x27;s underground culture as the borders between cabaret and legitimate theatre blurred. Anita Berber, a dancer and actress, became notorious throughout the city and beyond for her erotic performances (as well as her cocaine addiction and erratic behaviour). She was painted by Otto Dix, and socialized in the same circles as Klaus Mann.

==Gallery of 1920s Berlin cultural life==
1920s Berlin was a city of many social contrasts. While a large part of the population continued to struggle with high unemployment and deprivations in the aftermath of World War I, the upper class of society, and a growing middle class, gradually rediscovered prosperity and turned Berlin into a cosmopolitan city. 
==See also==

* Aftermath of World War I
* Cinema of Germany
* Critical Theory
* Cuba de ayer
* Culture of Germany
* Dada
* Degenerate art
* Expressionism
* Futurism
* Germany
* German Expressionism
* Gleichschaltung
* Glitter and Doom - Exhibit of Art in the Weimar Republic
* Glossary of the Weimar Republic
* Golden Twenties
* History of Germany
* Kultur
* Literature of World War I
* Lost Generation
* Modernism
* Nazi Germany
* New Objectivity
* Post-World War I recession
* Post-expressionism
* Reactionary modernism
* Roaring Twenties
* Surrealism
* Weimar Timeline
* Weimaraner
==References==
==Bibliography==
*Becker, Sabina. Neue Sachlichkeit. Köln: Böhlau, 2000. Print.
*Gail Finney (2008) &quot;WEIMAR CULTURE: Defeat, the Roaring Twenties, the Rise of Nazism&quot;, Courses overview of program The Roaring Twenties in Germany
*Gay, Peter. &quot;Weimar Culture: The Outsider as Insider&quot;. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1981.
* Gordon, Peter E., and John P. McCormick, eds. &quot;Weimar Thought: A Contested Legacy&quot; (Princeton U.P. 2013) 451 pages; scholarly essays on law, culture, politics, philosophy, science, art and architecture 
*Hermand, Jost and Frank Trommler. &quot;Die Kultur der Weimarer Republik&quot;. Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag, 1989.
*
*Kaes, Anton, Martin Jay, and Edward Dimendberg. &quot;The Weimar Republic Sourcebook&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995.
*Lethen, Helmut. &quot;Cool Conduct: The Culture of Distance in Weimar Germany&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002.
*Lindner, Martin. &quot;Leben in der Krise. Zeitromane der neuen Sachlichkeit und die intellektuelle Mentalität der klassischen Moderne&quot;. Stuttgart: Metzler, 1994.
*Martin Mauthner: &quot;German Writers in French Exile, 1933–1940&quot;, London: 2007; .
*Peukert, Detlev. &quot;The Weimar Republic: the Crisis of Classical Modernity&quot;. New York: Hill and Wang, 1992.
*Schrader, Barbel. &quot;The &#x27;Golden&#x27; Twenties: Art and Literature in the Weimar Republic&quot;. Yale University Press, 1988, p. 25-27.
*Schütz, Erhard H. &quot;Romane Der Weimarer Republik&quot;. München: W. Fink, 1986. Print.
*Peter Selz (2004) &quot;Beyond the Mainstream: Fifty years of Curating Modern and Contemporary Art.&quot; lectures delivered at Duke University, September 10, 2004.
*Weitz, Eric D. &quot;Weimar Germany: Promise and Tragedy&quot;. Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 2007. Print.
*Willett, John. &quot;Art and Politics in the Weimar Period: The New Sobriety, 1917–1933&quot;. 1st ed. New York: Pantheon Books, 1978. Print.

==External links==
* A site about art, literature and politics in the Weimar era</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3699337" start="0" end="14" title="Weimar culture" label="Weimar culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="94" end="109" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="146" end="161" title="Interwar Period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560929" start="256" end="268" title="1920s Berlin" label="1920s Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="375" end="382" title="First Austrian Republic" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="401" end="407" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="830" end="845" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q76823" start="860" end="873" title="Karl Mannheim" label="Karl Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q57085" start="875" end="886" title="Erich Fromm" label="Erich Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="888" end="902" title="Theodor Adorno" label="Theodor Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q76826" start="904" end="918" title="Max Horkheimer" label="Max Horkheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60030" start="924" end="939" title="Herbert Marcuse" label="Herbert Marcuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q57188" start="954" end="968" title="Ernst Cassirer" label="Ernst Cassirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="973" end="987" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q213748" start="1009" end="1025" title="Arthur Rosenberg" label="Arthur Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q71337" start="1030" end="1042" title="Gustav Meyer" label="Gustav Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="1095" end="1107" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="1332" end="1338" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1366" end="1378" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1485" end="1498" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1504" end="1518" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q820216" start="1588" end="1617" title="Institute for Social Research" label="Institute for Social Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q151843" start="1637" end="1653" title="Frankfurt School" label="Frankfurt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988140" start="1720" end="1750" title="New School for Social Research" label="New School for Social Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1754" end="1767" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755318" start="1834" end="1867" title="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee" label="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="2034" end="2043" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2183" end="2189" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="2191" end="2205" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Gilles Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q352465" start="2207" end="2221" title="Félix Guattari" label="Félix Guattari"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="2227" end="2242" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q84412" start="2252" end="2265" title="Wilhelm Reich" label="Wilhelm Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="2267" end="2282" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="2292" end="2306" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="2311" end="2327" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q298075" start="2329" end="2339" title="Guy Debord" label="Guy Debord"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="2348" end="2374" title="Situationist International" label="Situationist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="2490" end="2496" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078374" start="2800" end="2809" title="tenements" label="tenements"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="3178" end="3189" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3429" end="3440" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3952" end="3964" title="German Empire" label="Wilhelminian"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4017" end="4028" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q65295621" start="4263" end="4285" title="Dr. Mabuse the Gambler" label="Dr. Mabuse the Gambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="4440" end="4460" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4479" end="4490" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="4676" end="4682" title="sociology" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="4687" end="4703" title="political theory" label="political theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="4716" end="4723" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="4743" end="4751" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="4752" end="4766" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="4812" end="4827" title="critical theory" label="critical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q820216" start="4856" end="4885" title="Institute for Social Research" label="Institute for Social Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q151843" start="4905" end="4921" title="Frankfurt School" label="Frankfurt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q50662" start="4938" end="4969" title="Johann Wolfgang Goethe University of Frankfurt am Main" label="University of Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q151843" start="5035" end="5051" title="Frankfurt School" label="Frankfurt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q57085" start="5077" end="5088" title="Erich Fromm" label="Erich Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q60030" start="5090" end="5105" title="Herbert Marcuse" label="Herbert Marcuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="5107" end="5121" title="Theodor Adorno" label="Theodor Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078" start="5123" end="5138" title="Walter Benjamin" label="Walter Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76357" start="5140" end="5155" title="Jürgen Habermas" label="Jürgen Habermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q76826" start="5160" end="5174" title="Max Horkheimer" label="Max Horkheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="5255" end="5271" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="5276" end="5285" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q488059" start="5299" end="5325" title="philosophical anthropology" label="philosophical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="5414" end="5431" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="5578" end="5595" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="5611" end="5632" title="Uncertainty principle" label="Uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q58978" start="5644" end="5652" title="Max Born" label="Max Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q61761" start="5657" end="5671" title="Pascual Jordan" label="Pascual Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q603198" start="5775" end="5791" title="Matrix mechanics" label="Matrix mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="5794" end="5803" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="5834" end="5839" title="aerodynamics" label="aero-"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="5844" end="5858" title="fluid dynamics" label="fluid-dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q76683" start="5927" end="5941" title="Ludwig Prandtl" label="Ludwig Prandtl"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5949" end="5960" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705141" start="6085" end="6105" title="Compressible flow" label="compressibility drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="6192" end="6212" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Messerschmitt Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="6334" end="6349" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="6422" end="6445" title="Nobel Prize for Physics" label="Nobel Prize for Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q57592" start="6525" end="6542" title="Magnus Hirschfeld" label="Magnus Hirschfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q73974" start="6559" end="6590" title="Institut für Sexualwissenschaft" label="Institut für Sexualwissenschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q170912" start="6606" end="6614" title="Sexology" label="Sexology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="6703" end="6716" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="6802" end="6810" title="Bisexuality" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="6816" end="6827" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="7108" end="7118" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="7154" end="7176" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems" label="Incompleteness Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q241534" start="7452" end="7460" title="Eurythmy" label="Eurythmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="7474" end="7483" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="7526" end="7540" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q216690" start="7563" end="7580" title="Waldorf education" label="Waldorf education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922" start="7605" end="7613" title="pedagogy" label="pedagogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="7897" end="7907" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="7909" end="7912" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="7914" end="7926" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="7928" end="7933" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="7935" end="7940" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="7942" end="7947" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="7975" end="7989" title="motion picture" label="motion picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q57240" start="8010" end="8021" title="Ernst Bloch" label="Ernst Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000977" start="8058" end="8071" title="Fifth-century Athens" label="Periclean Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="8153" end="8173" title="German Expressionism" label="German Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160218" start="8255" end="8270" title="New Objectivity" label="New Objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197403" start="8640" end="8654" title="Kirkus Reviews" label="Kirkus Reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q700202" start="8806" end="8820" title="November Group (German)" label="November Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="8927" end="8957" title="German Revolution of 1918–1919" label="German Revolution of 1918–1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="8964" end="8974" title="Communism" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q61071" start="9597" end="9611" title="Walter Gropius" label="Walter Gropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="9624" end="9631" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="9638" end="9648" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="9653" end="9667" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q374278" start="9669" end="9677" title="agitprop" label="agitprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q156460" start="10031" end="10045" title="degenerate art" label="degenerate art"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="10206" end="10226" title="German Expressionism" label="German Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="10450" end="10454" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q76853" start="10653" end="10672" title="Richard Huelsenbeck" label="Richard Huelsenbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q153739" start="10726" end="10734" title="Jean Arp" label="Jean Arp"/>
<link wikidata="Q168671" start="10736" end="10751" title="John Heartfield" label="John Heartfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10753" end="10771" title="Wieland Hertzfelde" label="Wieland Hertzfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q67897" start="10773" end="10788" title="Johannes Baader" label="Johannes Baader"/>
<link wikidata="Q84503" start="10790" end="10804" title="Raoul Hausmann" label="Raoul Hausmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q107194" start="10806" end="10818" title="George Grosz" label="George Grosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q463411" start="10823" end="10834" title="Hannah Höch" label="Hannah Höch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="10871" end="10877" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154842" start="10928" end="10937" title="Max Ernst" label="Max Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q155158" start="11132" end="11147" title="Kurt Schwitters" label="Kurt Schwitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q160218" start="11473" end="11488" title="New Objectivity" label="New Objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q142472" start="11689" end="11703" title="Käthe Kollwitz" label="Käthe Kollwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q153104" start="11705" end="11713" title="Otto Dix" label="Otto Dix"/>
<link wikidata="Q164683" start="11715" end="11727" title="Max Beckmann" label="Max Beckmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q107194" start="11729" end="11741" title="George Grosz" label="George Grosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q168671" start="11743" end="11758" title="John Heartfield" label="John Heartfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q693095" start="11760" end="11778" title="Conrad Felixmüller" label="Conrad Felixmüller"/>
<link wikidata="Q703331" start="11780" end="11795" title="Christian Schad" label="Christian Schad"/>
<link wikidata="Q640787" start="11801" end="11818" title="Rudolf Schlichter" label="Rudolf Schlichter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12058" end="12064" title="Verism (Germany)" label="Verism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14227427" start="12101" end="12107" title="Verism" label="Verism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="12592" end="12599" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="12792" end="12796" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="12856" end="12863" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="12934" end="12941" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160218" start="13196" end="13211" title="New Objectivity" label="New Objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q61071" start="13241" end="13255" title="Walter Gropius" label="Walter Gropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q61622" start="13532" end="13541" title="Ernst May" label="Ernst May"/>
<link wikidata="Q76729" start="13546" end="13556" title="Bruno Taut" label="Bruno Taut"/>
<link wikidata="Q76730" start="13665" end="13681" title="Erich Mendelsohn" label="Erich Mendelsohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q76734" start="13686" end="13698" title="Hans Poelzig" label="Hans Poelzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q41508" start="13745" end="13762" title="Mies van der Rohe" label="Mies van der Rohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44007" start="13855" end="13864" title="Paul Klee" label="Paul Klee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151804" start="13943" end="13962" title="Paul Klee Notebooks" label="Paul Klee Notebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258536" start="14038" end="14058" title="Treatise on Painting" label="Treatise on Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q163335" start="14089" end="14110" title="Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q76729" start="14178" end="14188" title="Bruno Taut" label="Bruno Taut"/>
<link wikidata="Q75949" start="14193" end="14204" title="Adolf Behne" label="Adolf Behne"/>
<link wikidata="Q531372" start="14217" end="14237" title="Arbeitsrat für Kunst" label="Arbeitsrat für Kunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196513" start="14621" end="14629" title="Der Ring" label="Der Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q62322" start="14704" end="14717" title="Otto Bartning" label="Otto Bartning"/>
<link wikidata="Q76726" start="14719" end="14732" title="Peter Behrens" label="Peter Behrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q64094" start="14734" end="14745" title="Hugo Häring" label="Hugo Häring"/>
<link wikidata="Q76730" start="14747" end="14763" title="Erich Mendelsohn" label="Erich Mendelsohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41508" start="14765" end="14782" title="Mies van der Rohe" label="Mies van der Rohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76729" start="14784" end="14794" title="Bruno Taut" label="Bruno Taut"/>
<link wikidata="Q61892" start="14799" end="14807" title="Max Taut" label="Max Taut"/>
<link wikidata="Q57389" start="14905" end="14918" title="Alfred Döblin" label="Alfred Döblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47293" start="14920" end="14940" title="Erich Maria Remarque" label="Erich Maria Remarque"/>
<link wikidata="Q76480" start="14958" end="14966" title="Heinrich Mann" label="Heinrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="14971" end="14982" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q945895" start="15174" end="15182" title="decadent" label="decadent"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="15183" end="15190" title="cabaret" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q310111" start="15240" end="15261" title="Christopher Isherwood" label="Christopher Isherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605099" start="15290" end="15307" title="Goodbye to Berlin" label="Goodbye to Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423702" start="15356" end="15369" title="I Am a Camera" label="I Am a Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="15404" end="15412" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="15554" end="15567" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q44328" start="15651" end="15661" title="Karl Kraus (writer)" label="Karl Kraus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363630" start="15941" end="15956" title="Erwin von Busse" label="Erwin von Busse"/>
<link wikidata="Q77087" start="16106" end="16116" title="Klaus Mann" label="Klaus Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q88125" start="16118" end="16140" title="Anna Elisabet Weirauch" label="Anna Elisabet Weirauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q214042" start="16142" end="16157" title="Christa Winsloe" label="Christa Winsloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352109" start="16159" end="16174" title="Erich Ebermayer" label="Erich Ebermayer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16180" end="16194" title="Max René Hesse" label="Max René Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="16227" end="16233" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="16238" end="16255" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q57266" start="16282" end="16294" title="Ernst Toller" label="Ernst Toller"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="16296" end="16310" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="16312" end="16319" title="cabaret" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="16344" end="16357" title="Max Reinhardt" label="Max Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q60978" start="16362" end="16376" title="Erwin Piscator" label="Erwin Piscator"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960575" start="16491" end="16507" title="agitprop theatre" label="agitprop theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="16831" end="16841" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q212495" start="16885" end="16905" title="The Threepenny Opera" label="The Threepenny Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q160218" start="17099" end="17114" title="New Objectivity" label="New Objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104196" start="17451" end="17469" title="The Berlin Stories" label="The Berlin Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q310111" start="17498" end="17519" title="Christopher Isherwood" label="Christopher Isherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024739" start="17591" end="17598" title="Cabaret (musical)" label="Cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q16832221" start="17738" end="17747" title="Jean Ross" label="Jean Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629820" start="17829" end="17841" title="Otto Reutter" label="Otto Reutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45255" start="17843" end="17856" title="Karl Valentin" label="Karl Valentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="18353" end="18359" title="Atonality" label="atonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426218" start="18364" end="18376" title="modernism (music)" label="modern music"/>
<link wikidata="Q78475" start="18380" end="18390" title="Alban Berg" label="Alban Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="18392" end="18409" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="18415" end="18425" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q78704" start="18427" end="18439" title="Hanns Eisler" label="Hanns Eisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q213613" start="18444" end="18455" title="Paul Dessau" label="Paul Dessau"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="18499" end="18514" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474467" start="18616" end="18626" title="Intermezzo (opera)" label="Intermezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220040" start="18650" end="18671" title="Die ägyptische Helena" label="Die ägyptische Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q213712" start="18706" end="18722" title="Rudolf von Laban" label="Rudolf von Laban"/>
<link wikidata="Q77127" start="18727" end="18738" title="Mary Wigman" label="Mary Wigman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186035" start="18783" end="18801" title="contemporary dance" label="contemporary dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q160476" start="18880" end="18899" title="German expressionist cinema" label="Expressionist films"/>
<link wikidata="Q153886" start="19063" end="19090" title="The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari" label="The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari"/>
<link wikidata="Q76552" start="19117" end="19129" title="Robert Wiene" label="Robert Wiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q55412" start="19365" end="19377" title="F. W. Murnau" label="F. W. Murnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q151895" start="19411" end="19420" title="Nosferatu" label="Nosferatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="19449" end="19459" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q65295621" start="19473" end="19495" title="Dr. Mabuse the Gambler" label="Dr. Mabuse the Gambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="19700" end="19708" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="19801" end="19809" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151599" start="19819" end="19829" title="Metropolis (1927 film)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29478" start="19910" end="19929" title="Goethe&amp;#x27;s Faust" label="Goethe&amp;#x27;s Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q672480" start="19983" end="19988" title="Faust (1926 film)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q41468" start="20271" end="20274" title="Universum Film AG" label="UFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q55421" start="20742" end="20753" title="Georg Pabst" label="Georg Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q152779" start="20758" end="20771" title="Louise Brooks" label="Louise Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q212495" start="20943" end="20963" title="The Threepenny Opera" label="The Threepenny Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q158047" start="21314" end="21328" title="The Blue Angel" label="The Blue Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q78719" start="21355" end="21374" title="Josef von Sternberg" label="Josef von Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="21400" end="21416" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q77181" start="21421" end="21434" title="Emil Jannings" label="Emil Jannings"/>
<link wikidata="Q76480" start="21590" end="21603" title="Heinrich Mann" label="Heinrich Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q569699" start="21958" end="21978" title="Diary of a Lost Girl" label="Diary of a Lost Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q55421" start="22004" end="22023" title="Georg Wilhelm Pabst" label="Georg Wilhelm Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q152779" start="22037" end="22050" title="Louise Brooks" label="Louise Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q78874" start="22316" end="22330" title="Richard Oswald" label="Richard Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q875521" start="22522" end="22535" title="Sexual slavery" label="white slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q491335" start="22555" end="22580" title="Different from the Others" label="Different from the Others"/>
<link wikidata="Q55413" start="22858" end="22874" title="William Dieterle" label="William Dieterle"/>
<link wikidata="Q325260" start="22888" end="22901" title="Sex in Chains" label="Sex in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q700736" start="22939" end="22957" title="Pandora&amp;#x27;s Box (1929 film)" label="Pandora&amp;#x27;s Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055995" start="23337" end="23350" title="Berlin Circle" label="Berlin Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q61885" start="23385" end="23396" title="Carl Hempel" label="Carl Hempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="23470" end="23493" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="23502" end="23526" title="University of Heidelberg" label="University of Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170147" start="23599" end="23615" title="Hans Reichenbach" label="Hans Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="23620" end="23630" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="23665" end="23681" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q193627" start="23920" end="23938" title="logical positivism" label="logical positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q84292" start="24171" end="24188" title="Richard von Mises" label="Richard von Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="24332" end="24348" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q404567" start="24447" end="24461" title="Being and Time" label="Being and Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181385" start="24615" end="24628" title="Phenomenology (architecture)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="24630" end="24644" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="24646" end="24658" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="24663" end="24677" title="deconstruction" label="deconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="24806" end="24820" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q60030" start="25020" end="25035" title="Herbert Marcuse" label="Herbert Marcuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="25092" end="25108" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q160637" start="25213" end="25221" title="New Left" label="New Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q57240" start="25244" end="25255" title="Ernst Bloch" label="Ernst Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q76826" start="25257" end="25271" title="Max Horkheimer" label="Max Horkheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078" start="25276" end="25291" title="Walter Benjamin" label="Walter Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q708764" start="25481" end="25496" title="Jewish question" label="Jewish question"/>
<link wikidata="Q77144" start="25527" end="25538" title="Leo Strauss" label="Leo Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q60025" start="25543" end="25556" title="Hannah Arendt" label="Hannah Arendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q75812" start="25697" end="25710" title="Norbert Elias" label="Norbert Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q77146" start="25712" end="25725" title="Leo Löwenthal" label="Leo Löwenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q75790" start="25727" end="25738" title="Karl Löwith" label="Karl Löwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q75333" start="25740" end="25755" title="Julius Guttmann" label="Julius Guttmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q76356" start="25757" end="25775" title="Hans-Georg Gadamer" label="Hans-Georg Gadamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76710" start="25777" end="25793" title="Franz Rosenzweig" label="Franz Rosenzweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q138850" start="25795" end="25810" title="Gershom Scholem" label="Gershom Scholem"/>
<link wikidata="Q79017" start="25816" end="25833" title="Alexander Altmann" label="Alexander Altmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q77148" start="26005" end="26017" title="Carl Schmitt" label="Carl Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="26126" end="26132" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q311005" start="26287" end="26299" title="Alain Badiou" label="Alain Badiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q184750" start="26301" end="26313" title="Slavoj Žižek" label="Slavoj Žižek"/>
<link wikidata="Q60025" start="26338" end="26351" title="Hannah Arendt" label="Hannah Arendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078" start="26353" end="26368" title="Walter Benjamin" label="Walter Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77144" start="26374" end="26385" title="Leo Strauss" label="Leo Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411815" start="26604" end="26616" title="Lebensreform" label="Lebensreform"/>
<link wikidata="Q61926" start="26787" end="26801" title="Joseph Pilates" label="Joseph Pilates"/>
<link wikidata="Q272460" start="26824" end="26831" title="Pilates" label="Pilates"/>
<link wikidata="Q778382" start="26878" end="26897" title="Expressionist dance" label="Expressionist dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q213712" start="26915" end="26927" title="Rudolf Laban" label="Rudolf Laban"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="27012" end="27020" title="naturism" label="naturism"/>
<link wikidata="Q519169" start="27067" end="27090" title="Karl Wilhelm Diefenbach" label="Karl Wilhelm Diefenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="27382" end="27396" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="27433" end="27442" title="Theosophy (Blavatskian)" label="Theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="27485" end="27503" title="alternative health" label="alternative health"/>
<link wikidata="Q202818" start="27559" end="27569" title="Ita Wegman" label="Ita Wegman"/>
<link wikidata="Q574514" start="27584" end="27609" title="anthroposophical medicine" label="anthroposophical medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="27647" end="27657" title="homeopathy" label="homeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="27771" end="27790" title="organic agriculture" label="organic agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="27809" end="27817" title="holistic" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q847611" start="27839" end="27861" title="biodynamic agriculture" label="biodynamic agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="28498" end="28517" title="Weimar Constitution" label="Weimar Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q512552" start="28545" end="28558" title="Reichsgericht" label="Reichsgericht"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353630" start="28859" end="28889" title="German League for Human Rights" label="German League for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274363" start="28985" end="28997" title="Die Freundin" label="Die Freundin"/>
<link wikidata="Q491335" start="29878" end="29899" title="Anders als die Andern" label="Anders als die Andern"/>
<link wikidata="Q161845" start="30011" end="30029" title="Mädchen in Uniform" label="Mädchen in Uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="30776" end="30784" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="30789" end="30798" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154075" start="31962" end="31973" title="Ringvereine" label="Ringvereine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792361" start="32066" end="32077" title="lust murder" label="lust murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="32211" end="32220" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q127021" start="32259" end="32260" title="M (1931 film)" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q57592" start="33112" end="33129" title="Magnus Hirschfeld" label="Magnus Hirschfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q73974" start="33137" end="33158" title="Institut für Sexualwissenschaft" label="Institute of Sexology"/>
<link wikidata="Q26392" start="33285" end="33304" title="underground culture" label="underground culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q70764" start="33368" end="33380" title="Anita Berber" label="Anita Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q153104" start="33557" end="33565" title="Otto Dix" label="Otto Dix"/>
<link wikidata="Q77087" start="33605" end="33615" title="Klaus Mann" label="Klaus Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519948" start="33993" end="34017" title="Aftermath of World War I" label="Aftermath of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q688510" start="34020" end="34037" title="Cinema of Germany" label="Cinema of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="34040" end="34055" title="Critical theory" label="Critical Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q113396392" start="34058" end="34070" title="Cuba de ayer" label="Cuba de ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979615" start="34073" end="34091" title="Culture of Germany" label="Culture of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="34094" end="34098" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q156460" start="34101" end="34115" title="Degenerate art" label="Degenerate art"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="34118" end="34131" title="Expressionism" label="Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="34134" end="34142" title="Futurism (art)" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="34145" end="34152" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="34155" end="34175" title="German Expressionism" label="German Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q313768" start="34178" end="34193" title="Gleichschaltung" label="Gleichschaltung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569966" start="34196" end="34252" title="Glitter and Doom" label="Glitter and Doom - Exhibit of Art in the Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571891" start="34255" end="34286" title="Glossary of the Weimar Republic" label="Glossary of the Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q702442" start="34289" end="34304" title="Golden Twenties" label="Golden Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q122131" start="34307" end="34325" title="History of Germany" label="History of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="34328" end="34334" title="Kultur" label="Kultur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401860" start="34337" end="34362" title="Literature of World War I" label="Literature of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q234105" start="34365" end="34380" title="Lost Generation" label="Lost Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="34383" end="34392" title="Modernism" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="34395" end="34407" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q160218" start="34410" end="34425" title="New Objectivity" label="New Objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234542" start="34428" end="34454" title="Post-World War I recession" label="Post-World War I recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233539" start="34457" end="34475" title="Post-expressionism" label="Post-expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300277" start="34478" end="34499" title="Reactionary modernism" label="Reactionary modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="34502" end="34518" title="Roaring Twenties" label="Roaring Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="34521" end="34531" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806421" start="34534" end="34549" title="Weimar Timeline" label="Weimar Timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q38965" start="34552" end="34562" title="Weimaraner" label="Weimaraner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517074" start="34659" end="34670" title="Gail Finney" label="Gail Finney"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33689" wikidata="Q937631" url="?curid=33689" title="Waterlooville">
<text>Waterlooville is a town in the Borough of Havant in Hampshire, England, approximately north northeast of Portsmouth. It is the largest town in the borough. The town had a population of 64,350 in the 2011 Census. It is surrounded by Purbrook, Blendworth, Cowplain, Lovedean, Clanfield, Catherington, Crookhorn, Denmead, Hambledon, Horndean and Widley. It forms part of the South Hampshire conurbation. The town formed around the old A3 London to Portsmouth road.

== History ==

It is reputed that the name derived from a pub that stood at the centre of the town, then known as Wait Lane End, where the stage-coach horses waited to change places with the team that pulled the coach up and over Portsdown Hill. The pub had been named &quot;Heroes of Waterloo&quot; because, on its opening day in 1815, soldiers who had just disembarked at Portsmouth, returning from the Battle of Waterloo, decided to stop there and celebrate their victory. According to local legend, many of them settled there. The pub was thereafter renamed in their honour and the area around the pub became known as Waterloo. In order to differentiate the town from other places with the same name, it became known as Waterlooville at a later date. The town was known as Waterloo parish at the time of the 1911 Census.

In June 2015 Waterlooville town celebrated its first 200 years, its origins and history in a festival called Waterlooville 200.

The town centre was closed to traffic in 1985 when a bypass was constructed to take traffic away from the main shopping area. The bypass, initially anonymous, was named Maurepas Way sometime after the two towns were twinned in 1995. An underpass was constructed for pedestrians walking up along the Hambledon road. Between 1982 and 1983 the old road was then fully converted to a pedestrian precinct. The precinct had a fountain and raised area at the northern end, near the &quot;Heroes&quot; pub; however, regular vandalism of the fountain soon resulted in its removal. In August 2012 the northern part of the precinct received a £700,000 renovation and repaving, increasing the area available to the weekly Friday market.

GEC Marconi built a site at Waterlooville for their Underwater Systems Division in the early 1980s, for the Stingray anti-submarine torpedo. A peace camp was set up near the construction site. After completion of the GEC building, a free music festival was held at Old Park Farm in Waterlooville called Torpedo Town. A second Torpedo Town festival was held in August 1987 at Bramdean Common near Winchester.

Near the town centre is St George&#x27;s Church, rebuilt in 1968–70 around the core of the original (1830) church. Waterlooville Baptist Church was built in 1967 in a Modernist style to replace the original chapel of 1884–85 in the town centre. During the 1950s and 1960s the surrounding area saw extensive growth in housing, when large suburban public and private housing estates were constructed. This resulted in the original Victorian church failing to cope with the population growth. Plans for a new church were started and in 1970 the new church was built on the site of the old church. Parts of the old church were retained. In July 2011 the town saw the consecration of its first Roman Catholic Church.

== Climate ==
Waterlooville has a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Cfb&quot;), similar to much of southern Britain. However, the climate in the area does have mild differences between highs and lows. with chilly winters and warm summers. In January and February average nighttime minimum temperatures drop to about , whereas in July and August average daytime maximum temperatures are around . Although is common in July and August, the area rarely achieves above . In fact, in the last century there have only been two days in June 1976, one day in August 1990 and one day in August 2003 where temperatures reached over . The highest recorded temperature was around on 10 August 2003. In contrast, the lowest recorded temperature was on 12 January 1987, when the temperature dipped to . 

During winter, Waterlooville tends to have more frost than nearby Portsmouth as it has fewer influences from the sea and is more exposed to northerly winds. However, highs in the summer are slightly warmer than Portsmouth because there is less influence of cool breezes from the English Channel as the town is more inland. Sunshine averages are typical of that across the Portsmouth area, Isle of Wight and the south-west Sussex coast of around 1800 – 2100 hours of sunshine a year, where southwesterly winds keep the sunshine hours up between late March and mid September; the town is also protected by the South Downs.

== Transport ==
The main shopping precinct is served by First Hampshire &amp; Dorset bus routes 7, 8, The X9 route has been discontinued and replaced by the D1 and D2 service which runs from Hambledon and Denmead and goes to Waterlooville town centre, and Stagecoach South services 37 and 39. The A3 Bus Corridor priority route (constructed between 2003 and 2007) serves the town. , the shopping precinct is closed to all road traffic other than buses.

The nearest train station is located in Bedhampton and is on the main train route between London and Portsmouth. For a time, South Western Railway provided a direct bus link to Petersfield railway station via Horndean, enabling quick access to fast London-bound trains, but now the link to Petersfield is Stagecoach service 37 via Clanfield. Havant railway station is served by Stagecoach service 39, and stations in Portsmouth by First services 7 and 8. For westbound trains the station at Cosham, served by the local bus services, is on the line between Portsmouth and Fareham, with regular trains to Southampton and Cardiff.

==Media==
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC South and ITV Meridian. Television signals are received from the Rowridge TV transmitter. 

Local radio stations are BBC Radio Solent on 96.1 FM, Heart South on 97.5 FM, Capital South on 103.2 FM, Easy Radio South Coast on 107.4 FM, Nation Radio South Coast on 106.0 FM, Radio Victory on 95.8 FM, and The Flash, a community based radio station which broadcast on DAB. 

The town is served by the local newspaper, The News. 

==Sport==
Waterlooville has a swimming pool which is used by Havant and Waterlooville Swimming Club.

Waterlooville Cricket Club plays its home games at Jubilee Park. It runs three Saturday sides and has a youth set-up. The 1st XI currently competes in the Southern Premier Cricket League Division 2 with other sides spread across the Hampshire League spectrum.

There is a bowls club with a carpet green in Jubilee Park.

Havant &amp; Waterlooville football club, which plays in Havant, was formed in 1998 after a merger between Havant Town and Waterlooville.

== Governance ==
The area is mainly unparished, therefore Waterlooville does not have its own parish council or town council. However, part of Waterlooville is in the district of Winchester City Council, which is parished, and therefore includes the Parish of Newlands. The first tier of local government is the Borough of Havant, with councillors elected for its Waterloo, Hart Plain, Cowplain, and Stakes wards. The upper tier is Hampshire County Council; the town centre is combined with Stakes North as the single-councillor division of Waterlooville and Stakes North, while another division covers Cowplain and Hart Plain.

For representation to the House of Commons, Waterlooville falls within the Fareham and Waterlooville constituency.

Waterloo was formerly an extra-parochial chapelry, in 1858 Waterloo became a separate civil parish, on 1 April 1932 the parish was abolished and merged with Havant, part also went to from Southwick and Widley. In 1931 the parish had a population of 1250.

== Education ==

Waterlooville contains ten primary schools: Morelands Primary School, Meadowlands Junior and Infants School,
Padnell Infants and Junior School, Hart Plain Infants and Junior schools, Springwood Infant School (formerly Stakes Hill Infant School), Springwood Junior School (formerly Hulbert Junior School), Mill Hill Primary School (formerly Waite End Infants and Waite End Junior School and Waite End Primary School), Purbrook Infant and Junior Schools, Queens Inclosure Primary and St. Peter&#x27;s Catholic Primary.

Two new two form entry primary schools are to be built in the new housing development area situated off the Maurepas Roundabout. The first of these is scheduled to open in September 2014 with a possible Year R only intake depending on the number of children needing places.

It contains five secondary schools: Horndean Technology College, The Cowplain School, Oaklands Catholic School, Purbrook Park School and Crookhorn College.

There are two colleges, Oaklands Catholic Sixth Form College and South Downs College.

==Notable residents==
* Christopher Hitchens (1949–2011), writer, born in Waterlooville
* Lewis Ganson (1913–1980), one of the most prolific writers in magic
* Michael Giles, drummer for King Crimson, born in Waterlooville
* James Edward Ignatius Masterson (1862–1935), awarded the Victoria Cross in 1900, retired to, and died in Waterlooville
* General Sir Charles James Napier (1782–1853), retired to, and died in Waterlooville; his former house is now part of Oaklands School
* Beatrice Shilling (1909–1990), aeronautical engineer, born in Waterlooville
* Rob Styles, retired FIFA and FA Premier League Referee
* Simon Whitlock, darts player, born in Cessnock, Australia
* Mason Mount, Premier League footballer, born in Portsmouth, attended Purbrook Park School

==See also==
*List of places of worship in the Borough of Havant

== References ==
== External links ==

*Waterlooville celebrates its first 200 years (2015)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q937631" start="0" end="13" title="Waterlooville" label="Waterlooville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946344" start="31" end="48" title="Borough of Havant" label="Borough of Havant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="52" end="61" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="105" end="115" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q656706" start="232" end="240" title="Purbrook" label="Purbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926035" start="242" end="252" title="Blendworth" label="Blendworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179814" start="254" end="262" title="Cowplain" label="Cowplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898639" start="264" end="272" title="Lovedean" label="Lovedean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443240" start="274" end="283" title="Clanfield, Hampshire" label="Clanfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053012" start="285" end="297" title="Catherington" label="Catherington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="299" end="308" title="Crookhorn" label="Crookhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779993" start="310" end="317" title="Denmead" label="Denmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150285" start="319" end="328" title="Hambledon, Hampshire" label="Hambledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916481" start="330" end="338" title="Horndean" label="Horndean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998733" start="343" end="349" title="Widley" label="Widley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567412" start="372" end="387" title="South Hampshire" label="South Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577223" start="432" end="434" title="A3 road" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="521" end="524" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="602" end="613" title="stage-coach" label="stage-coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232403" start="693" end="707" title="Portsdown Hill" label="Portsdown Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="868" end="886" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189009" start="1135" end="1166" title="Waterloo (disambiguation)" label="other places with the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757785" start="2144" end="2155" title="GEC Marconi" label="GEC Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q384792" start="2252" end="2260" title="Sting Ray (torpedo)" label="Stingray"/>
<link wikidata="Q15204153" start="2519" end="2534" title="Bramdean Common" label="Bramdean Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="2540" end="2550" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q85814626" start="2668" end="2696" title="Waterlooville Baptist Church" label="Waterlooville Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="2720" end="2735" title="Modernist style" label="Modernist style"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="3300" end="3309" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="3310" end="3325" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3327" end="3356" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="4134" end="4139" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="4365" end="4380" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="4458" end="4468" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="4475" end="4488" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q23287" start="4503" end="4514" title="west Sussex" label="west Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q584108" start="4694" end="4705" title="South Downs" label="South Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453067" start="4764" end="4792" title="First Hampshire &amp;amp; Dorset" label="First Hampshire &amp;amp; Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596863" start="4964" end="4980" title="Stagecoach South" label="Stagecoach South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816808" start="5202" end="5212" title="Bedhampton railway station" label="Bedhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="5263" end="5273" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q938861" start="5287" end="5308" title="South West Trains" label="South Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322998" start="5339" end="5366" title="Petersfield railway station" label="Petersfield railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136408" start="5504" end="5526" title="Havant railway station" label="Havant railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172759" start="5653" end="5659" title="Cosham railway station" label="Cosham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017943" start="5733" end="5740" title="Fareham" label="Fareham"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="5765" end="5776" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="5781" end="5788" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834969" start="5854" end="5863" title="BBC South" label="BBC South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975073" start="5868" end="5880" title="ITV Meridian" label="ITV Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372270" start="5923" end="5931" title="Rowridge transmitting station" label="Rowridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834932" start="5975" end="5991" title="BBC Radio Solent" label="BBC Radio Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066884" start="6004" end="6015" title="Heart South" label="Heart South"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063605" start="6028" end="6041" title="Capital South" label="Capital South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719954" start="6055" end="6077" title="Easy Radio South Coast" label="Easy Radio South Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546659" start="6091" end="6115" title="Nation Radio South Coast" label="Nation Radio South Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281108" start="6129" end="6142" title="Radio Victory" label="Radio Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q815830" start="6221" end="6224" title="Digital Audio Broadcasting" label="DAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753907" start="6271" end="6279" title="The News (Portsmouth)" label="The News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028870" start="6706" end="6732" title="Havant &amp;amp; Waterlooville" label="Havant &amp;amp; Waterlooville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="6733" end="6741" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683137" start="6813" end="6824" title="Havant Town F.C." label="Havant Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974318" start="6829" end="6842" title="Waterlooville F.C." label="Waterlooville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946344" start="7157" end="7174" title="Borough of Havant" label="Borough of Havant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286631" start="7219" end="7229" title="Hart Plain" label="Hart Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646045" start="7277" end="7301" title="Hampshire County Council" label="Hampshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="7500" end="7516" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q118874826" start="7549" end="7574" title="Fareham and Waterlooville" label="Fareham and Waterlooville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="7676" end="7688" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20968329" start="7778" end="7798" title="Southwick and Widley" label="Southwick and Widley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904205" start="8692" end="8719" title="Horndean Technology College" label="Horndean Technology College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179813" start="8721" end="8740" title="The Cowplain School" label="The Cowplain School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074076" start="8742" end="8766" title="Oaklands Catholic School" label="Oaklands Catholic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260898" start="8768" end="8788" title="Purbrook Park School" label="Purbrook Park School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16890698" start="8793" end="8810" title="Crookhorn College" label="Crookhorn College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567075" start="8878" end="8897" title="South Downs College" label="South Downs College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="8924" end="8944" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536575" start="8990" end="9002" title="Lewis Ganson" label="Lewis Ganson"/>
<link wikidata="Q449502" start="9060" end="9073" title="Michael Giles" label="Michael Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="9087" end="9099" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133350" start="9125" end="9156" title="James Edward Ignatius Masterson" label="James Edward Ignatius Masterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="9182" end="9196" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q721083" start="9246" end="9278" title="Charles James Napier" label="General Sir Charles James Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877196" start="9381" end="9398" title="Beatrice Shilling" label="Beatrice Shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583627" start="9459" end="9469" title="Rob Styles" label="Rob Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q952636" start="9516" end="9530" title="Simon Whitlock" label="Simon Whitlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q606357" start="9554" end="9562" title="Cessnock, New South Wales" label="Cessnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38000669" start="9576" end="9587" title="Mason Mount" label="Mason Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q85780258" start="9681" end="9731" title="List of places of worship in the Borough of Havant" label="List of places of worship in the Borough of Havant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33691" wikidata="Q193846" url="?curid=33691" title="Wave equation">
<text>The wave equation is a second-order linear partial differential equation for the description of waves or standing wave fields such as mechanical waves (e.g. water waves, sound waves and seismic waves) or electromagnetic waves (including light waves). It arises in fields like acoustics, electromagnetism, and fluid dynamics. 

This article focuses on waves in classical physics. Quantum physics uses an operator-based wave equation often as a relativistic wave equation.

== Introduction ==
The wave equation is a hyperbolic partial differential equation describing waves, including traveling and standing waves; the latter can be considered as linear superpositions of waves traveling in opposite directions. This article mostly focuses on the scalar wave equation describing waves in scalars by scalar functions of a time variable (a variable representing time) and one or more spatial variables (variables representing a position in a space under discussion). At the same time, there are vector wave equations describing waves in vectors such as waves for an electrical field, magnetic field, and magnetic vector potential and elastic waves. By comparison with vector wave equations, the scalar wave equation can be seen as a special case of the vector wave equations; in the Cartesian coordinate system, the scalar wave equation is the equation to be satisfied by each component (for each coordinate axis, such as the &quot;x&quot; component for the &quot;x&quot; axis) of a vector wave without sources of waves in the considered domain (i.e., space and time). For example, in the Cartesian coordinate system, for formula_1 as the representation of an electric vector field wave formula_2 in the absence of wave sources, each coordinate axis component formula_3 (&quot;i&quot; = &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, &quot;z&quot;) must satisfy the scalar wave equation. Other scalar wave equation solutions are for physical quantities in scalars such as pressure in a liquid or gas, or the displacement along some specific direction of particles of a vibrating solid away from their resting (equilibrium) positions.

The scalar wave equation is
where
* is a fixed non-negative real coefficient representing the propagation speed of the wave
* is a scalar field representing the displacement or, more generally, the conserved quantity (e.g. pressure or density)
* , and are the three spatial coordinates and being the time coordinate.

The equation states that, at any given point, the second derivative of formula_4 with respect to time is proportional to the sum of the second derivatives of formula_4 with respect to space, with the constant of proportionality being the square of the speed of the wave.

Using notations from vector calculus, the wave equation can be written compactly as
formula_6
or
formula_7 
where the double subscript denotes the second-order partial derivative with respect to time, formula_8 is the Laplace operator and formula_9 the d&#x27;Alembert operator, defined as:
formula_10

A solution to this (two-way) wave equation can be quite complicated. Still, it can be analyzed as a linear combination of simple solutions that are sinusoidal plane waves with various directions of propagation and wavelengths but all with the same propagation speed . This analysis is possible because the wave equation is linear and homogeneous, so that any multiple of a solution is also a solution, and the sum of any two solutions is again a solution. This property is called the superposition principle in physics.

The wave equation alone does not specify a physical solution; a unique solution is usually obtained by setting a problem with further conditions, such as initial conditions, which prescribe the amplitude and phase of the wave. Another important class of problems occurs in enclosed spaces specified by boundary conditions, for which the solutions represent standing waves, or harmonics, analogous to the harmonics of musical instruments.

==Wave equation in one space dimension==

The wave equation in one spatial dimension can be written as follows:
formula_11This equation is typically described as having only one spatial dimension , because the only other independent variable is the time .

===Derivation===

The wave equation in one space dimension can be derived in a variety of different physical settings. Most famously, it can be derived for the case of a string vibrating in a two-dimensional plane, with each of its elements being pulled in opposite directions by the force of tension.

Another physical setting for derivation of the wave equation in one space dimension uses Hooke&#x27;s law. In the theory of elasticity, Hooke&#x27;s law is an approximation for certain materials, stating that the amount by which a material body is deformed (the strain) is linearly related to the force causing the deformation (the stress).

====Hooke&#x27;s law====
The wave equation in the one-dimensional case can be derived from Hooke&#x27;s law in the following way: imagine an array of little weights of mass interconnected with massless springs of length . The springs have a spring constant of :

Here the dependent variable measures the distance from the equilibrium of the mass situated at , so that essentially measures the magnitude of a disturbance (i.e. strain) that is traveling in an elastic material. The resulting force exerted on the mass at the location is:
formula_12

By equating the latter equation with

formula_13

the equation of motion for the weight at the location is obtained:
formula_14
If the array of weights consists of weights spaced evenly over the length of total mass , and the total spring constant of the array , we can write the above equation as

formula_15

Taking the limit and assuming smoothness, one gets
formula_16
which is from the definition of a second derivative. is the square of the propagation speed in this particular case.

====Stress pulse in a bar====
In the case of a stress pulse propagating longitudinally through a bar, the bar acts much like an infinite number of springs in series and can be taken as an extension of the equation derived for Hooke&#x27;s law. A uniform bar, i.e. of constant cross-section, made from a linear elastic material has a stiffness given by
formula_17
where is the cross-sectional area, and is the Young&#x27;s modulus of the material. The wave equation becomes
formula_18

 is equal to the volume of the bar, and therefore
formula_19
where is the density of the material. The wave equation reduces to
formula_20

The speed of a stress wave in a bar is therefore formula_21.

===General solution===

==== Algebraic approach ====

For the one-dimensional wave equation a relatively simple general solution may be found. Defining new variables
formula_22
changes the wave equation into
formula_23
which leads to the general solution
formula_24

In other words, the solution is the sum of a right-traveling function and a left-traveling function . &quot;Traveling&quot; means that the shape of these individual arbitrary functions with respect to stays constant, however, the functions are translated left and right with time at the speed . This was derived by Jean le Rond d&#x27;Alembert.

Another way to arrive at this result is to factor the wave equation using two first-order differential operators: 
formula_25
Then, for our original equation, we can define
formula_26
and find that we must have
formula_27

This advection equation can be solved by interpreting it as telling us that the directional derivative of in the direction is 0. This means that the value of is constant on characteristic lines of the form , and thus that must depend only on , that is, have the form . Then, to solve the first (inhomogenous) equation relating to , we can note that its homogenous solution must be a function of the form , by logic similar to the above. Guessing a particular solution of the form , we find that

formula_28

Expanding out the left side, rearranging terms, then using the change of variables simplifies the equation to

formula_29

This means we can find a particular solution of the desired form by integration. Thus, we have again shown that obeys .

For an initial-value problem, the arbitrary functions and can be determined to satisfy initial conditions:
formula_30formula_31

The result is d&#x27;Alembert&#x27;s formula:
formula_32

In the classical sense, if , and , then . However, the waveforms and may also be generalized functions, such as the delta-function. In that case, the solution may be interpreted as an impulse that travels to the right or the left.

The basic wave equation is a linear differential equation, and so it will adhere to the superposition principle. This means that the net displacement caused by two or more waves is the sum of the displacements which would have been caused by each wave individually. In addition, the behavior of a wave can be analyzed by breaking up the wave into components, e.g. the Fourier transform breaks up a wave into sinusoidal components.

==== Plane-wave eigenmodes ====

Another way to solve the one-dimensional wave equation is to first analyze its frequency eigenmodes. A so-called eigenmode is a solution that oscillates in time with a well-defined &quot;constant&quot; angular frequency , so that the temporal part of the wave function takes the form , and the amplitude is a function of the spatial variable , giving a separation of variables for the wave function:
formula_33

This produces an ordinary differential equation for the spatial part :
formula_34

Therefore,
formula_35
which is precisely an eigenvalue equation for , hence the name eigenmode. Known as the Helmholtz equation, it has the well-known plane-wave solutions
formula_36
with wave number .

The total wave function for this eigenmode is then the linear combination
formula_37
where complex numbers , depend in general on any initial and boundary conditions of the problem.

Eigenmodes are useful in constructing a full solution to the wave equation, because each of them evolves in time trivially with the phase factor formula_38 so that a full solution can be decomposed into an eigenmode expansion:
formula_39
or in terms of the plane waves,
formula_40
which is exactly in the same form as in the algebraic approach. Functions are known as the Fourier component and are determined by initial and boundary conditions. This is a so-called frequency-domain method, alternative to direct time-domain propagations, such as FDTD method, of the wave packet , which is complete for representing waves in absence of time dilations. Completeness of the Fourier expansion for representing waves in the presence of time dilations has been challenged by chirp wave solutions allowing for time variation of . The chirp wave solutions seem particularly implied by very large but previously inexplicable radar residuals in the flyby anomaly and differ from the sinusoidal solutions in being receivable at any distance only at proportionally shifted frequencies and time dilations, corresponding to past chirp states of the source.

==Vectorial wave equation in three space dimensions==
The vectorial wave equation (from which the scalar wave equation can be directly derived) can be obtained by applying a force equilibrium to an infinitesimal volume element. If the medium has a modulus of elasticity formula_41 that is homogeneous (i.e. independent of formula_42) within the volume element, then its stress tensor is given by formula_43, for a vectorial elastic deflection formula_44. The local equilibrium of:
# the tension force formula_45 due to deflection formula_46, and
# the inertial force formula_47 caused by the local acceleration formula_48 
can be written as formula_49

By merging density formula_50 and elasticity module formula_51 the sound velocity formula_52 results (material law). After insertion, follows the well-known governing wave equation for a homogeneous medium:
formula_53
(Note: Instead of vectorial formula_54 only scalar formula_55 can be used, i.e. waves are travelling only along the formula_56 axis, and the scalar wave equation follows as formula_57.)

The above vectorial partial differential equation of the 2nd order delivers two mutually independent solutions. From the quadratic velocity term formula_58 can be seen that there are two waves travelling in opposite directions formula_59 and formula_60 are possible, hence results the designation “two-way wave equation”.
It can be shown for plane longitudinal wave propagation that the synthesis of two one-way wave equations leads to a general two-way wave equation. For formula_61 special two-wave equation with the d&#x27;Alembert operator results: 
formula_62
For formula_63 this simplifies to
formula_64
Therefore, the vectorial 1st-order one-way wave equation with waves travelling in a pre-defined propagation direction formula_65 results as
formula_66

==Scalar wave equation in three space dimensions==
A solution of the initial-value problem for the wave equation in three space dimensions can be obtained from the corresponding solution for a spherical wave. The result can then be also used to obtain the same solution in two space dimensions.

===Spherical waves===
To obtain a solution with constant frequencies, apply the Fourier transform
formula_67
which transforms the wave equation into an elliptic partial differential equation of the form:
formula_68

This is the Helmholtz equation and can be solved using separation of variables. In spherical coordinates this leads to a separation of the radial and angular variables, writing the solution as:
formula_69
The angular part of the solution take the form of spherical harmonics and the radial function satisfies:
formula_70
independent of formula_71, with formula_72. Substituting
formula_73
transforms the equation into
formula_74
which is the Bessel equation.

====Example====
Consider the case . Then there is no angular dependence and the amplitude depends only on the radial distance, i.e., . In this case, the wave equation reduces toformula_75
or
formula_76

This equation can be rewritten as
formula_77
where the quantity satisfies the one-dimensional wave equation. Therefore, there are solutions in the formformula_78
where and are general solutions to the one-dimensional wave equation and can be interpreted as respectively an outgoing and incoming spherical waves. The outgoing wave can be generated by a point source, and they make possible sharp signals whose form is altered only by a decrease in amplitude as increases (see an illustration of a spherical wave on the top right). Such waves exist only in cases of space with odd dimensions.

For physical examples of solutions to the 3D wave equation that possess angular dependence, see dipole radiation.

====Monochromatic spherical wave====

Although the word &quot;monochromatic&quot; is not exactly accurate, since it refers to light or electromagnetic radiation with well-defined frequency, the spirit is to discover the eigenmode of the wave equation in three dimensions. Following the derivation in the previous section on plane-wave eigenmodes, if we again restrict our solutions to spherical waves that oscillate in time with well-defined &quot;constant&quot; angular frequency , then the transformed function has simply plane-wave solutions:formula_79
or
formula_80

From this we can observe that the peak intensity of the spherical-wave oscillation, characterized as the squared wave amplitude
formula_81The integral can be solved by analytically continuing the Poisson kernel, givingformula_82where formula_83 is half the surface area of a formula_84-dimensional hypersphere.

=== Solutions in particular dimensions ===

We can relate the Green&#x27;s function in formula_85 dimensions to the Green&#x27;s function in formula_86 dimensions.

==== Lowering dimensions ====
Given a function formula_87 and a solution formula_88 of a differential equation in formula_89 dimensions, we can trivially extend it to formula_90 dimensions by setting the additional formula_91 dimensions to be constant:
formula_92Since the Green&#x27;s function is constructed from formula_93 and formula_4, the Green&#x27;s function in formula_90 dimensions integrates to the Green&#x27;s function in formula_89 dimensions:
formula_97

==== Raising dimensions ====
The Green&#x27;s function in formula_85 dimensions can be related to the Green&#x27;s function in formula_99 dimensions. By spherical symmetry,
formula_100
Integrating in polar coordinates,
formula_101
where in the last equality we made the change of variables formula_102. Thus, we obtain the recurrence relationformula_103

=== Solutions in &quot;D = 1, 2, 3&quot; ===
When formula_104, the integrand in the Fourier transform is the sinc functionformula_105
where formula_106 is the sign function and formula_107 is the unit step function. One solution is the forward solution, the other is the backward solution.

The dimension can be raised to give the formula_108 caseformula_109and similarly for the backward solution. This can be integrated down by one dimension to give the formula_110 caseformula_111

=== Wavefronts and wakes ===
In formula_104 case, the Green&#x27;s function solution is the sum of two wavefronts formula_113 moving in opposite directions.

In odd dimensions, the forward solution is nonzero only at formula_114. As the dimensions increase, the shape of wavefront becomes increasingly complex, involving higher derivatives of the Dirac delta function. For example,formula_115where formula_116, and the wave speed formula_117 is restored.

In even dimensions, the forward solution is nonzero in formula_118, the entire region behind the wavefront becomes nonzero, called a wake. The wake has equation:formula_119The wavefront itself also involves increasingly higher derivatives of the Dirac delta function.

This means that a general Huygens&#x27; principle – the wave displacement at a point formula_120 in spacetime depends only on the state at points on characteristic rays passing formula_120 – only holds in odd dimensions. A physical interpretation is that signals transmitted by waves remain undistorted in odd dimensions, but distorted in even dimensions. 

Hadamard&#x27;s conjecture states that this generalized Huygens&#x27; principle still holds in all odd dimensions even when the coefficients in the wave equation are no longer constant. It is not strictly correct, but it is correct for certain families of coefficients

==Problems with boundaries==

===One space dimension===

==== Reflection and transmission at the boundary of two media ====
For an incident wave traveling from one medium (where the wave speed is ) to another medium (where the wave speed is ), one part of the wave will transmit into the second medium, while another part reflects back into the other direction and stays in the first medium. The amplitude of the transmitted wave and the reflected wave can be calculated by using the continuity condition at the boundary.

Consider the component of the incident wave with an angular frequency of , which has the waveform
formula_122
At , the incident reaches the boundary between the two media at . Therefore, the corresponding reflected wave and the transmitted wave will have the waveforms
formula_123
The continuity condition at the boundary is
formula_124
This gives the equations
formula_125
and we have the reflectivity and transmissivity
formula_126
When , the reflected wave has a reflection phase change of 180°, since . The energy conservation can be verified by
formula_127
The above discussion holds true for any component, regardless of its angular frequency of .

The limiting case of corresponds to a &quot;fixed end&quot; that does not move, whereas the limiting case of corresponds to a &quot;free end&quot;.

==== The Sturm–Liouville formulation ====
A flexible string that is stretched between two points and satisfies the wave equation for and . On the boundary points, may satisfy a variety of boundary conditions. A general form that is appropriate for applications is

formula_128

where and are non-negative. The case where is required to vanish at an endpoint (i.e. &quot;fixed end&quot;) is the limit of this condition when the respective or approaches infinity. The method of separation of variables consists in looking for solutions of this problem in the special form
formula_129

A consequence is that
formula_130

The eigenvalue must be determined so that there is a non-trivial solution of the boundary-value problem
formula_131

This is a special case of the general problem of Sturm–Liouville theory. If and are positive, the eigenvalues are all positive, and the solutions are trigonometric functions. A solution that satisfies square-integrable initial conditions for and can be obtained from expansion of these functions in the appropriate trigonometric series.

===Several space dimensions===

The one-dimensional initial-boundary value theory may be extended to an arbitrary number of space dimensions. Consider a domain in -dimensional space, with boundary . Then the wave equation is to be satisfied if is in , and . On the boundary of , the solution shall satisfy

formula_132

where is the unit outward normal to , and is a non-negative function defined on . The case where vanishes on is a limiting case for approaching infinity. The initial conditions are

formula_133

where and are defined in . This problem may be solved by expanding and in the eigenfunctions of the Laplacian in , which satisfy the boundary conditions. Thus the eigenfunction satisfies

formula_134

in , and

formula_135

on .

In the case of two space dimensions, the eigenfunctions may be interpreted as the modes of vibration of a drumhead stretched over the boundary . If is a circle, then these eigenfunctions have an angular component that is a trigonometric function of the polar angle , multiplied by a Bessel function (of integer order) of the radial component. Further details are in Helmholtz equation.

If the boundary is a sphere in three space dimensions, the angular components of the eigenfunctions are spherical harmonics, and the radial components are Bessel functions of half-integer order.

==Inhomogeneous wave equation in one dimension==
The inhomogeneous wave equation in one dimension is
formula_136
with initial conditions
formula_30
formula_31

The function is often called the source function because in practice it describes the effects of the sources of waves on the medium carrying them. Physical examples of source functions include the force driving a wave on a string, or the charge or current density in the Lorenz gauge of electromagnetism.

One method to solve the initial-value problem (with the initial values as posed above) is to take advantage of a special property of the wave equation in an odd number of space dimensions, namely that its solutions respect causality. That is, for any point , the value of depends only on the values of and and the values of the function between and . This can be seen in d&#x27;Alembert&#x27;s formula, stated above, where these quantities are the only ones that show up in it. Physically, if the maximum propagation speed is , then no part of the wave that cannot propagate to a given point by a given time can affect the amplitude at the same point and time.

In terms of finding a solution, this causality property means that for any given point on the line being considered, the only area that needs to be considered is the area encompassing all the points that could causally affect the point being considered. Denote the area that causally affects point as . Suppose we integrate the inhomogeneous wave equation over this region:
formula_139

To simplify this greatly, we can use Green&#x27;s theorem to simplify the left side to get the following:
formula_140

The left side is now the sum of three line integrals along the bounds of the causality region. These turn out to be fairly easy to compute:
formula_141

In the above, the term to be integrated with respect to time disappears because the time interval involved is zero, thus .

For the other two sides of the region, it is worth noting that is a constant, namely , where the sign is chosen appropriately. Using this, we can get the relation , again choosing the right sign:
formula_142

And similarly for the final boundary segment:
formula_143

Adding the three results together and putting them back in the original integral gives
formula_144

Solving for , we arrive at
formula_145

In the last equation of the sequence, the bounds of the integral over the source function have been made explicit. Looking at this solution, which is valid for all choices compatible with the wave equation, it is clear that the first two terms are simply d&#x27;Alembert&#x27;s formula, as stated above as the solution of the homogeneous wave equation in one dimension. The difference is in the third term, the integral over the source.

==Further generalizations ==

===Elastic waves===

The elastic wave equation (also known as the Navier–Cauchy equation) in three dimensions describes the propagation of waves in an isotropic homogeneous elastic medium. Most solid materials are elastic, so this equation describes such phenomena as seismic waves in the Earth and ultrasonic waves used to detect flaws in materials. While linear, this equation has a more complex form than the equations given above, as it must account for both longitudinal and transverse motion:
formula_146
where:
: and are the so-called Lamé parameters describing the elastic properties of the medium,
: is the density, 
: is the source function (driving force), 
: is the displacement vector.

By using , the elastic wave equation can be rewritten into the more common form of the Navier–Cauchy equation.

Note that in the elastic wave equation, both force and displacement are vector quantities. Thus, this equation is sometimes known as the vector wave equation.
As an aid to understanding, the reader will observe that if and are set to zero, this becomes (effectively) Maxwell&#x27;s equation for the propagation of the electric field , which has only transverse waves.

===Dispersion relation===

In dispersive wave phenomena, the speed of wave propagation varies with the wavelength of the wave, which is reflected by a dispersion relation

formula_147

where is the angular frequency, and is the wavevector describing plane-wave solutions. For light waves, the dispersion relation is , but in general, the constant speed gets replaced by a variable phase velocity:

formula_148

==See also==

*Acoustic attenuation
*Acoustic wave equation
*Bateman transform
*Electromagnetic wave equation
*Helmholtz equation
*Inhomogeneous electromagnetic wave equation
*Laplace operator
*Mathematics of oscillation
*Maxwell&#x27;s equations
*Schrödinger equation
*Standing wave
*Vibrations of a circular membrane
*Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory
==Notes==
==References==
* Flint, H.T. (1929) &quot;Wave Mechanics&quot; Methuen &amp; Co. Ltd. London.
* 
* R. Courant, D. Hilbert, &quot;Methods of Mathematical Physics, vol II&quot;. Interscience (Wiley) New York, 1962.
* &quot;Linear Wave Equations&quot;, &quot;EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.&quot;
* &quot;Nonlinear Wave Equations&quot;, &quot;EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.&quot;
* William C. Lane, &quot; The Wave Equation and Its Solutions&quot;, &quot;Project PHYSNET&quot;.

== External links ==
* Nonlinear Wave Equations by Stephen Wolfram and Rob Knapp, Nonlinear Wave Equation Explorer by Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
* Mathematical aspects of wave equations are discussed on the Dispersive PDE Wiki .
* Graham W Griffiths and William E. Schiesser (2009). Linear and nonlinear waves. Scholarpedia, 4(7):4308. doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.4308</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193846" start="4" end="17" title="Wave equation" label="wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="43" end="72" title="partial differential equation" label="partial differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="96" end="100" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="105" end="118" title="standing wave" label="standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132631" start="134" end="150" title="mechanical waves" label="mechanical waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="157" end="162" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="170" end="181" title="sound waves" label="sound waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q186167" start="186" end="199" title="seismic waves" label="seismic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="204" end="225" title="Electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="237" end="242" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="276" end="285" title="acoustics" label="acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="287" end="303" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="309" end="323" title="fluid dynamics" label="fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81745" start="360" end="377" title="classical physics" label="classical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="418" end="431" title="Schrodinger equation" label="wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310838" start="443" end="469" title="relativistic wave equation" label="relativistic wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627459" start="514" end="554" title="hyperbolic partial differential equation" label="hyperbolic partial differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="597" end="611" title="standing waves" label="standing waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="645" end="666" title="Superposition principle" label="linear superpositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q193460" start="786" end="793" title="Scalar field" label="scalars"/>
<link wikidata="Q186247" start="1033" end="1040" title="Vector field" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033855" start="1049" end="1125" title="Inhomogeneous electromagnetic wave equation" label="waves for an electrical field, magnetic field, and magnetic vector potential"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1130" end="1143" title="#Elastic waves" label="elastic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="1279" end="1306" title="Cartesian coordinate system" label="Cartesian coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q107715" start="1912" end="1931" title="Physical quantity" label="physical quantities"/>
<link wikidata="Q193460" start="1935" end="1942" title="Scalar field" label="scalars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1951" end="1959" title="Acoustic_wave_equation#Equation" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q190291" start="1987" end="1999" title="displacement (vector)" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2174" end="2178" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="2179" end="2190" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2208" end="2225" title="Wave#Wave_velocity" label="propagation speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q193460" start="2245" end="2257" title="scalar field" label="scalar field"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="2337" end="2345" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="2349" end="2356" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q200802" start="2725" end="2740" title="vector calculus" label="vector calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186475" start="2864" end="2882" title="partial derivative" label="partial derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q203484" start="2922" end="2938" title="Laplace operator" label="Laplace operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q911268" start="2957" end="2981" title="d&amp;#x27;Alembert operator" label="d&amp;#x27;Alembert operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="3155" end="3165" title="sinusoidal" label="sinusoidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q122518" start="3166" end="3176" title="plane wave" label="plane wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129902" start="3330" end="3336" title="linear differential equation" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="3491" end="3514" title="superposition principle" label="superposition principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351510" start="3682" end="3700" title="initial conditions" label="initial conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332643" start="3830" end="3849" title="boundary conditions" label="boundary conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="3885" end="3899" title="standing waves" label="standing waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="3904" end="3913" title="harmonics" label="harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="4188" end="4208" title="independent variable" label="independent variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252739" start="4394" end="4410" title="String vibration" label="string vibrating"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="4517" end="4524" title="Tension (physics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q170282" start="4616" end="4632" title="Hooke&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hooke&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080293" start="4641" end="4661" title="theory of elasticity" label="theory of elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193514" start="4789" end="4795" title="deformation (mechanics)" label="strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="4859" end="4865" title="stress (mechanics)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q170282" start="4960" end="4976" title="Hooke&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hooke&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q569057" start="5110" end="5125" title="stiffness" label="spring constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q569057" start="5649" end="5664" title="stiffness" label="spring constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932744" start="5824" end="5841" title="second derivative" label="second derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091584" start="6317" end="6337" title="Young&amp;#x27;s modulus" label="Young&amp;#x27;s modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q153232" start="7177" end="7205" title="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert" label="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058681" start="7298" end="7321" title="Differential operator" label="differential operators:"/>
<link wikidata="Q379788" start="7436" end="7454" title="advection equation" label="advection equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785085" start="7604" end="7618" title="Method of characteristics" label="characteristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10167591" start="8190" end="8211" title="initial-value problem" label="initial-value problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388753" start="8326" end="8356" title="d&amp;#x27;Alembert&amp;#x27;s formula" label="d&amp;#x27;Alembert&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q846537" start="8451" end="8472" title="generalized functions" label="generalized functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129902" start="8631" end="8659" title="linear differential equation" label="linear differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="8690" end="8713" title="superposition principle" label="superposition principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="8970" end="8987" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q21658398" start="9156" end="9166" title="eigenmodes" label="eigenmodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q913323" start="9420" end="9443" title="separation of variables" label="separation of variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q465274" start="9496" end="9526" title="ordinary differential equation" label="ordinary differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482183" start="9606" end="9625" title="eigenvalue equation" label="eigenvalue equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q860615" start="9671" end="9689" title="Helmholtz equation" label="Helmholtz equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122518" start="9713" end="9723" title="plane-wave" label="plane-wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="9750" end="9761" title="wave number" label="wave number"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348910" start="10154" end="10173" title="eigenmode expansion" label="eigenmode expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="10320" end="10337" title="Fourier component" label="Fourier component"/>
<link wikidata="Q786423" start="10413" end="10429" title="frequency-domain" label="frequency-domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q185889" start="10460" end="10471" title="time-domain" label="time-domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417308" start="10494" end="10498" title="FDTD" label="FDTD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412691" start="10514" end="10525" title="wave packet" label="wave packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27304" start="10717" end="10722" title="chirp" label="chirp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434486" start="10887" end="10900" title="flyby anomaly" label="flyby anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359230" start="12554" end="12575" title="one-way wave equation" label="one-way wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359230" start="12795" end="12816" title="one-way wave equation" label="one-way wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="13288" end="13305" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607962" start="13360" end="13398" title="elliptic partial differential equation" label="elliptic partial differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q860615" start="13436" end="13454" title="Helmholtz equation" label="Helmholtz equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q913323" start="13479" end="13502" title="separation of variables" label="separation of variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q203218" start="13507" end="13528" title="spherical coordinates" label="spherical coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q877100" start="13679" end="13698" title="spherical harmonics" label="spherical harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q219637" start="13866" end="13881" title="Bessel equation" label="Bessel equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552709" start="14439" end="14451" title="point source" label="point source"/>
<link wikidata="Q215589" start="14775" end="14791" title="dipole radiation" label="dipole radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="14929" end="14954" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15118" end="15139" title="#Plane-wave eigenmodes" label="plane-wave eigenmodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596534" start="15561" end="15575" title="Poisson kernel" label="Poisson kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q306610" start="15663" end="15674" title="N-sphere" label="hypersphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q855949" start="16776" end="16789" title="sinc function" label="sinc function"/>
<link wikidata="Q236813" start="16826" end="16839" title="sign function" label="sign function"/>
<link wikidata="Q322339" start="16863" end="16881" title="Heaviside step function" label="unit step function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362362" start="17741" end="17745" title="Wake (physics)" label="wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q188321" start="17903" end="17926" title="Huygens–Fresnel principle" label="Huygens&amp;#x27; principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785085" start="18026" end="18045" title="Method of characteristics" label="characteristic rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q834020" start="19080" end="19097" title="angular frequency" label="angular frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180940" start="19494" end="19517" title="reflection phase change" label="reflection phase change"/>
<link wikidata="Q913323" start="20308" end="20331" title="separation of variables" label="separation of variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="20454" end="20464" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154082" start="20616" end="20638" title="Sturm–Liouville theory" label="Sturm–Liouville theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q219637" start="21933" end="21948" title="Bessel function" label="Bessel function"/>
<link wikidata="Q860615" start="22016" end="22034" title="Helmholtz equation" label="Helmholtz equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q877100" start="22141" end="22160" title="spherical harmonics" label="spherical harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q219637" start="22192" end="22207" title="Bessel function" label="Bessel function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203816" start="22664" end="22676" title="Lorenz gauge" label="Lorenz gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="22680" end="22696" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388753" start="23070" end="23100" title="d&amp;#x27;Alembert&amp;#x27;s formula" label="d&amp;#x27;Alembert&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q321237" start="23785" end="23805" title="Green&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Green&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25086" end="25108" title="Linear elasticity#Elastodynamics in terms of displacements" label="Navier–Cauchy equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="25171" end="25180" title="isotropic" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q904929" start="25181" end="25192" title="Homogeneity (physics)" label="homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="25193" end="25200" title="elastic (solid mechanics)" label="elastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186167" start="25288" end="25301" title="seismic waves" label="seismic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="25309" end="25314" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="25319" end="25329" title="Ultrasound" label="ultrasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066623" start="25562" end="25577" title="Lamé parameters" label="Lamé parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="25904" end="25910" title="vector (geometry)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="26231" end="26241" title="Dispersion (optics)" label="dispersive"/>
<link wikidata="Q590051" start="26352" end="26371" title="dispersion relation" label="dispersion relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q834020" start="26399" end="26416" title="angular frequency" label="angular frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q657009" start="26429" end="26439" title="wavevector" label="wavevector"/>
<link wikidata="Q122518" start="26451" end="26461" title="plane-wave" label="plane-wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q13824" start="26582" end="26596" title="phase velocity" label="phase velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629144" start="26627" end="26647" title="Acoustic attenuation" label="Acoustic attenuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674723" start="26649" end="26671" title="Acoustic wave equation" label="Acoustic wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868770" start="26673" end="26690" title="Bateman transform" label="Bateman transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q533281" start="26692" end="26721" title="Electromagnetic wave equation" label="Electromagnetic wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q860615" start="26723" end="26741" title="Helmholtz equation" label="Helmholtz equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033855" start="26743" end="26786" title="Inhomogeneous electromagnetic wave equation" label="Inhomogeneous electromagnetic wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q203484" start="26788" end="26804" title="Laplace operator" label="Laplace operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106411" start="26806" end="26832" title="Mathematics of oscillation" label="Mathematics of oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="26834" end="26858" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="26860" end="26880" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="26882" end="26895" title="Standing wave" label="Standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042351" start="26897" end="26930" title="Vibrations of a circular membrane" label="Vibrations of a circular membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526772" start="26932" end="26963" title="Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory" label="Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q310798" start="27530" end="27545" title="Stephen Wolfram" label="Stephen Wolfram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632017" start="27597" end="27627" title="Wolfram Demonstrations Project" label="Wolfram Demonstrations Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33692" wikidata="Q6457238" url="?curid=33692" title="World history (field)">
<text>World history or global history as a field of historical study examines history from a global perspective. It emerged centuries ago; some leading practitioners are Voltaire (1694–1778), Hegel (1770–1831), Karl Marx (1818–1883), Oswald Spengler (1880–1936), and Arnold J. Toynbee (1889–1975). The field became much more active (in terms of university teaching, text books, scholarly journals, and academic associations) in the late 20th century. 

It is not to be confused with comparative history, which, like world history, deals with the history of multiple cultures and nations, but does not do so on a global scale. World historians use a thematic approach, with two major focal points: integration (how processes of world history have drawn people of the world together) and difference (how patterns of world history reveal the diversity of the human experience).

== Periodisation ==
World history in the Western tradition is commonly divided into three parts, viz. ancient, medieval, and modern time. The division on ancient and medieval periods is less sharp or absent in the Arabic and Asian historiographies. A synoptic view of universal history led some scholars, beginning with Karl Jaspers, to distinguish the Axial Age synchronous to &quot;classical antiquity&quot; of the Western tradition. Jaspers also proposed a more universal periodization—prehistory, history and planetary history. All distinguished earlier periods belong to the second period (history) which is a relatively brief transitory phase between two much longer periods.

==Establishment and perimeters of the field==

Jerry H. Bentley (2011) observed that &quot;the term &quot;world history&quot; has never been a clear signifier with a stable referent&quot;, and that usage of the term overlaps with universal history, comparative history, global history, Big History, macro history, and transnational history, among others. Marnie Hughes-Warrington (2005) reasoned that &quot;world history&quot; is often mistaken to encompass the entire Earth, because works claiming to be &quot;world histories&quot; may have in practice a more limited scope, depending on the author&#x27;s perspective: &#x27;The &quot;world&quot; in world history (...) refers not to the earth in its entirety – both include and apart from human experience – but to the &quot;known&quot; and &quot;meaningful&quot; world of an individual or group.&#x27;

The advent of world history as a distinct academic field of study can be traced to the United States in the 1960s, but the pace quickened in the 1980s. A key step was the creation of the World History Association and graduate programs at a handful of American universities. Over the next decades scholarly publications, professional and academic organizations, and graduate programs in World History proliferated. World History has often displaced Western Civilization in the required curriculum of American high schools and universities, and is supported by new textbooks with a world history approach.

World history attempts to recognize and address two structures that have profoundly shaped professional history-writing:
# A tendency to use current nation-states to set the boundaries and agendas of studies of the past.
# A deep legacy of Eurocentric assumptions (found especially, but not only, in Western history-writing).
Trying to escape the nation-state, global history tries to transcend nation boundaries by looking at larger unburdened by spacial limitations. Thus World History tends to study networks, connections, and systems that cross traditional boundaries of historical study like linguistic, cultural, and national borders. World History is often concerned to explore social dynamics that have led to large-scale changes in human society, such as industrialization and the spread of capitalism, and to analyse how large-scale changes like these have affected different parts of the world. Like other branches of history-writing in the second half of the twentieth century, World History has a scope far beyond historians&#x27; traditional focus on politics, wars, and diplomacy, taking in a panoply of subjects like gender history, social history, cultural history, and environmental history.

===Organizations===
* The &quot;H-World&quot; website and online network is used among some practitioners of world history, and allows discussions among scholars, announcements, syllabi, bibliographies and book reviews.
* The International Society for the Comparative Study of Civilizations (ISCSC) approaches world history from the standpoint of comparative civilizations. Founded at a conference in 1961 in Salzburg, Austria, that was attended by Othmar Anderlie, Pitirim Sorokin, and Arnold J. Toynbee, this is an international association of scholars that publishes a journal, &quot;Comparative Civilization Review&quot;, and hosts an annual meeting in cities around the world.
* The &quot;Journal of Global History&quot; is a scholarly journal established in 2006 and is published by Cambridge University Press. 
* The World History Association (WHA) was established in 1982, and is predominantly an American phenomenon. Since 1990, it publishes the &quot;Journal of World History&quot; on a quarterly basis.

==History==

===Pre-modern===
The study of world history, as distinct from national history, has existed in many world cultures. However, early forms of world history were not truly global and were limited to only the regions known by the historian.

In Ancient China, Chinese world history, that of China and the surrounding people of East Asia was based on the dynastic cycle articulated by Sima Qian . Sima Qian&#x27;s model is based on the Mandate of Heaven. Rulers rise when they united China, then are overthrown when such dynasty became corrupt. Each new dynasty begins virtuous and strong, but then decays, provoking the transfer of Heaven&#x27;s mandate to a new ruler. The test of virtue in a new dynasty is success in being obeyed by China and neighboring barbarians. After 2000 years Sima Qian&#x27;s model still dominates scholarship, although the dynastic cycle is no longer used for modern Chinese history.

In Ancient Greece, Herodotus (5th century BC), as the founder of Greek historiography, presents discussions of the customs, geography, and history of Mediterranean peoples, particularly the Egyptians. His contemporary Thucydides rejected Herodotus&#x27;s all-embracing approach to history, offering instead a more precise, sharply focused monograph, dealing not with vast empires over the centuries but with 27 years of war between Athens and Sparta. In Rome, the vast, patriotic history of Rome by Livy (59 BC – 17 AD) approximated Herodotean inclusiveness; Polybius () aspired to combine the logical rigor of Thucydides with the scope of Herodotus.

Rashīd al-Dīn Fadhl-allāh Hamadānī (1247–1318), was a Muslim physician from Persian speaking family, polymathic writer, and historian, who wrote an enormous Islamic history, the Jami al-Tawarikh, in the Persian language, often considered a landmark in intercultural historiography and a key document on the Ilkhanids (13th and 14th century). His encyclopedic knowledge of a wide range of cultures from Mongolia to China to the Steppes of Central Eurasia to Persia, the Arabic-speaking lands, and Europe, provide the most direct access to information on the late Mongol era. His descriptions also highlight how the Mongol Empire and its emphasis on trade resulted in an atmosphere of cultural and religious exchange and intellectual ferment, resulting in the transmission of a host of ideas from East to West and vice versa.

One Muslim scholar, Ibn Khaldun (1332–1409) broke with traditionalism and offered a model of historical change in &quot;Muqaddimah,&quot; an exposition of the methodology of scientific history. Ibn Khaldun focused on the reasons for the rise and fall of civilization, arguing that the causes of change are to be sought in the economic and social structure of society. His work was largely ignored in the Muslim world.

===Early modern===
During the Renaissance in Europe, history was written about states or nations. The study of history changed during the Enlightenment and Romanticism. Voltaire described the history of certain ages that he considered important, rather than describing events in chronological order. History became an independent discipline. It was not called &quot;Philosophia Historiae&quot; anymore, but merely history (&quot;Historia&quot;). Voltaire, in the 18th century, attempted to revolutionize the study of world history. First, Voltaire concluded that the traditional study of history was flawed. The Christian Church, one of the most powerful entities in his time, had presented a framework for studying history. Voltaire, when writing &quot;History of Charles XII&quot; (1731) and &quot;The Age of Louis XIV&quot; (1751), instead choose to focus on economics, politics, and culture. These aspects of history were mostly unexplored by his contemporaries and would each develop into their sections of world history. Above all else, Voltaire regarded truth as the most essential part of recording world history. Nationalism and religion only subtracted from objective truth, so Voltaire freed himself for their influence when he recorded history.

Giambattista Vico (1668–1744) in Italy wrote &quot;Scienza Nuova seconda&quot; (The New Science) in 1725, which argued history as the expression of human will and deeds. He thought that men are historical entities and that human nature changes over time. Each epoch should be seen as a whole in which all aspects of culture—art, religion, philosophy, politics, and economics—are interrelated (a point developed later by Oswald Spengler). Vico showed that myth, poetry, and art are entry points to discovering the true spirit of a culture. Vico outlined a conception of historical development in which great cultures, like Rome, undergo cycles of growth and decline. His ideas were out of fashion during the Enlightenment but influenced the Romantic historians after 1800.

A major theoretical foundation for world history was given by German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, who saw the modern Prussian state as the latest (though often confused with the highest) stage of world development.

G.W.F. Hegel developed three lenses through which he believed world history could be viewed. Documents produced during a historical period, such as journal entries and contractual agreements, were considered by Hegel to be part of Original History. These documents are produced by a person enveloped within a culture, making them conduits of vital information but also limited in their contextual knowledge. Documents which pertain to Hegel&#x27;s Original History are classified by modern historians as primary sources.

Reflective History, Hegel&#x27;s second lens, are documents written with some temporal distance separating the event which is discussed in academic writing. What limited this lens, according to Hegel, was the imposition of the writer&#x27;s own cultural values and views on the historical event. This criticism of Reflective History was later formalized by Anthropologist Franz Boa and coined as Cultural relativism by Alain Locke. Both of these lenses were considered to be partially flawed by Hegel.

Hegel termed the lens which he advocated to view world history through as Philosophical History. To view history through this lens, one must analyze events, civilizations, and periods objectively. When done in this fashion, the historian can then extract the prevailing theme from their studies. This lens differs from the rest because it is void of any cultural biases and takes a more analytical approach to history. World History can be a broad topic, so focusing on extracting the most valuable information from certain periods may be the most beneficial approach. This third lens, as did Hegel&#x27;s definitions of the other two, affected the study of history in the early modern period and our contemporary period.

Another early modern historian was Adam Ferguson. Ferguson&#x27;s main contribution to the study of world history was his &quot;An Essay on the History of Civil Society&quot; (1767). According to Ferguson, world history was a combination of two forms of history. One was natural history; the aspects of our world which God created. The other, which was more revolutionary, was social history. For him, social history was the progress humans made towards fulfilling God&#x27;s plan for humanity. He believed that progress, which could be achieved through individuals pursuing commercial success, would bring us closer to a perfect society; but we would never reach one. However, he also theorized that complete dedication to commercial success could lead to societal collapses—like what happened in Rome—because people would lose morality. Through this lens, Ferguson viewed world history as humanity&#x27;s struggle to reach an ideal society.

Henry Home, Lord Kames was a philosopher during the Enlightenment and contributed to the study of world history. In his major historical work, &quot;Sketches on the History of Man&quot;, Kames outlined the four stages of human history which he observed. The first and most primitive stage was small hunter-gatherer groups. Then, to form larger groups, humans transitioned into the second stage when they began to domesticate animals. The third stage was the development of agriculture. This new technology established trade and higher levels of cooperation amongst sizable groups of people. With the gathering of people into agricultural villages, laws and social obligations needed to be developed so a form of order could be maintained. The fourth, and final stage, involved humans moving into market towns and seaports where agriculture was not the focus. Instead, commerce and other forms of labor arouse in a society. By defining the stages of human history, Homes influenced his successors. He also contributed to the development of other studies such as sociology and anthropology.

The Marxist theory of historical materialism claims the history of the world is fundamentally determined by the &quot;material conditions&quot; at any given time – in other words, the relationships which people have with each other to fulfil basic needs such as feeding, clothing and housing themselves and their families. Overall, Marx and Engels claimed to have identified five successive stages of the development of these material conditions in Western Europe.
The theory divides the history of the world into the following periods: Primitive communism; Slave society; Feudalism; Capitalism; and Socialism.

Regna Darnell and Frederic Gleach argue that, in the Soviet Union, the Marxian theory of history was the only accepted orthodoxy, and stifled research into other schools of thought on history. However, many adherents of Marx&#x27;s theories argue that Stalin distorted Marxism.

===20th century===
World history became a popular genre in the 20th century with universal history. In the 1920s, several best-sellers dealt with the history of the world, including surveys &quot;The Story of Mankind&quot; (1921) by Hendrik Willem van Loon and &quot;The Outline of History&quot; (1918) by H. G. Wells. Influential writers who have reached wide audiences include H. G. Wells, Oswald Spengler, Arnold J. Toynbee, Pitirim Sorokin, Carroll Quigley, Christopher Dawson, and Lewis Mumford. Scholars working the field include Eric Voegelin, William Hardy McNeill and Michael Mann. With evolving technologies such as dating methods and surveying laser technology called LiDAR, contemporary historians have access to new information which changes how past civilizations are studied.

Spengler&#x27;s &quot;Decline of the West&quot; (2 vol 1919–1922) compared nine organic cultures: Egyptian (3400–1200 BC), Indian (1500–1100 BC), Chinese (1300 BC–AD 200), Classical (1100–400 BC), Byzantine (AD 300–1100), Aztec (AD 1300–1500), Arabian (AD 300–1250), Mayan (AD 600–960), and Western (AD 900–1900). His book was a success among intellectuals worldwide as it predicted the disintegration of European and American civilization after a violent &quot;age of Caesarism&quot;, arguing by detailed analogies with other civilizations. It deepened the post-World War I pessimism in Europe, and was warmly received by intellectuals in China, India, and Latin America who hoped his predictions of the collapse of European empires would soon come true.

In 1936–1954, Toynbee&#x27;s ten-volume &quot;A Study of History&quot; came out in three separate installments. He followed Spengler in taking a comparative topical approach to independent civilizations. Toynbee said they displayed striking parallels in their origin, growth, and decay. Toynbee rejected Spengler&#x27;s biological model of civilizations as organisms with a typical life span of 1,000 years. Like Sima Qian, Toynbee explained decline as due to their moral failure. Many readers rejoiced in his implication (in vols. 1–6) that only a return to some form of Catholicism could halt the breakdown of western civilization which began with the Reformation. Volumes 7–10, published in 1954, abandoned the religious message, and his popular audience shrunk while scholars picked apart his mistakes.

McNeill wrote &quot;The Rise of the West&quot; (1963) to improve upon Toynbee by showing how the separate civilizations of Eurasia interacted from the very beginning of their history, borrowing critical skills from one another, and thus precipitating still further change as adjustment between traditional old and borrowed new knowledge and practice became necessary. McNeill took a broad approach organized around the interactions of peoples across the Earth. Such interactions have become both more numerous and more continual and substantial in recent times. Before about 1500, the network of communication between cultures was that of Eurasia. The term for these areas of interaction differ from one world historian to another and include &quot;world-system&quot; and &quot;ecumene.&quot; The importance of these intercultural contacts has begun to be recognized by many scholars.

==History education==

===United States===
As early as 1884, the American Historical Association advocated the study of the past on a world scale. T. Walter Wallbank and Alastair M. Taylor co-authored &quot;Civilization Past &amp; Present&quot;, the first world-history textbook published in the United States (1942). With additional authors, this very successful work went through numerous editions up to the first decade of the twenty-first century. According to the Golden Anniversary edition of 1992, the ongoing objective of &quot;Civilization Past &amp; Present&quot; &quot;was to present a survey of world cultural history, treating the development and growth of civilization not as a unique European experience but as a global one through which all the great culture systems have interacted to produce the present-day world. It attempted to include all the elements of history – social, economic, political, religious, aesthetic, legal, and technological.&quot; Just as World War I strongly encouraged American historians to expand the study of Europe than to courses on Western civilization, World War II enhanced the global perspectives, especially regarding Asia and Africa. Louis Gottschalk, William H. McNeill, and Leften S. Stavrianos became leaders in the integration of world history to the American College curriculum. Gottschalk began work on the UNESCO &#x27;History of Mankind: Cultural and Scientific Development&#x27; in 1951. McNeill, influenced by Toynbee, broadened his work on the 20th century to new topics. Since 1982 the World History Association at several regional associations began a program to help history professors broaden their coverage in freshman courses; world history became a popular replacement for courses on Western civilization. Professors Patrick Manning, at the University of Pittsburgh&#x27;s World History Center; and Ross E. Dunn at San Diego State are leaders in promoting innovative teaching methods.

In related disciplines, such as art history and architectural history, global perspectives have been promoted as well. In schools of architecture in the U.S., the National Architectural Accrediting Board now requires that schools teach history that includes a non-west or global perspective. This reflects a decade-long effort to move past the standard Euro-centric approach that had dominated the field.

==Historiography==

===Rankean historical positivism===
The roots of historiography in the 19th century are bound up with the concept that history written with a strong connection to the primary sources could be integrated with &quot;the big picture&quot;, i.e. to a general, universal history. For example, Leopold von Ranke, probably the pre-eminent historian of the 19th century, founder of Rankean historical positivism, the classic mode of historiography that now stands against postmodernism, attempted to write a Universal History at the close of his career. The works of world historians Oswald Spengler and Arnold J. Toynbee are examples of attempts to integrate primary source-based history and Universal History. Spengler&#x27;s work is more general; Toynbee created a theory that would allow the study of &quot;civilizations&quot; to proceed with integration of source-based history writing and Universal History writing. Both writers attempted to incorporate teleological theories into general presentations of the history. Toynbee found as the &quot;telos&quot; (&quot;goal&quot;) of universal history the emergence of a single World State.

===Modernization theory===
According to Francis Fukuyama, modernization theory is the &quot;last significant Universal History&quot; written in the 20th century. This theory draws on Marx, Weber, and Durkheim. Talcott Parsons&#x27;s &quot;Societies. Evolutionary and Comparative Perspectives&quot; (1966) is a key statement of this view of world history.

=== African and world history ===
In recent years, the relationship between African and world history has shifted rapidly from one of antipathy to one of engagement and synthesis. Reynolds (2007) surveys the relationship between African and world histories, with an emphasis on the tension between the area studies paradigm and the growing world-history emphasis on connections and exchange across regional boundaries. A closer examination of recent exchanges and debates over the merits of this exchange is also featured. Reynolds sees the relationship between African and world history as a measure of the changing nature of historical inquiry over the past century.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Journal of Global History&quot;
* &quot;Journal of World History&quot;

==References==
== Works cited ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Manvir Singh, &quot;Genghis the Good: Nomadic warriors like the Mongol hordes, scholars argue, built our world&quot;, &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, 1 &amp; 8 January 2024, pp. 58–61. &quot;Historians have worked to show that, in Sattin&#x27;s words, &#x27;the nomad story is neither less wonderful nor less significant than ours.&#x27; But we&#x27;ll still be treating ourselves as the measure of everything unless we learn to revise our sense of significance. This may be the greatest gift a more global history offers us: greatness redefined.&quot; (p. 61.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6457238" start="0" end="13" title="World history (field)" label="World history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457238" start="17" end="31" title="World history (field)" label="global history"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="46" end="62" title="historiography" label="historical study"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="72" end="79" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="164" end="172" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="186" end="191" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="205" end="214" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q57112" start="228" end="243" title="Oswald Spengler" label="Oswald Spengler"/>
<link wikidata="Q185381" start="261" end="278" title="Arnold J. Toynbee" label="Arnold J. Toynbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708569" start="477" end="496" title="comparative history" label="comparative history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="573" end="579" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053916" start="643" end="651" title="theme (literature)" label="thematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="691" end="702" title="syncretism" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124515" start="850" end="866" title="human experience" label="human experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="972" end="979" title="Ancient history" label="ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="981" end="989" title="Postclassical Era" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="995" end="1001" title="Modern history" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q76509" start="1190" end="1202" title="Karl Jaspers" label="Karl Jaspers"/>
<link wikidata="Q340742" start="1223" end="1232" title="Axial Age" label="Axial Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404810" start="1600" end="1616" title="Jerry H. Bentley" label="Jerry H. Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18882" start="1783" end="1800" title="universal history (genre)" label="universal history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708569" start="1802" end="1821" title="comparative history" label="comparative history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920418" start="1839" end="1850" title="Big History" label="Big History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886448" start="1852" end="1865" title="macro history" label="macro history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449515" start="1871" end="1892" title="transnational history" label="transnational history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772243" start="1908" end="1932" title="Marnie Hughes-Warrington" label="Marnie Hughes-Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="2022" end="2027" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843454" start="2596" end="2621" title="World History Association" label="World History Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="3163" end="3176" title="nation-states" label="nation-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q376717" start="3254" end="3265" title="Eurocentrism" label="Eurocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="3778" end="3795" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="3814" end="3824" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517835" start="4147" end="4161" title="gender history" label="gender history"/>
<link wikidata="Q908604" start="4163" end="4177" title="social history" label="social history"/>
<link wikidata="Q858517" start="4179" end="4195" title="cultural history" label="cultural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561862" start="4201" end="4222" title="environmental history" label="environmental history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4451" end="4515" title="International Society for the Comparative Study of Civilizations" label="International Society for the Comparative Study of Civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="4634" end="4642" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q319816" start="4691" end="4706" title="Pitirim Sorokin" label="Pitirim Sorokin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185381" start="4712" end="4729" title="Arnold J. Toynbee" label="Arnold J. Toynbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15767415" start="4919" end="4944" title="Journal of Global History" label="Journal of Global History"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="5014" end="5040" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843454" start="5049" end="5074" title="World History Association" label="World History Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296065" start="5186" end="5210" title="Journal of World History" label="Journal of World History"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5494" end="5507" title="History of China#Ancient China" label="Ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="5576" end="5585" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319145" start="5603" end="5617" title="dynastic cycle" label="dynastic cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="5633" end="5642" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="5684" end="5701" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319145" start="6101" end="6115" title="dynastic cycle" label="dynastic cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="6166" end="6180" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="6182" end="6191" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="6381" end="6391" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q328782" start="6815" end="6849" title="Rashīd al-Dīn Fadhl-allāh Hamadānī" label="Rashīd al-Dīn Fadhl-allāh Hamadānī"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="7660" end="7671" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="8089" end="8100" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="8197" end="8210" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="8215" end="8226" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="8228" end="8236" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q178709" start="9317" end="9334" title="Giambattista Vico" label="Giambattista Vico"/>
<link wikidata="Q57112" start="9737" end="9752" title="Oswald Spengler" label="Oswald Spengler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="10171" end="10200" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639471" start="14106" end="14120" title="Marxist theory" label="Marxist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q190004" start="14124" end="14146" title="historical materialism" label="historical materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="14434" end="14438" title="Karl Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="14443" end="14449" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="14551" end="14565" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="14966" end="14982" title="Stalinism" label="Stalin distorted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="14983" end="14990" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18882" start="15074" end="15091" title="universal history (genre)" label="universal history"/>
<link wikidata="Q13802568" start="15189" end="15209" title="The Story of Mankind" label="The Story of Mankind"/>
<link wikidata="Q959097" start="15226" end="15249" title="Hendrik Willem van Loon" label="Hendrik Willem van Loon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755682" start="15260" end="15282" title="The Outline of History" label="The Outline of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="15299" end="15310" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="15372" end="15383" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q57112" start="15385" end="15400" title="Oswald Spengler" label="Oswald Spengler"/>
<link wikidata="Q185381" start="15402" end="15419" title="Arnold J. Toynbee" label="Arnold J. Toynbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q319816" start="15421" end="15436" title="Pitirim Sorokin" label="Pitirim Sorokin"/>
<link wikidata="Q720443" start="15438" end="15453" title="Carroll Quigley" label="Carroll Quigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707044" start="15455" end="15473" title="Christopher Dawson" label="Christopher Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q469888" start="15479" end="15492" title="Lewis Mumford" label="Lewis Mumford"/>
<link wikidata="Q704039" start="15529" end="15542" title="Eric Voegelin" label="Eric Voegelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765863" start="15544" end="15565" title="William Hardy McNeill" label="William Hardy McNeill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425193" start="15570" end="15582" title="Michael Mann (sociologist)" label="Michael Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q57112" start="15785" end="15800" title="Oswald Spengler" label="Spengler&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="16955" end="16964" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765863" start="17350" end="17357" title="William Hardy McNeill" label="McNeill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760901" start="17370" end="17390" title="The Rise of the West" label="The Rise of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668834" start="18383" end="18401" title="T. Walter Wallbank" label="T. Walter Wallbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708737" start="18406" end="18424" title="Alastair M. Taylor" label="Alastair M. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19214" end="19225" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="19337" end="19349" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688018" start="19422" end="19438" title="Louis R. Gottschalk" label="Louis Gottschalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329652" start="19464" end="19484" title="Leften S. Stavrianos" label="Leften S. Stavrianos"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="19990" end="20010" title="Western culture" label="Western civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147101" start="20023" end="20038" title="Patrick Manning (professor)" label="Patrick Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q111288031" start="20105" end="20117" title="Ross E. Dunn" label="Ross E. Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091169" start="20355" end="20395" title="National Architectural Accrediting Board" label="National Architectural Accrediting Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="20667" end="20681" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q112754" start="20785" end="20799" title="primary source" label="primary source"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="20807" end="20820" title="Research" label="be integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q77184" start="20906" end="20923" title="Leopold von Ranke" label="Leopold von Ranke"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="21082" end="21095" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q57112" start="21194" end="21209" title="Oswald Spengler" label="Oswald Spengler"/>
<link wikidata="Q185381" start="21214" end="21231" title="Arnold J. Toynbee" label="Arnold J. Toynbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754533" start="21278" end="21290" title="Source text" label="source-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="21472" end="21500" title="Recorded history" label="source-based history writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192121" start="21570" end="21591" title="teleology" label="teleological theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q489268" start="21740" end="21751" title="World State" label="World State"/>
<link wikidata="Q186123" start="21794" end="21810" title="Francis Fukuyama" label="Francis Fukuyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q856122" start="21812" end="21832" title="modernization theory" label="modernization theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q203913" start="21964" end="21979" title="Talcott Parsons" label="Talcott Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15767415" start="22810" end="22835" title="Journal of Global History" label="Journal of Global History"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296065" start="22850" end="22874" title="Journal of World History" label="Journal of World History"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="23074" end="23088" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773424" start="23177" end="23183" title="Anthony Sattin" label="Sattin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33693" wikidata="Q208364" url="?curid=33693" title="Wok">
<text>A wok () is a deep round-bottomed cooking pan of Chinese origin. It is believed to be derived from the South Asian karahi. It is common in Greater China, and similar pans are found in parts of East, South and Southeast Asia, as well as being popular in other parts of the world.

Woks are used in a range of Chinese cooking techniques, including stir frying, steaming, pan frying, deep frying, poaching, boiling, braising, searing, stewing, making soup, smoking and roasting nuts. Wok cooking is often done with utensils called (spatula) or (ladle) whose long handles protect cooks from high heat. The uniqueness of wok cooking is conveyed by the Cantonese term : &quot;breath of the wok&quot;.

==History==
The origin of the wok is unclear, but most scholars believe it originated from the karahi, as well as the Southeast Asian &quot;kuali&quot; (believed to be the etymology of Mandarin ). These cooking vessels are universal in South and Southeast Asian cuisine for stewing and quick evaporation. They likely entered China via Central Asia from India where it evolved into the wok. 
In his 1988 book &quot;The Food of China&quot;, E.N. Anderson writes:

The first possible depictions of woks in China appeared in the Han dynasty (c. 202 BCE - 220 CE). But these are conjectural, since these &quot;woks&quot; were made of clay and were only used to dry grains. Metal woks only started to appear in China in the Ming dynasty (1368 - 1644), where it was first used for stir frying (an original Han Chinese innovation).

==Characteristics==

The wok&#x27;s most distinguishing feature is its shape. Classic woks have a rounded bottom. Hand-hammered woks are sometimes flipped inside out after being shaped, giving the wok a gentle flare to the edge that makes it easier to push food up onto the sides of the wok. Woks sold in Western countries are sometimes found with flat bottoms—this makes them more similar to a deep frying pan. The flat bottom allows the wok to be used on an electric stove, where a rounded wok would not be able to fully contact the stove&#x27;s heating element. A round-bottom wok enables the traditional round spatula or ladle to pick all the food up at the bottom of the wok and toss it around easily; this is difficult with a flat bottom. With a gas hob, or traditional pit stove, the bottom of a round wok can get hotter than a flat wok and so is better for stir frying.

Most woks range from or more in diameter. Woks of (suitable for a family of 3 or 4) are the most common, but home woks can be found as small as and as large as . Smaller woks are typically used for quick cooking techniques at high heat such as stir frying (). Large woks over a meter wide are mainly used by restaurants or community kitchens for cooking rice or soup, or for boiling water.

===Materials===
The most common materials used in making woks today are carbon steel and cast iron. Although the latter was the most common type used in the past, cooks tend to be divided on whether carbon steel or cast iron woks are superior.

====Carbon steel====
Currently, carbon steel is the most widely used material, being relatively inexpensive compared with other materials, relatively light in weight, providing quick heat conduction as it has a low specific heat capacity, and having reasonable durability. Their light weight makes them easier to lift and quicker to heat. Carbon steel woks, however, tend to be more difficult to season than those made of cast-iron (&#x27;seasoning&#x27;, or carbonizing the cooking surface of a wok, is required to prevent foods from sticking and to remove metallic tastes and odors). Carbon steel woks vary widely in price, style, and quality, which is based on ply and forming technique. The lowest quality steel woks tend to be stamped by machine from a single &#x27;ply&#x27; or piece of stamped steel. Less expensive woks have a higher tendency to deform and misshape. Cooking with lower quality woks is also more difficult and precarious since they often have a &quot;hot spot&quot;. Higher quality, mass-produced woks are made of heavy gauge (14-gauge or thicker) steel, and are either machine-hammered or made of spun steel. The best quality woks are almost always hand-made, being pounded into shape by hand (&quot;hand hammered&quot;) from two or more sheets of carbon steel which are shaped into final form by a ring-forming or hand-forging process.

====Cast iron====
Two types of cast iron woks can be found in the market. Chinese-made cast iron woks are very thin (), weighing only a little more than a carbon steel wok of similar size, while cast iron woks typically produced in the West tend to be much thicker (), and very heavy. Because of the thickness of the cast iron, Western-style cast iron woks take much longer to bring up to cooking temperature, and their weight also makes stir-frying and techniques difficult.

Cast iron woks form a more stable carbonized layer of seasoning which makes it less prone to food sticking on the pan. While cast iron woks are superior to carbon steel woks in heat retention and uniform heat distribution, they respond slowly to heat adjustments and are slow to cool once taken off the fire. Because of this, food cooked in a cast-iron wok must be promptly removed from the wok as soon as it is done to prevent overcooking. Chinese-style cast iron woks, although relatively light, are fragile and are prone to shattering if dropped or mishandled.

====Non-stick====
Steel woks coated with non-stick coatings such as PFA and Teflon, a development originated in Western countries, are now popular in Asia as well. These woks cannot be used with metal utensils, and foods cooked in non-stick woks tend to retain juices instead of browning in the pan. As they necessarily lack the carbonizing or seasoning of the classic steel or iron wok, non-stick woks do not impart the distinctive taste or sensation of . The newest nonstick coatings will withstand temperatures of up to , sufficient for stir-frying. Woks are also now being introduced with clad or five-layer construction, which sandwich a thick layer of aluminum or copper between two sheets of stainless steel. Clad woks can cost five to ten times the price of a traditional carbon steel or cast-iron wok, yet cook no better; for this reason they are not used in most professional restaurant kitchens. Clad woks are also slower to heat than traditional woks and not nearly as efficient for stir-frying.

====Aluminium====
Woks can also be made from aluminium. Although an excellent conductor of heat, it has somewhat inferior thermal capacity to cast iron or carbon steel, it loses heat to convection much faster than carbon steel, and it may be constructed much thinner than cast iron. Although anodized aluminium alloys can stand up to constant use, plain aluminium woks are too soft and damage easily. Aluminium is mostly used for wok lids.

===Handles===
The handles for woks come in two styles: loops and stick. Loop handles mounted on opposite sides of the wok are typical in southern China. The twin small loop handles are the most common handle type for woks of all types and materials, and are usually made of bare metal. Cooks needing to hold the wok to toss the food in cooking do so by holding a loop handle with a thick towel (though some woks have spool-shaped wooden or plastic covers over the metal of the handle). Cooking with the tossing action in loop-handled woks requires a large amount of hand, arm and wrist strength. Loop handles typically come in pairs on the wok and are riveted, welded or extended from the wok basin.

Stick handles are long, made of steel, and are usually welded or riveted to the wok basin, or are an actual direct extension of the metal of the basin. Stick handles are popular in northern China, where food in the wok is frequently turned with a tossing motion of the arm and wrist when stir-frying food. The classic stick handle is made of hollow hammered steel, but other materials may be used, including wood or plastic-covered hand grips. Because of their popularity in northern China, stick-handled woks are often referred to as &quot;pao woks&quot; or &quot;Peking pans&quot;. Stick handles are normally not found on cast-iron woks since the wok is either too heavy for the handle or the metal is too thin to handle the tensile stress exerted by the handle. Larger-diameter woks with stick-type handles frequently incorporate a &quot;helper&quot; handle consisting of a loop on the opposite side of the wok, which aids in handling.

==Cooking==

The wok can be used in a large number of cooking methods. Before the introduction of Western cookware, it was often used for all cooking techniques including:
*Boiling: For boiling water, soups, dumplings, or rice. In the latter case, guoba often forms.
*Braising: Braised dishes are commonly made using woks. Braising is useful when reducing sauces.
*Deep frying: This is usually accomplished with larger woks to reduce splashing, but for deep frying of less food or small food items, small woks are also used.
*Pan frying: Food that is fried using a small amount of oil in the bottom of a pan
*Roasting: Food may be cooked with dry heat in an enclosed pan with lid. Whole chestnuts are dry roasted by tossing them in a dry wok with several pounds of small stones.
*Searing: Food is browned on its outer surfaces through the application of high heat
*Smoking: Food can be hot smoked by putting the smoking material in the bottom of the wok while food is placed on a rack above.
*Steaming: Done using a dedicated wok for boiling water in combination with steaming baskets
*Stewing: Woks are sometimes used for stewing though it is more common in Chinese cuisines to use either stoneware or porcelain for such purposes, especially when longer stewing times are required. Small woks are for hot pot, particularly in Hainan cuisine. These are served at the table over a sterno flame.
*Stir frying: Frying food quickly in a small amount of oil over high heat while stirring continuously.

=== Wok hei ===
 () literally, the &quot;breath of the wok&quot;, is the distinct charred, smoky flavor resulting from stir-frying foods over an open flame in Cantonese cuisine. The second character () is transliterated as () according to its Standard Chinese pronunciation, so is sometimes rendered as in Western cookbooks. refers to the flavor, taste, and &quot;essence&quot; imparted by a hot wok on food during stir frying. It is particularly important for Cantonese dishes requiring high heat for fragrance such as and beef. Out of the Eight Culinary Traditions of China, the concept is only encountered in Cantonese cuisine, and may not even be an accepted underlying principle in most other Chinese cuisines.

To impart the traditional way, the food is cooked in a seasoned wok over a high flame while being stirred and tossed quickly. Constant contact with the heat source is crucial as the addition of new ingredients and each toss of the wok inevitably cools the wok down; therefore, cooking over flame is preferred. Consequently, many chefs (especially those with less-than-ideal cookers) may cook in small batches to overcome this problem so that the wok is still as hot as it can be, and to avoid &quot;stewing&quot; the food, instead. When cooking over gas stoves or open flame, it additionally allows for the splattering of fine oil particles to catch the flame into the wok; this is easily achieved when experienced chefs toss the wok and can be a demonstration of experience. For these reasons, cooking over an open flame is preferable to other types of stoves. Cooking with coated woks (e.g. nonstick) notably will not give the distinct taste of , which is partially imbued from previous cooking sessions. In practical terms, the flavor imparted by chemical compounds results from caramelization, Maillard reactions, and the partial combustion of oil that come from charring and searing of the food at very high heat in excess of . Aside from flavor, the texture of the cooked items and smell involved also describe .

In Hong Kong, &quot;wok hei&quot; is traditionally street food, cooked in open-air &quot;dai pai dongs&quot; (&quot;big license stalls&quot;) over a very hot kerosene flame. Due to government regulations, the number of such stalls has been reduced from hundreds to about 20 in 2024.

==Other Asian pans==

In Indonesia, a wok-like pan is known as a or (also spelled , from Javanese language, from the root word meaning &quot;steel&quot;). In Malaysia, it is called a (small wok) or (big wok). Similarly in the Philippines, the wok is known as in Tagalog or in Cebuano (Philippine Spanish: ), and it is called in Kapampangan. Bigger pans used for festivals and gatherings are known as in most languages of the Philippines. In India, a similar pan is called &quot;karahi&quot;.

In Japan, the wok is called a . In South India, the Chinese wok became a part of South Indian cooking, where it is called the (literally, &quot;Chinese pot&quot; in Malayalam and Tamil).

In Central Asia, a similar utensil is called a kazan.

== Wok stoves ==
=== Traditional ===

Woks were designed to be used over the traditional Chinese pit-style hearth () with the wok recessed into the stove top, where the heat is fully directed at the bottom of the wok. Round grate rings on the edge of the opening provide stability to the wok. There are two styles of traditional wok stoves. The same design aspects of these Chinese stoves can be seen in traditional Japanese stoves. The more primitive style was used outdoors or in well ventilated areas since hot gasses from the firebox exhaust around the wok. The more advanced style, found in better-off households, has a chimney and may be used indoors. These stoves are similar in design to modern rocket stoves.

Pit stoves originally burned wood or coal but are now more typically heated by natural gas with the burner recessed below the stovetop. In areas where natural gas is unavailable, LPG may be used instead. With the adoption of gas and its less objectionable combustion products, the chimney has been replaced by the vent hood.

This type of stove allows foods to be stir-fried at a very high heat, sometimes hot enough to deform the wok itself. Professional chefs in Chinese restaurants often use pit stoves since they have the heating power to give food an alluring .

===Gas===
Traditionally shaped woks can be used on some Western-style (flat-topped) gas stoves by removing a burner cover and replacing it with a &quot;wok ring&quot;, which provides stability and concentrates heat. Although not as ideal as &quot;pit stoves&quot;, these allow woks to be used in a manner more suitable for their design and are good enough for most tasks required in home cooking.

Wok rings are sold in cylindrical and conical shapes. For greatest efficiency with the conical wok ring, position it with the wide side up. This allows the base of the wok to sit closer to the heat source.

In recent years, some consumer indoor stoves using natural gas or propane have begun offering higher-BTU burners. A few manufacturers of such stoves, notably Kenmore Appliances and Viking Range Corp. now include a specially designed high-output bridge-type wok burner as part of their standard or optional equipment, though even high-heat models are limited to a maximum of around 27,000 BTU (7.9 kW).

Because of the high cost of kitchen modifications, coupled with increased heat and smoke generated in the kitchen, more home chefs are using their wok outdoors on high-heat propane burners with curved wok support grates. Many inexpensive propane burners are easily capable of 60,000–270,000 BTU (17.5–22 kW) or more, easily surpassing most in-home gas stoves.

===Electric===
Woks, round or flat bottomed, do not generally work well for stir-frying or other quick cooking methods when used on an electric cooker. These stoves do not produce the large amounts of quick even heat required for stir-frying. It is possible, however, to find round-shaped electric stove elements that will fit the curve of a wok, which allows the wok to be heated at its bottom along with part of its sides. A flat-bottomed wok may also work better on an electric stove.

Coupled with the lower heat retention of woks, meals stir-fried on electric stoves have a tendency to stew and boil when too much food is in the wok rather than &quot;fry&quot; as in traditional woks, thus not producing . A wok can, however, benefit from the slow steady heating of electric stoves when used for slower cooking methods such as stewing, braising, and steaming, and immersion cooking techniques such as frying and boiling. Many Chinese cooks use Western style cast-iron pans for stir-frying on electric stoves, since they hold enough heat for the required sustained high temperatures.

A newer trend in woks is the electric wok, where no stove is needed. This type of wok is plugged into an electrical outlet and the heating element is in the wok. Like stove-mounted non-stick woks, these woks can also only be used at lower temperatures than traditional woks.

===Induction===
Induction cookers generate heat in induction-compatible cookware via direct magnetic stimulation of the pan material. While carbon steel and cast iron (the most common wok materials) are induction-compatible metals, induction cooking also requires close contact between the cooking vessel and the induction burner. This presents problems with tossing techniques, where the wok is lifted off the burner and agitated, will break contact and turn off the burner. Traditionally shaped woks, which are round-bottomed, also do not have enough contact with the cooking surface to generate notable heat. Bowl-shaped induction cookers overcome this problem and can be used suitably for wok cooking in locations where gas stoves are not suitable.

Flat-bottomed woks make sufficient contact to generate heat. Some cookware makers are now offering round-bottomed woks with a small flat spot to provide induction contact, with a specially designed support ring, and some induction cooktops are now also available with a rounded burner that is able to make contact with the rounded bottom of a traditional wok. In both cases, the food will need to be stirred with a cooking utensil, instead of being tossed by lifting the wok itself.

==Advantages==
The main advantage of the wok, beyond its constructed material, is its curved, concave shape. This shape produces a small, hot area at the bottom which allows some of the food to be seared by intense heat while using relatively little fuel. The large sloped sides also make it easier for chefs to employ the tossing cooking technique on solid and thick liquid food, with less spillage and a greater margin of safety. The curved sides also allow a person to cook without having to &quot;chase the food around the pan&quot;, since bite-sized or finely chopped stir-fry ingredients usually tumble back to the center of the wok when agitated.

The curve also provides a larger usable cooking surface versus Western-style pots and pans, which typically have vertical edges. This allows large pieces of food seared at the bottom of the wok to be pushed up the gently sloped sides to continue cooking at a slower rate. While this occurs another ingredient for the same dish needing high heat is being cooked at the bottom. The pointed bottom also allows even small amounts of oil to pool. As such, large food items can be shallow fried, while finely chopped garlic, chili peppers, scallions, and ginger can be essentially deep-fried in both cases with very small amounts of cooking oil.

== See also ==

* Chinese cuisine
**Cantonese cuisine
**Egg fried rice
* List of cooking techniques
* List of cooking vessels
**&quot;Karahi&quot;, similar pan from India with steeper sides
**Qazan, large cooking vessel from Turkey and Central Asian countries
** Paella, a similar vessel from Iberia used in cooking a rice dish of the same name.
* Wok racing

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208364" start="2" end="5" title="Wok" label="wok"/>
<link wikidata="Q154038" start="34" end="45" title="cookware and bakeware" label="cooking pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="49" end="56" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="103" end="113" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595636" start="115" end="121" title="karahi" label="karahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143195" start="139" end="152" title="Greater China" label="Greater China"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="193" end="197" title="East Asia" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="199" end="204" title="South Asia" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="209" end="223" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100736" start="308" end="334" title="Chinese cooking techniques" label="Chinese cooking techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="346" end="357" title="stir frying" label="stir frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415859" start="359" end="367" title="steaming" label="steaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073916" start="369" end="379" title="pan frying" label="pan frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="381" end="392" title="deep frying" label="deep frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q263588" start="394" end="402" title="Poaching (cooking)" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q41716" start="404" end="411" title="boiling" label="boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q784148" start="413" end="421" title="braising" label="braising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483514" start="423" end="430" title="searing" label="searing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="432" end="439" title="stewing" label="stewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="448" end="452" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="454" end="461" title="Smoking (cooking)" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q15148" start="529" end="536" title="spatula" label="spatula"/>
<link wikidata="Q193358" start="542" end="547" title="ladle (spoon)" label="ladle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="647" end="656" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595636" start="791" end="797" title="karahi" label="karahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="814" end="829" title="Southeast Asian" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="868" end="877" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="1031" end="1043" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1049" end="1054" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1221" end="1232" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="1356" end="1361" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="1414" end="1426" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="1470" end="1481" title="stir frying" label="stir frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q127666" start="1921" end="1931" title="frying pan" label="frying pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211746" start="1990" end="1995" title="Electric cooker" label="stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="2432" end="2440" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="2644" end="2655" title="stir frying" label="stir frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="2754" end="2758" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="2762" end="2766" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="2783" end="2788" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="2863" end="2875" title="carbon steel" label="carbon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="2880" end="2889" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="3251" end="3273" title="specific heat capacity" label="specific heat capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441925" start="3432" end="3438" title="Seasoning (cookware)" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3700" end="3703" title=":wikt:ply" label="ply"/>
<link wikidata="Q211367" start="3708" end="3725" title="Sheet metal forming" label="forming technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q9363879" start="3829" end="3842" title="Stamping (metalworking)" label="stamped steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="4430" end="4439" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441925" start="4930" end="4939" title="Seasoning (cookware)" label="seasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049048" start="5482" end="5491" title="non-stick" label="non-stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305225" start="5509" end="5512" title="Fluorocarbon" label="PFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="5517" end="5523" title="polytetrafluoroethylene" label="Teflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q288064" start="6034" end="6038" title="Clad (metallurgy)" label="clad"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="6495" end="6504" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7465774" start="6528" end="6545" title="heat conduction" label="conductor of heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q179388" start="6572" end="6588" title="thermal capacity" label="thermal capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="6636" end="6646" title="convection" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q567502" start="6742" end="6760" title="anodized aluminium" label="anodized aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="6761" end="6766" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131696" start="7279" end="7284" title="towel" label="towel"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="8319" end="8333" title="tensile stress" label="tensile stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q41716" start="8705" end="8712" title="Boiling" label="Boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435296" start="8780" end="8785" title="guoba" label="guoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q784148" start="8800" end="8808" title="Braising" label="Braising"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="8897" end="8908" title="Deep frying" label="Deep frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073916" start="9058" end="9068" title="Pan frying" label="Pan frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865573" start="9141" end="9149" title="Roasting" label="Roasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483514" start="9312" end="9319" title="Searing" label="Searing"/>
<link wikidata="Q647574" start="9329" end="9336" title="Maillard reaction" label="browned"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="9397" end="9404" title="Smoking (cooking)" label="Smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415859" start="9525" end="9533" title="Steaming" label="Steaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="9618" end="9622" title="Stew" label="Stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q846849" start="9834" end="9841" title="hot pot" label="hot pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639389" start="9859" end="9873" title="Hainan cuisine" label="Hainan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q589850" start="9912" end="9918" title="sterno" label="sterno"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="9927" end="9938" title="Stir frying" label="Stir frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="10189" end="10206" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="10273" end="10289" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Standard Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="10445" end="10456" title="stir frying" label="stir frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q837647" start="10554" end="10558" title="beef chow fun" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="10642" end="10659" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="10728" end="10743" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q73185" start="11829" end="11843" title="caramelization" label="caramelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q647574" start="11845" end="11862" title="Maillard reaction" label="Maillard reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="12070" end="12079" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="12376" end="12385" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33549" start="12440" end="12457" title="Javanese language" label="Javanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="12492" end="12497" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="12509" end="12517" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="12577" end="12588" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="12613" end="12620" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q33239" start="12627" end="12634" title="Cebuano language" label="Cebuano"/>
<link wikidata="Q22091406" start="12636" end="12654" title="Philippine Spanish" label="Philippine Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36121" start="12679" end="12690" title="Kapampangan language" label="Kapampangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="12792" end="12797" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595636" start="12829" end="12835" title="karahi" label="karahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="12847" end="12852" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595152" start="12925" end="12937" title="South Indian cuisine" label="South Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="13009" end="13018" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="13023" end="13028" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="13035" end="13047" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207627" start="13079" end="13084" title="Kazan (cookware)" label="kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="13194" end="13200" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254139" start="13790" end="13802" title="rocket stove" label="rocket stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="13985" end="13988" title="Liquefied Petroleum Gas" label="LPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164342" start="14120" end="14129" title="extractor hood" label="vent hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389466" start="15137" end="15155" title="Kenmore Appliances" label="Kenmore Appliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929477" start="15160" end="15178" title="Viking Range" label="Viking Range Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q1211746" start="15878" end="15893" title="electric cooker" label="electric cooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294507" start="16692" end="16720" title="Cast-iron cookware" label="Western style cast-iron pans"/>
<link wikidata="Q751960" start="17124" end="17140" title="Induction cooker" label="Induction cooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483514" start="18543" end="18549" title="seared" label="seared"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="19512" end="19518" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="19520" end="19532" title="chili pepper" label="chili pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="19535" end="19543" title="scallion" label="scallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="19550" end="19556" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="19660" end="19675" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="19678" end="19695" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076874" start="19698" end="19712" title="Egg fried rice" label="Egg fried rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3451717" start="19715" end="19741" title="List of cooking techniques" label="List of cooking techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q48790119" start="19744" end="19767" title="List of cooking vessels" label="List of cooking vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595636" start="19776" end="19782" title="Karahi" label="Karahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207627" start="19834" end="19839" title="Kazan (cookware)" label="Qazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="19867" end="19873" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="19878" end="19901" title="Central Asian countries" label="Central Asian countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q212121" start="19905" end="19911" title="Paella" label="Paella"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="19935" end="19941" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q92290" start="19990" end="20000" title="Wok racing" label="Wok racing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33700" wikidata="Q217127" url="?curid=33700" title="Wing Chun">
<text>Wing Chun (Cantonese) or Yong Chun (Mandarin) (, lit. &quot;singing spring&quot;) is a concept-based martial art, a form of Southern Chinese kung fu, and a close-quarters system of self-defense. It is a martial arts style characterized by its focus on close-quarters hand-to-hand combat, rapid-fire punches, and straightforward efficiency. It has a philosophy that emphasizes capturing and sticking to an opponent&#x27;s centerline. This is accomplished using simultaneous attack and defense, tactile sensitivity, and using an opponent&#x27;s force against them.

Wing Chun has various spellings in the West, but &quot;Wing Chun&quot; is the most common. The origins of Wing Chun are uncertain, but it is generally attributed to the development of Southern Chinese martial arts. There are at least eight distinct lineages, of which the Ip Man and Yuen Kay-shan lineages are the most prolific.

The martial art was brought to Hong Kong and then the rest of the world by Ip Man, with Bruce Lee being his most famous student. The Ving Tsun Athletic Association, founded in 1967 by Ip Man and his students, helped spread Wing Chun globally. Traditionally taught within a family system, modern Wing Chun lessons have taken on a more academic and commercial character.

Wing Chun gained popularity in the 2010s due to the &quot;Ip Man&quot; film series starring Donnie Yen and has been featured in video games like Tekken 7. Notable practitioners include Bruce Lee, Donnie Yen, Samuel Kwok, and Carlos Deleon.

== Etymology ==
In Chinese, this martial art is referred to as (simplified script) or (traditional script). Though it is written in an almost identical way in traditional and simplified, it is not pronounced and transcribed in the same way according to the regions and their dialects: Yǒngchūn quán in Mandarin pinyin, Wing-Chun keen in Cantonese Wade–Giles. It is made up of 2 terms: (quan/kuen) which means &quot;fist, boxing&quot; and the term (wing-chun, in Cantonese) meaning &quot;singing spring&quot;. The full name is thus translated as &quot;singing spring boxing&quot;.

In its short designation, the martial art is simply designated by these two sinograms:
* the sinogram yǒng/wing: &quot;to sing, to sing...&quot;
* the sinogram chūn/chun: &quot;spring, vitality...&quot;

This martial art is sometimes referred to by , characters different from , but pronounced and transcribed in the same way: They are literally translated as &quot;eternal spring&quot;, the character meaning &quot;eternal, endless&quot;. These characters also designate the Yongchun region near the city of Quanzhou (Fujian).

If the use of seems privileged today for Wing Chun styles, still appears in the name of other Southern Chinese martial arts (with often transcribed Weng Chun); for example jee shim weng chun and Yǒng Chūn Bái Hè Quán ().

=== Romanization ===

In the West, the name of this martial art has been transcribed variably due to the use of different or personal Chinese language romanization methods, and differences in pronunciation between Chinese languages (but Cantonese was often preferred) or according to Western languages. In addition, some Wing Chun masters voluntarily created their own terms, in order to dissociate their personal teaching from traditional teachings. For example, Yip Man&#x27;s Ving Tsun or Leung Ting&#x27;s Wing Tsun.

Finally, this martial art is pronounced quite identically in the West but is written with many spellings: Ving Tsun, Wing Tsun, Wing Tsung, Yong Chun, Weng Chun, Wyng Tjun, Ving Tjun, Wing Tzun, Wing Tschun. Wing Chun is the most common form, used to apply to all lineages of this martial art.

=== Context ===
Context of the name Wing Chun varies between various branches of Wing Chun. Common legend is that the name is derived from Yim Wing-chun, the mythical progenator of the martial art, who was a student of the legendary Abbess Ng Mui.

According to the Hung Suen / Hung Gu Biu lineage, the Ng Mui / Yim Wing Chun legend was conceived to protect the identity of Cheung Ng, a Shaolin monk who survived the Manchurian massacres and took refuge at Red Boat Opera. The &quot;Yim Wing Chun&quot; name was chosen for specific reasons, as Yim could be understood as the word for &quot;Secret&quot; or &quot;Protected&quot;, and &quot;Wing Chun&quot; refers to Siu Lam Wing Chun Tong (the Always Spring Hall). With &quot;Yim Wing Chun&quot; being a secret code for &quot;the secret art of Siu Lam Wing Chun Hall.&quot;

In the Pan Nam lineage, the &quot;Wing&quot; in Wing Chun comes from Chan Wing-wah, one of the founders of Hongmen. According to the Pao Fa Lien lineage, the name Wing Chun is a shortened form of the revolutionary motto, &quot;Wing yun chi jee; Mo mong Hon Juk; Dai dei wu chun.&quot; A secret code that allowed the anti-Qing revolutionaries to recognize each other. Eventually, the codeword was shortened to Wing Chun (Always Spring.)

== Origins ==
The definitive origin of Wing Chun remains unknown and is attributed to the development of Southern Chinese martial arts. Complications in the history and documentation of Wing Chun are attributed to the art being passed from teacher to student orally, rather than in writing. Another reason is the secrecy of its development, due to its connections to Anti-Qing rebellious movements.

There are at least eight different distinct lineages of Wing Chun, each having its own history of origin. Additionally, there are competing genealogies within the same branch or about the same individual teacher. The eight distinct lineages of Wing Chun which have been identified are:

* Ip Man
* Yuen Kay-shan
* Gu Lao Village
* Nanyang / Cao Dean
* Pan Nam
* Pao Fa Lien
* Hung Suen / Hung Gu Biu
* Jee Shim / Weng Chun
Regardless of the origins espoused by various Wing Chun branches and lineages, there is much third-party controversy and speculative theorizing regarding the true origins of Wing Chun. In the West, Wing Chun&#x27;s history has become a mix of fact and fiction due to the impacts of early secrecy and modern marketing.

== Modern Wing Chun ==

Of the eight Wing Chun lineages, the Ip Man and Yuen Kay-shan lineages are the most prolific branches of Wing Chun worldwide. The other lineages are pretty much unknown outside of China, except for the Pan Nam line, which survives in the USA and the Jee Shim / Weng Chun line with a strong presence in Germany.
The Yuen Chai Wan form of Wing Chun has a notable presence in Vietnam, with this lineage having earned the moniker of &quot;Vietnamese Wing Chun&quot;.

In 1949, Ip Man, considered the most important grandmaster of modern Wing Chun, brought the style from China to Hong Kong and eventually to the rest of the world. Yip Man&#x27;s most famous student was Bruce Lee, who had studied under Yip Man before he moved to the United States. Lee is also credited for popularizing Wing Chun internationally, although he would later develop his own martial arts philosophies (namely Jeet Kune Do) that contain many Wing Chun influences. Some masters changed the way of teaching only 1 loyal student because it was a tradition that came because of Qing dynasty&#x27;s influence and destruction of Southern Shaolin, in order to preserve the style, ancient masters taught only 1 loyal student.

=== The Ving Tsun Athletic Association ===
The Ving Tsun Athletic Association was founded in 1967 by Cantonese master Ip Man and seven of his senior students so they could teach Wing Chun together and Ip Man would not take on all the work himself. The first public demonstration of the Wing Chun fighting system, according to Ip Man, took place in Hong Kong at an official exhibition fight in the winter of 1969 at what was then the Baptist College (now the Hong Kong Baptist University). Leung Ting, a student of Ip Man, invited his master and some well-known representatives of the martial arts scene of the time to the college and conducted the exhibition fights in front of a specialist audience. The Association helped Wing Chun to spread to the rest of the world.

=== Organizational structure in modern Europe ===
There is no uniform umbrella organization in Europe under which Wing Chun practitioners are grouped, but rather numerous, sometimes competing and divided associations, schools, and individual teachers. Most associations do not appear in the legal form of associations that have voluntarily merged to form an association, but as commercial organizations in which associated schools are integrated, which are authorized and certified by the association. Some of the associations are organized in a franchise system.

=== International Wing Chun Organization (IWCO) ===
The International Wing Chun Organization (IWCO) was founded by Grandmaster Donald Mak in 1997, a respected Wing Chun practitioner and instructor who studied under the Great Grandmaster Chow Tze Chueng.

In some associations, based on the family system that was used in the past, obedience and obligations towards the master and his teacher are emphasized, although these are rarely directly related to their training students.

== Characteristics ==
=== General ===
Wing Chun puts emphasis on economic movement and encourages its practitioners to &quot;feel&quot; through their opponents&#x27; defenses and to utilize the incoming attacks with parrying, deflection, rapid punches, and finger pokes. Slapping and defensive maneuvers are used to distract the opponent to make them shift their defenses away from their centerline.

Wing Chun favors a relatively high, narrow stance with the elbows close to the body. Within the stance, arms are generally positioned across the vital points of the centerline with hands in a vertical &quot;wu sau&quot; (&quot;protecting hand&quot; position). This puts the practitioner in a position to make readily placed blocks and fast-moving blows to vital striking points down the center of the body, i.e. the neck, chest, belly, and groin. Shifting or turning within a stance is done on the heels, balls, or middle (K1 or Kidney point 1) of the foot, depending on the lineage. Some Wing Chun styles discourage the use of high kicks because this risks counter-attacks to the groin. The practice of &quot;settling&quot; one&#x27;s opponent to brace them more effectively against the ground helps one deliver as much force as possible.

=== Relaxation ===
Softness (via relaxation) and performance of techniques in a relaxed and controlled manner By training the physical, mental, breathing, energy, and force in a relaxed manner a &quot;soft wholesome force&quot; known as Chi is develop which is fundamental to Wing Chun. On &quot;softness&quot; in Wing Chun, Ip Man said during an interview:

=== Teaching structure in the past ===
In ancient China, Wing Chun, like all other martial arts or craft guilds, was traditionally passed on in a familiar way, from master to student. The master, who had personal responsibility for the entire training of the student (apprentice), was addressed as Sifu (master). The lessons often took place in the master&#x27;s house, where a personal bond would develop between the master and his family and the student (apprentice), with certain mutual obligations. The first public martial arts schools were established in Hong Kong. Since then, Wing Chun&#x27;s lessons have taken on a more modern, academic, and commercial character.

In some schools, however, the family system was still maintained. Lo Man-Kam, a nephew of Ip Man, still teaches his students in his home in Taipei. Selected long-term students are accepted into the inner circle of the Wing Chun family by the Sifu in the traditional way, through a master-student tea ceremony.

== Forms ==
=== Most common forms ===

The most common system of forms in Wing Chun consists of three empty hand forms, two weapon forms: the Dragon pole and Butterfly swords, and a wooden dummy form.

==== Empty hand ====
===== Siu nim tau =====
The first and most important form in Wing Chun, siu nim tau (), is practiced throughout the practitioner&#x27;s lifetime. It is the foundation or &quot;seed&quot; of the art, on which all succeeding forms and techniques are based. Fundamental rules of balance and body structure are developed here. Using a car analogy; for some branches this would provide the chassis and for others, this is the engine. It serves as the basic alphabet of the system. Some branches view the symmetrical stance as the fundamental fighting stance, while others see it as a training stance used in developing technique.

Although many of the movements are similar, siu nim tau varies significantly between the different branches of Wing Chun. In Ip Man&#x27;s Wing Chun, the first section of the form is done by training the basic power for the hand techniques by tensing and relaxing the arms. In Moy Yat&#x27;s Wing Chun, the first section of the form is done without muscle tension and slowly in a meditative, calm, and being &quot;in the moment&quot; way. In 1972, weeks before he died, Ip Man demonstrated Siu Nim Tau (also known as Siu Lim Tau) on film, showing how the form is to be performed.

===== Chum kiu =====
The second form, chum kiu , focuses on coordinated movement of body mass and entry techniques to &quot;bridge the gap&quot; between practitioner and opponent, and move in to disrupt their structure and balance. Close-range attacks using the elbows and knees are also developed here. It also teaches methods of recovering position and centerline when in a compromised position where Siu Nim Tau structure has been lost. For some branches, bodyweight in striking is a central theme, either from pivoting (rotational) or stepping (translational). Likewise, for some branches, this form provides the engine to the car. For branches that use the &quot;sinking bridge&quot; interpretation, the form has more emphasis on &quot;uprooting&quot;, adding multi-dimensional movement and spiraling to the already developed engine.

===== Biu jee =====
The third and last form, biu jee , is composed of extreme short-range and extreme long-range techniques, low kicks and sweeps, and &quot;emergency techniques&quot; to counter-attack when structure and centerline have been seriously compromised, such as when the practitioner is seriously injured., As well as the pivoting and stepping developed in Chum Kiu, a third degree of freedom, involves more upper body, and stretching is developed for more power. Such movements include close-range elbow strikes and finger thrusts to the throat. For some branches, this is the turbo-charger of the car; for others, it can be seen as a &quot;pit stop&quot; kit that should never come into play, recovering your &quot;engine&quot; when it has been lost. Still, other branches view this form as imparting deadly &quot;killing&quot; and maiming techniques that should never be used without good reason. A common Wing Chun saying is, &quot;Biu jee doesn&#x27;t go out the door&quot;. Some interpret this to mean the form should be kept secret; others interpret it as meaning it should never be used if you can help it.

==== Wooden dummy ====

Mu ren zhuang () is performed on a wooden dummy, which serves as a training tool to teach the student the use of Wing Chun Kuen&#x27;s 108 movements against a live opponent. There are many versions of this form which come from a variety of Wing Chun Kung Fu lineages.

=== Other forms ===
San Sik (Chinese: ; Cantonese Yale: Sáan Sīk; pinyin: Sǎn Shì; &#x27;Separate forms&#x27;), along with the other three forms, is the basis of all Wing Chun techniques. They are compact in structure, and can be loosely grouped into three broad categories: (1) Focus on building body structure through basic punching, standing, turning, and stepping drills; (2) Fundamental arm cycles and changes, firmly ingraining the cardinal tools for interception and adaptation; (3) Sensitivity training and combination techniques.

==== Weapons ====
The Yuen Kay Shan / Sum Nung branch also historically trained to throw darts (Biu).

== In film and popular culture ==
Sammo Hung directed two films about Wing Chun practitioner Leung Jan: &quot;Warriors Two&quot; (1978), in which Leung is played Sammo Hung himself, and &quot;The Prodigal Son&quot; (1981), in which Leung is played by Yuen Biao.

Donnie Yen played the role of Wing Chun Grandmaster Ip Man in the 2008 movie &quot;Ip Man&quot;, and in its sequels &quot;Ip Man 2&quot;, &quot;Ip Man 3,&quot; and &quot;Ip Man 4&quot;. The Ip Man series of movies is credited for reviving interest in the martial art in the 2010s and the Ip Man trilogy received critical acclaim in the box office. Ip Man was Bruce Lee&#x27;s master, which made the trilogy so popular. Lee was largely responsible for launching the &quot;kung fu craze&quot; of the 1970s.

For the 2008 American action thriller film &quot;Bangkok Dangerous&quot;, actor Nicolas Cage trained in Wing Chun extensively. A particular scene in the film shows Cage’s skills whilst drilling moves with another Wing Chun practitioner (played by Thai actor Shahkrit Yamnam).

In December 2019, a new Wing Chun fighter named Leroy Smith was introduced to the fighting game &quot;Tekken 7&quot; roster as downloadable content. When creating characters to represent real-world martial arts, the developers wanted to introduce a new fighter utilizing Wing Chun. The developers consulted a student of Ip Man&#x27;s nephew, who provided motion capture for the character.

== Notable practitioners ==


== See also ==
* Chinese martial arts
* Wing Chun terms
* Wushu
* List of films featuring Wing Chun

== Bibliography ==
* 


== Notes ==
== External links ==
*List of Wing Chun techniques

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217127" start="0" end="9" title="Wing Chun" label="Wing Chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="11" end="20" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q217127" start="25" end="34" title="Wing Chun" label="Yong Chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="36" end="44" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q593800" start="124" end="148" title="Nanquan (martial art)" label="Southern Chinese kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="181" end="193" title="self-defense" label="self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q163830" start="836" end="842" title="Ip Man" label="Ip Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573082" start="847" end="860" title="Yuen Kay-shan" label="Yuen Kay-shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16397" start="982" end="991" title="Bruce Lee" label="Bruce Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840232" start="1316" end="1346" title="Ip Man (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Ip Man&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q311723" start="1356" end="1366" title="Donnie Yen" label="Donnie Yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17378799" start="1409" end="1417" title="Tekken 7" label="Tekken 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="1807" end="1822" title="Mandarin pinyin" label="Mandarin pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="1842" end="1851" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q208442" start="1852" end="1862" title="Wade–Giles" label="Wade–Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11132267" start="2787" end="2805" title="Weng Chun" label="jee shim weng chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q803758" start="2810" end="2831" title="Fujian White Crane" label="Yǒng Chūn Bái Hè Quán"/>
<link wikidata="Q163830" start="3301" end="3308" title="Yip Man" label="Yip Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q206128" start="3329" end="3339" title="Leung Ting" label="Leung Ting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923693" start="3723" end="3744" title="branches of Wing Chun" label="branches of Wing Chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q985683" start="3793" end="3806" title="Yim Wing-chun" label="Yim Wing-chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180752" start="3894" end="3900" title="Ng Mui" label="Ng Mui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361838" start="4485" end="4492" title="Pan Nam" label="Pan Nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q213387" start="4585" end="4592" title="Hongmen" label="Hongmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q593800" start="5020" end="5049" title="Nanquan (martial art)" label="Southern Chinese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q163830" start="5604" end="5610" title="Ip Man" label="Ip Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573082" start="5613" end="5626" title="Yuen Kay-shan" label="Yuen Kay-shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361838" start="5667" end="5674" title="Pan Nam" label="Pan Nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q859691" start="5717" end="5725" title="Jee Shim" label="Jee Shim"/>
<link wikidata="Q11132267" start="5728" end="5737" title="Weng Chun" label="Weng Chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166096" start="5859" end="5870" title="Speculative reason" label="speculative"/>
<link wikidata="Q163830" start="6118" end="6124" title="Ip Man" label="Ip Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573082" start="6129" end="6142" title="Yuen Kay-shan" label="Yuen Kay-shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361838" start="6283" end="6290" title="Pan Nam" label="Pan Nam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6331" end="6339" title="Branches of Wing Chun#Jee Shim / Weng Chun" label="Jee Shim"/>
<link wikidata="Q11132267" start="6342" end="6351" title="Weng Chun" label="Weng Chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="6383" end="6390" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315339" start="6396" end="6409" title="Yuen Chai Wan" label="Yuen Chai Wan"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="6454" end="6461" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6516" end="6536" title="Branches of Wing Chun#Yuen Chai Wan / Nguyen Te Cong / Vietnamese Wing Chun" label="Vietnamese Wing Chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q163830" start="6554" end="6560" title="Ip Man" label="Ip Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="6657" end="6666" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16397" start="6747" end="6756" title="Bruce Lee" label="Bruce Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q188923" start="6965" end="6977" title="Jeet Kune Do" label="Jeet Kune Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q603686" start="7732" end="7760" title="Hong Kong Baptist University" label="Hong Kong Baptist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q206128" start="7763" end="7773" title="Leung Ting" label="Leung Ting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8847" end="8862" title="Chow Tze Chueng" label="Chow Tze Chueng"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655496" start="10351" end="10359" title="Hard and soft (martial arts)" label="Softness"/>
<link wikidata="Q952375" start="10989" end="10993" title="Sifu" label="Sifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q602507" start="11884" end="11894" title="Hand-to-hand combat" label="Empty hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q163830" start="12651" end="12657" title="Ip Man" label="Ip Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927564" start="12803" end="12810" title="Moy Yat" label="Moy Yat"/>
<link wikidata="Q519174" start="15098" end="15111" title="Mu ren zhuang" label="Mu ren zhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573082" start="15929" end="15942" title="Yuen Kay Shan" label="Yuen Kay Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60686031" start="15945" end="15953" title="Sum Nung" label="Sum Nung"/>
<link wikidata="Q311219" start="16044" end="16054" title="Sammo Hung" label="Sammo Hung"/>
<link wikidata="Q866631" start="16103" end="16112" title="Leung Jan" label="Leung Jan"/>
<link wikidata="Q612816" start="16120" end="16132" title="Warriors Two" label="Warriors Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015963" start="16202" end="16218" title="The Prodigal Son (1981 film)" label="The Prodigal Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q319364" start="16261" end="16270" title="Yuen Biao" label="Yuen Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q311723" start="16273" end="16283" title="Donnie Yen" label="Donnie Yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q573743" start="16356" end="16362" title="Ip Man (film)" label="Ip Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193433" start="16395" end="16403" title="Ip Man 2" label="Ip Man 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757672" start="16417" end="16425" title="Ip Man 3" label="Ip Man 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958357" start="16443" end="16451" title="Ip Man 4" label="Ip Man 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16397" start="16632" end="16641" title="Bruce Lee" label="Bruce Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="16744" end="16751" title="kung fu" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748530" start="16822" end="16851" title="Bangkok Dangerous (2008 film)" label="&amp;quot;Bangkok Dangerous&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="16859" end="16871" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115325" start="17037" end="17052" title="Shahkrit Yamnam" label="Shahkrit Yamnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="17138" end="17151" title="fighting game" label="fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q17378799" start="17158" end="17166" title="Tekken 7" label="Tekken 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066707" start="17183" end="17203" title="downloadable content" label="downloadable content"/>
<link wikidata="Q806259" start="17272" end="17282" title="Bandai-Namco" label="developers"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="17411" end="17425" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="17493" end="17513" title="Chinese martial arts" label="Chinese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025080" start="17516" end="17531" title="Wing Chun terms" label="Wing Chun terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479346" start="17534" end="17539" title="Wushu (sport)" label="Wushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629524" start="17542" end="17575" title="List of films featuring Wing Chun" label="List of films featuring Wing Chun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33701" wikidata="Q3116136" url="?curid=33701" title="William Jardine (merchant)">
<text>William Jardine (24 February 1784 – 27 February 1843) was a Scottish opium trader and physician who co-founded the Hong Kong–based conglomerate Jardine, Matheson &amp; Co. Educated in medicine at the University of Edinburgh, in 1802 Jardine obtained a diploma from the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. The next year, he became a surgeon&#x27;s mate aboard the &quot;Brunswick&quot; belonging to the East India Company, and set sail for India. In May 1817, he abandoned medicine for trade.

Jardine was a resident in China from 1820 to 1839. His early success in Canton as a commercial agent for opium merchants in India led to his admission in 1825 as a partner in Magniac &amp; Co., and by 1826 he controlled that firm&#x27;s Canton operations. James Matheson joined him shortly afterwards with Magniac &amp; Co. reconstituted as Jardine, Matheson &amp; Co. in 1832. After Imperial Commissioner Lin Zexu destroyed 20,000 cases of opium seized from British traders in 1839, Jardine arrived in London that September to press Foreign Secretary Lord Palmerston for a forceful response, which resulted in the First Opium War.

Following his return to Britain from China, between 1841 and 1843, he was Member of Parliament for Ashburton representing the Whig party. Jardine died in 1843, bringing an end to his short political career.

==Early life==
Jardine, one of seven children, was born in 1784 on a small farm near Lochmaben, Dumfriesshire, Scotland. His father, Andrew Jardine (abt. 1750- d. 1793), died when he was nine, leaving the family in some economic difficulty. Though struggling to make ends meet, Jardine&#x27;s older brother David (1776-1827) provided him with money to attend school. Jardine began to acquire credentials at the age of sixteen. 

In 1800 he entered the University of Edinburgh Medical School where he took classes in anatomy, medical practice, and obstetrics among others. While his schooling was in progress, Jardine was apprenticed to a surgeon who would provide housing, food, and the essential acquaintance with a hospital practice, with the money his older brother, David, provided. 

He graduated from the Edinburgh Medical School on 2 March 1802, and was presented a full diploma from the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. He chose to join the service of the British East India Company (EIC) and in 1803, at the age of 19, boarded the East Indiaman &quot;Brunswick&quot; as a surgeon&#x27;s mate in the East India Company&#x27;s Maritime Marine Service. Taking advantage of his employee&#x27;s &quot;cargo privilege&quot;, he traded successfully in cassia, cochineal and musk during his 14 years as a surgeon at the firm.

On his first voyage, Jardine met two men who would come to play a role in his future as a drug trafficking merchant. The first was Thomas Weeding, a fellow doctor, and surgeon of the Glatton, one of the other ships in the convoy. The second was 26-year-old Charles Magniac who had arrived in Guangzhou at the beginning of 1801 to supervise his father&#x27;s watch business in Canton in partnership with Daniel Beale.

By leaving the East India Company in 1817, Jardine was able to exploit the opportunity afforded by the company&#x27;s policy of not transporting opium but contracting the trade out to free traders. Jardine entered into partnership with retired surgeon Thomas Weeding and opium and cotton trader Framji Cowasji Banaji. The firm did well and established Jardine&#x27;s reputation as an able, steady and experienced private trader. One of Jardine&#x27;s agents in Bombay, who would become his lifelong friend, was Parsee opium and cotton trader Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy. 

Both men were on the &quot;Brunswick&quot; when the crew of a French ship forcibly boarded her. Jeejeebhoy long continued as a close business associate of Jardine and that a portrait of Jeejeebhoy hung in Jardines&#x27; Hong Kong office in the 1990s was tribute to that.

In 1824, a very important opportunity arose for Jardine. Magniac &amp; Co., one of the two most successful agency houses in Canton, fell into disarray. Hollingworth Magniac, who succeeded his brother Charles Magniac after the latter&#x27;s death in Paris, was in search of competent partners to join his firm as he was intent on leaving Asia. 

He was also forced to have his brother, Daniel, resign from the firm after marrying his Chinese mistress. In later years, Jardine had helped Daniel by sending his young son Daniel Francis, his child by his Chinese wife, to Scotland for school. Magniac invited Jardine to join him in 1825 and, three years later, James Matheson joined the partnership. 

Magniac returned to England in the late 1820s with the firm in the hands of Jardine and Matheson. Contrary to the practice at the time of retiring partners removing their capital from the firm, Magniac left his capital with the firm in trust to Jardine and Matheson. The firm carried on as Magniac &amp; Co. until 1832 as the name Magniac was still formidable throughout China and India. Magniac wrote of William Jardine:
You will find Jardine a most conscientious, honourable, and kind-hearted fellow, extremely liberal and an excellent man of business in this market, where his knowledge and experience in the opium trade and in most articles of export is highly valuable. He requires to be known and to be properly appreciated.
==Jardine, Matheson &amp; Co.==

James Matheson joined Magniac &amp; Co. from the firm Yrissari &amp; Co where he was partner. After Francis Xavier de Yrissari&#x27;s death, Matheson wound up the firm&#x27;s affairs and closed shop. Yrissari, leaving no heir, had willed all his shares in the firm to Matheson. This created the perfect opportunity for Matheson to join in commerce with Jardine. Matheson proved a perfect partner for Jardine. 

James Matheson and his nephew, Alexander Matheson, joined the firm Magniac and Co. in 1827, but their association was officially advertised on 1 January 1828. Jardine was known as the planner, the tough negotiator and strategist of the firm and Matheson was known as the organization man, who handled the firm&#x27;s correspondence, and other complex articles including legal affairs. 

Matheson was known to be behind many of the company&#x27;s innovative practices. And both men were a study in contrasts, Jardine being tall, lean and trim while Matheson was short and slightly portly. Matheson had the advantage of coming from a family with social and economic means, while Jardine came from a much more humble background. 

Jardine was tough, serious, detail-oriented and reserved while Matheson was creative, outspoken and jovial. Jardine was known to work long hours and was extremely business-minded, while Matheson enjoyed the arts and was very eloquent. 

William C. Hunter wrote about Jardine, &quot;He was a gentleman of great strength of character and of unbounded generosity.&quot; Hunter&#x27;s description of Matheson was, &quot;He was a gentleman of great suavity of manner and the impersonation of benevolence.&quot; But there were similarities in both men. Both men were hardworking, driven and single-minded in their pursuit of wealth.

Both men were also known to have continuously sent money home to less fortunate family members in Scotland and to have helped nephews by providing them work within the firm. Upon the death of his older brother, David, Jardine set up a fund for his brother&#x27;s widow and arranged schooling for his four sons. In a letter to Magniac, Jardine wrote,
My only Brother has a very large family, three or four of them Boys, and as he has not the means of providing for them all, in the way I wish to see them provided for, I am desirous of having one of them here, to commence in the office, and work his way, by industry and application to business.
All four of David&#x27;s sons moved on to work with Jardine, Matheson &amp; Co. in Hong Kong and South China, starting as clerks and eventually becoming partners, managing partners or senior executives of the firm, locally known as taipan, a Chinese colloquial title meaning foreign-born senior manager.

But, it was their reputation for business probity, innovative management and strict fiscal policies that sustained their partnership&#x27;s success in a period where businesses operated in a highly volatile and uncertain environment where the line between success and bankruptcy was extremely thin. Jardine was known for his legendary imperiousness and pride. 

He was nicknamed by the locals &quot;The Iron-headed Old Rat&quot; after being hit on the head by a club in Guangzhou. Jardine, after being hit, just shrugged off the injury with dour resilience. He had only one chair in his office in the &quot;Creek Hong&quot; in Canton, and that was his own. Visitors were never allowed to sit, to impress upon them that Jardine was a very busy man. 

Jardine was also known as a crisis manager. In 1822, during his visit to the firm&#x27;s Guangzhou office, he found the local office in management crisis, with employees in near mutiny against the firm&#x27;s officers. Jardine then proceeded to take temporary control and succeeded in putting the office in order in just a matter of days. Also a shrewd judge of character, Jardine was even able to persuade the Rev. Charles Gutzlaff, a Prussian missionary, to interpret for their ship captains during coastal smuggling of opium, using the idea that the reverend would best gather more converts during these smuggling operations. Matheson claimed to own the only piano in Asia and was also an accomplished player. 

He was also responsible for removing one of the firm&#x27;s ship captains for refusing to offload opium chests on the Sabbath, Matheson observed, &quot;We have every respect for persons entertaining strict religious principles, but we fear that very godly people are not suited for the drug trade.&quot;
On 1 July 1832, Jardine, Matheson &amp; Co., a partnership between Jardine and Matheson as senior partners, and Magniac, Alexander Matheson, Jardine&#x27;s nephew Andrew Johnstone, Matheson&#x27;s nephew Hugh Matheson, John Abel Smith, and Henry Wright, as the first partners, was formed in China, taking the Chinese name &#x27;Ewo&#x27; (怡和) pronounced &quot;Yee-Wo&quot; and meaning &quot;Happy Harmony&quot;. 

The name was chosen as it had been used by the former Ewo Hong run by Chinese merchant Howqua, a business with an impeccable reputation. The firm&#x27;s operations included smuggling opium into China from Malwa, India, trading spices and sugar with the Philippines, exporting Chinese tea and silk to England, factoring and insuring cargo, renting out dockyard facilities and warehouse space, trade financing and other numerous lines of business and trade. 

In 1834, Parliament ended the monopoly of the EIC on trade between Britain and China. Jardine, Matheson &amp; Co. took this opportunity to fill the vacuum left by the East India Company. With its first voyage carrying raw silk, but ironically no tea, the ship (now owned by Thomas Weeding, but previously owned in partnership by Weeding, Jardine and Cowasjee) left for England, becoming the first free trader to arrive in England after the monopoly ceased. Jardine Matheson then began its transformation from a major commercial agent of the East India Company into the largest British trading hong (洋行), or firm, in Asia. William Jardine was now being referred to by the other traders as &quot;taipan&quot;.

Jardine wanted the opium trafficking to expand in China. In 1834, working with the Chief Superintendent of Trade representing the British Empire, William, Lord Napier, tried unsuccessfully to negotiate with the Chinese officials in Canton. The Chinese Viceroy ordered the Canton offices where Napier was staying to be blockaded and the inhabitants including Napier to be held hostages. Lord Napier, a broken and humiliated man, was allowed to return to Macao by land and not by ship as requested. Suffering a fever, he died a few days later.

Jardine, who had good relations with Lord Napier, a Scottish peer, and his family, then took the initiative to use the debacle as an opportunity to convince the British government to use force to further open trade. In early 1835 he ordered James Matheson to leave for Britain to persuade the Government to take up strong action to further open up trade in China. 

Matheson accompanied Napier&#x27;s widow to England using an eye-infection as an excuse to return home. Matheson in England then extensively travelled to meet with several parties, both for government and for trade, to gather support for a war with China. Initially unsuccessful in his forays in England, he was brushed aside by the &quot;Iron Duke&quot; (Duke of Wellington), then the British Foreign Secretary, and reported bitterly to Jardine of being insulted by an arrogant and stupid man. However, his activities and widespread lobbying in several forums including Parliament sowed seeds that would lead to war in a few years.

==Departure from China and breakdown of relations==
Matheson returned to China in 1836 to prepare to take over the firm as Jardine was preparing to fulfill his temporarily delayed retirement. Jardine left Canton on 26 January 1839 for Britain as retirement but in actuality to try to continue Matheson&#x27;s work. The respect shown by other foreign opium traffickers to Jardine before his departure can be best illustrated in the following passage from a book by William C. Hunter.
A few days before Mr. Jardine’s departure from Canton, the entire foreign community entertained him at a dinner in the dining room of the East India Company’s Factory. About eighty persons of all nationalities, including India, were present, and they did not separate until several hours after midnight. It was an event frequently referred to afterwards amongst the residents, and to this day there are a few of us who still speak of it.
The Qing government was pleased to hear of Jardine&#x27;s departure, then, being were more familiar with Jardine as the trading head and were quite unfamiliar with Matheson, proceeded to stop the opium trafficker. Lin Zexu, appointed specifically to suppress the drug trafficking in Guangzhou, stated, &quot;The Iron-headed Old Rat, the sly and cunning ring-leader of the opium smugglers has left for The Land of Mist, of fear from the Middle Kingdom&#x27;s wrath.&quot; He then ordered the surrender of all opium and the destruction of more than 20,000 cases of opium in Guangzhou, representing 50 per cent of the entire trade in opium in 1838. He also ordered the arrest of opium trafficker Lancelot Dent, the head of Dent and Company (a rival company to Jardine Matheson). Lin also wrote to Queen Victoria, to submit in obeisance in the presence of the Chinese Emperor.

==War and the Chinese surrender==
Having arrived in London in September 1839, Jardine&#x27;s first order of business was to meet with Lord Palmerston. He carried with him a letter of introduction written by Superintendent Elliot that relayed a few of his credentials to Palmerston,
This gentleman has for several years stood at the head of our commercial community and he carries with him the esteem and kind wishes of the whole foreign society, honourably acquired by a long career of private charity and public spirit.
In 1839, Jardine successfully persuaded the British Foreign Minister, Lord Palmerston, to wage war on China, giving a full detailed plan for war, detailed strategic maps, battle strategies, the indemnifications and political demands from China and even the number of troops and warships needed. Aided by Matheson&#x27;s nephew, Alexander Matheson (1805–1881) and MP John Abel Smith, Jardine met several times with Palmerston to argue the necessity for a war plan. 

This plan was known as the Jardine Paper. In the &#x27;Jardine Paper&#x27;, Jardine emphasized several points to Palmerston in several meetings and they are as follows: There was to be complete compensation for the 20,000 chests of opium that Lin had confiscated, the conclusion of a viable commercial treaty that would prevent any further hostilities, and the opening of further ports of trade such as Fuzhou, Ningbo, Shanghai, and Keeson-chow. 

It was also suggested by Jardine that should the need arise to occupy an island or harbor in the vicinity of Guangzhou, Hong Kong would be perfect because it provided an extensive and protected anchorage. As early as the mid-1830s, the island of Hong Kong had already been used for transhipment points by Jardine Matheson and other firms&#x27; ships. 

Jardine clearly stated what he thought would be a sufficient naval and military force to complete the objectives he had outlined. He also provided maps and charts of the area. In a well calculated recommendation letter to Parliament, creating a precedent now infamously known as &#x27;Gunboat Diplomacy&#x27;, Jardine states:
No formal Purchase, – no tedious negotiations...A firman insistently issued to Sir F. Maitland authorizing him to take and retain possession is all that is necessary, and the Squadron under his Command is quite competent to do both...until an adequate naval and military force...could be sent out from the mother Country. When All this is accomplished – but not till then, a negotiation may be commenced in some such Terms as the following – You take my opium – I take your Islands in return – we are therefore Quits, – and thenceforth if you please let us live in friendly Communion and good fellowship. You cannot protect your Seaboard against Pirates and Buccaneers. I can – So let us understand Each other, and study to promote our mutual Interests.
Lord Palmerston, the Foreign Secretary who succeeded Wellington, decided mainly on the &quot;suggestions&quot; of Jardine to dispatch a military expedition to China. In June 1840, a fleet of 16 Royal Navy warships and British merchantmen, many of the latter leased from Jardine Matheson &amp; Co., arrived at Canton and the First Opium War quickly broke out. For the next two years, British forces engaged the Chinese military in numerous battles as part of a series of military campaigns intended to bring the Qing government to the negotiating table. Eventually, the British pushed far enough up north to threaten the Imperial Palace in Beijing itself. The Qing government, forced to surrender, gave in to the demands of the British. 
Richard Hughes, in &quot;Hongkong: A Borrowed Place, A Borrowed Time&quot;, stated &quot;William Jardine would have made his mark as admirably as a soldier as he did as a &quot;Tai-pan&quot;.&quot; Lord Palmerston wrote,
To the assistance and information which you and Mr. Jardine so handsomely afforded us it was mainly owing that we were able to give our affairs naval, military and diplomatic, in China those detailed instructions which have led to these satisfactory results.
In 1843, the Treaty of Nanking was signed by official representatives of both Britain and China. It allowed the opening of five major Chinese ports, granted extraterritoriality to foreigners and their activities in China, indemnification for the opium destroyed and completed the formal acquisition of the island of Hong Kong, which had been officially taken over as a trading and military base since 26 January 1841, though it had already been used years earlier as a transhipment point. Trade with China, especially in the illegal opium, grew, and so did the firm of Jardine, Matheson &amp; Co., which was already known as the &quot;Princely Hong&quot; for being the largest British trading firm in East Asia.

By 1841, Jardine had 19 intercontinental clipper ships, compared to close rival Dent and Company with 13. He also had hundreds of small ships, lorchas and small smuggling craft for coastal and upriver smuggling. In 1841, Jardine was elected to the House of Commons, a Whig Member of Parliament (MP) representing Ashburton in Devon. He was also a partner, along with Magniac, in the merchant banking firm of Magniac, Smith &amp; Co., later renamed Magniac, Jardine &amp; Co., the forerunner of the firm Matheson &amp; Co. Despite his nominal retirement, Jardine was still very much active in business and politics and built a townhouse in 6 Upper Belgrave Street, then a new upscale residential district in London near Buckingham Palace. He had also bought a country estate, Lanrick Castle, in Perthshire, Scotland.

==Death and legacy==
In late 1842, Jardine&#x27;s health had rapidly deteriorated due to colon cancer. In the latter part of the year, Jardine was already bedridden and in great pain. He was assisted by his nephew, Andrew Johnstone and later on by James Matheson in his correspondence. Despite his illness, Jardine was still very active in keeping an eye on business, politics and current affairs, and continued to welcome a steady stream of visits from family members, business partners, political associates and his constituents. 

He died on 27 February 1843, just three days after his 59th birthday, one of the richest and most powerful men in Britain and Member of Parliament. Jardine&#x27;s funeral was attended by a very large gathering of family, friends, government and business personalities, many of whom Jardine had helped in his lifetime.

Jardine, a bachelor, willed his estate to his siblings and his nephews. Though gleaning from Oxford University Press&#x27; immense collection of Jardine Matheson&#x27;s correspondence from its earliest years, it can be speculated that Jardine had an illegitimate child, a daughter, with a &#x27;Mrs. Ratcliffe&#x27; who was provided with an annual pension and shares with Jardine&#x27;s firms which was later on cashed out years after Jardine&#x27;s death. Jardine had provided extensive correspondence with various associates in London instructing to carry out provisions to Mrs. Ratcliffe and her daughter, named Matilda Jane or &#x27;Tilly&#x27; as Jardine affectionately called her in his letters. There were also letters from Tilly to Jardine requesting for additional monetary assistance. An older nephew, Andrew Johnstone, administered Jardine&#x27;s issue. 

His other nephews David, Joseph, Robert and Andrew Jardine, all sons of Jardine&#x27;s older brother David, continued to assist James Matheson in running Jardines. Matheson retired as taipan in 1842 and handed over control of the firm to his nephew Sir Alexander Matheson, who was also known as of the same capacity and competence as the elder Jardine and Matheson. David Jardine, another nephew of Jardine, became taipan after Sir Alexander Matheson and was one of the first two unofficial members appointed to the Legislative Council in Hong Kong. David in turn would hand over to his brother Sir Robert control of the firm. Joseph succeeded Robert as taipan.

Sir Robert Jardine (1825–1905) is the ancestor of the Buchanan-Jardine branch of the family. A descendant of Sir Robert, Sir John Buchanan-Jardine, sold his family&#x27;s 51% holding in Jardine, Matheson and Co. for $84 million at the then prevailing exchange rate in 1959. A great-nephew of Jardine who would be taipan from 1874 to 1886, William Keswick (1834–1912), is the ancestor of the Keswick branch (pronounced Ke-zick) of the family. 

Keswick is a grandson of Jardine&#x27;s older sister, Jean Johnstone. Keswick was responsible for opening the Japan office of the firm in 1859 and also expanding the Shanghai office. James Matheson returned to England to fill up the Parliament seat left vacant by Jardine and to head up the firm Matheson &amp; Co., previously known as Magniac, Jardine &amp; Co., in London, a merchant bank and Jardines&#x27; agent in England. 

In 1912, Jardine, Matheson &amp; Co. and the Keswicks would eventually buy out the shares of the Matheson family in the firm although the name is still retained. The company was managed by several of Jardine&#x27;s family members and their descendants throughout the decades, including the Keswicks, Buchanan-Jardines, Landales, Bell-Irvings, Patersons, Newbiggings and Weatheralls.

Notable Jardines managing directors, or taipans, included Sir Alexander Matheson, 1st Baronet, David Jardine, Robert Jardine, William Keswick, James Johnstone Keswick, Ben Beith, David Landale, Sir John Buchanan-Jardine, Sir William Johnstone &quot;Tony&quot; Keswick, Hugh Barton, Sir Michael Herries, Sir John Keswick, Sir Henry Keswick, Simon Keswick and Alasdair Morrison. There was a point in time in the early 20th century that the firm had two taipans at the same time, one in Hong Kong and one in Shanghai, to effectively manage the firm&#x27;s extensive affairs in both locations. Both taipans were responsible only to the senior partner or proprietor in London who was normally a retired former taipan and an elder member of the Jardine family.

Today, the Jardine Matheson Group is still very much active in Hong Kong, being one of the largest conglomerates in Hong Kong and its largest employer, second only to the government. Several landmarks in present-day Hong Kong are named after the firm and the founders Jardine and Matheson like Jardine&#x27;s Bazaar, Jardine&#x27;s Crescent, Jardine&#x27;s Bridge, Jardine&#x27;s Lookout, Yee Wo Street, Matheson Street, Jardine House and the Noon Day Gun. In 1947, a secret Trust was formed by members of the family to retain effective control over the company. 

Jardine, Matheson and Co. offered its shares to the public in 1961 under the tenure of Hugh Barton and was oversubscribed 56 times. The Keswick family, in consortium with several London-based banks and financial institutions, bought out the controlling shares of the Buchanan-Jardine family in 1959, but subsequently sold most of the shares during the 1961 public offering, retaining only about 10% of the company. The company had its head office redomiciled to Bermuda in 1984 under the tenure of Simon Keswick.

The present Chairman of Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd, Sir Henry Keswick, who is based in the UK, was the company&#x27;s taipan from 1970 (aged 31) to 1975 and was the 6th Keswick to be taipan of the company. His brother Simon was the company&#x27;s taipan from 1983 to 1988 and is the 7th Keswick to be taipan. Both brothers are the fourth generation of Keswicks in the company. The organizational structure of Jardines has changed almost totally, but members of Jardine&#x27;s family still control the firm through a complex cross-shareholding structure, several allied shareholders and a secretive 1947 Trust.

== Family tree==
==See also==
*Buchanan-Jardine baronets – branch of Jardine family from William&#x27;s brother David Jardine.

== Notes ==
==References==
* William Jardine and other Jardine taipans are fictionally portrayed in author James Clavell&#x27;s popular fiction novels &quot;Tai-Pan&quot; (1966), &quot;Gai-Jin&quot; (1993), &quot;Noble House&quot; (1981) and &quot;Whirlwind&quot; (1987).
* &quot;China Trade and Empire: Jardine, Matheson &amp; Co. and the Origins of British Rule in Hong Kong 1827-1843&quot; by Alain Le Pichon
* &quot;Jardine Matheson Archives&quot; Cambridge Library
* &quot;Jardine Matheson: Traders of the Far East&quot; by Sir Robert Blake
* &quot;The Thistle and the Jade&quot; by Maggie Keswick

==Further reading==
* Richard J. Grace. &quot;Opium and Empire: The Lives and Careers of William Jardine and James Matheson&quot; (McGill-Queen&#x27;s University Press; 2014) 476 pages.

== External links ==
* Official website of Jardine Matheson

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3116136" start="0" end="15" title="William Jardine (merchant)" label="William Jardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="115" end="124" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683452" start="144" end="170" title="Jardine Matheson" label="Jardine, Matheson &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="200" end="223" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171012" start="269" end="307" title="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="406" end="424" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="569" end="575" title="Guangzhou" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870843" start="753" end="767" title="James Matheson" label="James Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q184999" start="903" end="911" title="Lin Zexu" label="Lin Zexu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825430" start="912" end="971" title="Destruction of opium at Humen" label="destroyed 20,000 cases of opium seized from British traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="1049" end="1064" title="Lord Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="1112" end="1127" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804663" start="1229" end="1238" title="Ashburton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ashburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="1256" end="1260" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257725" start="1423" end="1432" title="Lochmaben" label="Lochmaben"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635089" start="1790" end="1828" title="University of Edinburgh Medical School" label="University of Edinburgh Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635089" start="2149" end="2173" title="Edinburgh Medical School" label="Edinburgh Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171012" start="2233" end="2271" title="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="2317" end="2335" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035668" start="2385" end="2398" title="East Indiaman" label="East Indiaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q204148" start="2599" end="2605" title="Cassia bark" label="cassia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244274" start="2607" end="2616" title="cochineal" label="cochineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q323461" start="2621" end="2625" title="musk" label="musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="2965" end="2974" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="3049" end="3055" title="Canton (Guangzhou)" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216514" start="3076" end="3088" title="Daniel Beale" label="Daniel Beale"/>
<link wikidata="Q53837974" start="3386" end="3407" title="Framji Cowasji Banaji" label="Framji Cowasji Banaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q13604560" start="3633" end="3652" title="Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy" label="Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881497" start="4080" end="4100" title="Hollingworth Magniac" label="Hollingworth Magniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="4177" end="4182" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870843" start="4585" end="4599" title="James Matheson" label="James Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q852348" start="8035" end="8041" title="taipan" label="taipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q67221" start="9274" end="9290" title="Karl Gützlaff" label="Charles Gutzlaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="9294" end="9301" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="9520" end="9525" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683452" start="9893" end="9920" title="Jardine Matheson" label="Jardine, Matheson &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="10186" end="10193" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419073" start="10345" end="10353" title="Ewo (hong)" label="Ewo Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391990" start="10378" end="10384" title="Howqua" label="Howqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q550691" start="10496" end="10501" title="Malwa" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="10544" end="10555" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="11118" end="11125" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016028" start="11604" end="11624" title="William Napier, 9th Lord Napier" label="William, Lord Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="12723" end="12741" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="12761" end="12778" title="Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q184999" start="14136" end="14144" title="Lin Zexu" label="Lin Zexu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483611" start="14615" end="14628" title="Lancelot Dent" label="Lancelot Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="14716" end="14730" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="14930" end="14945" title="Henry Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159828" start="15810" end="15823" title="Jardine Paper" label="Jardine Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q68481" start="16186" end="16192" title="Fuzhou" label="Fuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="16194" end="16200" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="16202" end="16210" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="16351" end="16360" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="17858" end="17868" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="17988" end="18003" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="18284" end="18299" title="Forbidden City" label="Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="18303" end="18310" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q238262" start="18894" end="18911" title="Treaty of Nanjing" label="Treaty of Nanking"/>
<link wikidata="Q19483" start="19187" end="19206" title="Hong Kong Island" label="island of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243728" start="19516" end="19529" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Building" label="Princely Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q273081" start="19635" end="19648" title="Clipper" label="clipper ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189838" start="19674" end="19690" title="Dent &amp;amp; Co." label="Dent and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q458581" start="19737" end="19744" title="lorcha (boat)" label="lorchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="19755" end="19764" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="19842" end="19858" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="19862" end="19866" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="19867" end="19887" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804663" start="19906" end="19915" title="Ashburton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ashburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649933" start="20368" end="20382" title="Lanrick Castle" label="Lanrick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="20499" end="20511" title="colon cancer" label="colon cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806930" start="22793" end="22811" title="Sir Robert Jardine, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Robert Jardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982555" start="22847" end="22870" title="Buchanan-Jardine baronets" label="Buchanan-Jardine branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q167076" start="23132" end="23147" title="William Keswick" label="William Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950819" start="23184" end="23198" title="Keswick branch" label="Keswick branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="24068" end="24085" title="managing director" label="managing director"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062870" start="24109" end="24144" title="Sir Alexander Matheson, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Alexander Matheson, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066218" start="24146" end="24159" title="David Jardine (Hong Kong)" label="David Jardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806930" start="24161" end="24175" title="Sir Robert Jardine, 1st Baronet" label="Robert Jardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059035" start="24194" end="24217" title="James Johnstone Keswick" label="James Johnstone Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24219" end="24228" title="Ben Beith" label="Ben Beith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16026220" start="24230" end="24243" title="David Landale" label="David Landale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12806344" start="24272" end="24318" title="Tony Keswick" label="Sir William Johnstone &amp;quot;Tony&amp;quot; Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989829" start="24320" end="24331" title="Hugh Barton" label="Hugh Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712358" start="24337" end="24352" title="Michael Herries" label="Michael Herries"/>
<link wikidata="Q18878621" start="24354" end="24370" title="Sir John Keswick" label="Sir John Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990102" start="24376" end="24389" title="Henry Keswick (businessman)" label="Henry Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519116" start="24391" end="24404" title="Simon Keswick" label="Simon Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280894" start="24409" end="24426" title="Alasdair Morrison (Jardine&amp;#x27;s)" label="Alasdair Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683452" start="24818" end="24840" title="Jardine Matheson Holdings" label="Jardine Matheson Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159812" start="25101" end="25122" title="Jardine&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Jardine&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159818" start="25172" end="25194" title="Jardine&amp;#x27;s Lookout" label="Jardine&amp;#x27;s Lookout"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051113" start="25196" end="25209" title="Yee Wo Street" label="Yee Wo Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130456" start="25228" end="25241" title="Jardine House" label="Jardine House"/>
<link wikidata="Q837123" start="25250" end="25262" title="Noon Day Gun" label="Noon Day Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="25834" end="25841" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982555" start="26531" end="26556" title="Buchanan-Jardine baronets" label="Buchanan-Jardine baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q316802" start="26735" end="26748" title="James Clavell" label="James Clavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734297" start="26785" end="26792" title="Tai-Pan (novel)" label="Tai-Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q275245" start="26841" end="26852" title="Noble House (book)" label="Noble House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33702" wikidata="Q18498" url="?curid=33702" title="Wolf">
<text>The wolf (Canis lupus; : wolves), also known as the grey wolf or gray wolf, is a canine native to Eurasia and North America. More than thirty subspecies of &quot;Canis lupus&quot; have been recognized, including the dog and dingo, though grey wolves, as popularly understood, only comprise naturally-occurring wild subspecies. The wolf is the largest wild extant member of the family Canidae, and is further distinguished from other &quot;Canis&quot; species by its less pointed ears and muzzle, as well as a shorter torso and a longer tail. The wolf is nonetheless related closely enough to smaller &quot;Canis&quot; species, such as the coyote and the golden jackal, to produce fertile hybrids with them. The wolf&#x27;s fur is usually mottled white, brown, grey, and black, although subspecies in the arctic region may be nearly all white.

Of all members of the genus &quot;Canis&quot;, the wolf is most specialized for cooperative game hunting as demonstrated by its physical adaptations to tackling large prey, its more social nature, and its highly advanced expressive behaviour, including individual or group howling. It travels in nuclear families consisting of a mated pair accompanied by their offspring. Offspring may leave to form their own packs on the onset of sexual maturity and in response to competition for food within the pack. Wolves are also territorial, and fights over territory are among the principal causes of mortality. The wolf is mainly a carnivore and feeds on large wild hooved mammals as well as smaller animals, livestock, carrion, and garbage. Single wolves or mated pairs typically have higher success rates in hunting than do large packs. Pathogens and parasites, notably the rabies virus, may infect wolves.

The global wild wolf population was estimated to be 300,000 in 2003 and is considered to be of Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Wolves have a long history of interactions with humans, having been despised and hunted in most pastoral communities because of their attacks on livestock, while conversely being respected in some agrarian and hunter-gatherer societies. Although the fear of wolves exists in many human societies, the majority of recorded attacks on people have been attributed to animals suffering from rabies. Wolf attacks on humans are rare because wolves are relatively few, live away from people, and have developed a fear of humans because of their experiences with hunters, farmers, ranchers, and shepherds.

== Etymology ==

The English &quot;wolf&quot; stems from the Old English , which is itself thought to be derived from the Proto-Germanic . The Proto-Indo-European root *&#x27; may also be the source of the Latin word for the animal &quot;lupus&quot; (*&#x27;). The name &quot;grey wolf&quot; refers to the greyish colour of the species.

Since pre-Christian times, Germanic peoples such as the Anglo-Saxons took on &quot;wulf&quot; as a prefix or suffix in their names. Examples include Wulfhere (&quot;Wolf Army&quot;), Cynewulf (&quot;Royal Wolf&quot;), Cēnwulf (&quot;Bold Wolf&quot;), Wulfheard (&quot;Wolf-hard&quot;), Earnwulf (&quot;Eagle Wolf&quot;), Wulfstān (&quot;Wolf Stone&quot;) Æðelwulf (&quot;Noble Wolf&quot;), Wolfhroc (&quot;Wolf-Frock&quot;), Wolfhetan (&quot;Wolf Hide&quot;), Scrutolf (&quot;Garb Wolf&quot;), Wolfgang (&quot;Wolf Gait&quot;) and Wolfdregil (&quot;Wolf Runner&quot;).

== Taxonomy ==

In 1758, the Swedish botanist and zoologist Carl Linnaeus published in his &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; the binomial nomenclature. &quot;Canis&quot; is the Latin word meaning &quot;dog&quot;, and under this genus he listed the doglike carnivores including domestic dogs, wolves, and jackals. He classified the domestic dog as &quot;Canis familiaris&quot;, and the wolf as &quot;Canis lupus&quot;. Linnaeus considered the dog to be a separate species from the wolf because of its &quot;cauda recurvata&quot; (upturning tail) which is not found in any other canid.

=== Subspecies ===
In the third edition of &quot;Mammal Species of the World&quot; published in 2005, the mammalogist W. Christopher Wozencraft listed under &quot;C. lupus&quot; 36 wild subspecies, and proposed two additional subspecies: &quot;familiaris&quot; (Linnaeus, 1758) and &quot;dingo&quot; (Meyer, 1793). Wozencraft included &quot;hallstromi&quot;—the New Guinea singing dog—as a taxonomic synonym for the dingo. Wozencraft referred to a 1999 mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) study as one of the guides in forming his decision, and listed the 38 subspecies of &quot;C. lupus&quot; under the biological common name of &quot;wolf&quot;, the nominate subspecies being the Eurasian wolf (&quot;C. l. lupus&quot;) based on the type specimen that Linnaeus studied in Sweden. Studies using paleogenomic techniques reveal that the modern wolf and the dog are sister taxa, as modern wolves are not closely related to the population of wolves that was first domesticated. In 2019, a workshop hosted by the IUCN/Species Survival Commission&#x27;s Canid Specialist Group considered the New Guinea singing dog and the dingo to be feral &quot;Canis familiaris&quot;, and therefore should not be assessed for the IUCN Red List.

=== Evolution ===

The phylogenetic descent of the extant wolf &quot;C. lupus&quot; from the earlier &quot;C. mosbachensis&quot; (which in turn descended from &quot;C. etruscus&quot;) is widely accepted. Among the oldest fossils of the modern grey wolf is from Ponte Galeria in Italy, dating to 406,500 ± 2,400 years ago. Remains from Cripple Creek Sump in Alaska may be considerably older, around 1 million years old, though differentiating between the remains of modern wolves and &quot;C. mosbachensis&quot; is difficult and ambiguous, with some authors choosing to include C. &quot;mosbachensis&quot; (which first appeared around 1.4 million years ago) as an early subspecies of &quot;C. lupus.&quot;

Considerable morphological diversity existed among wolves by the Late Pleistocene. Many Late Pleistocene wolf populations had more robust skulls and teeth than modern wolves, often with a shortened snout, a pronounced development of the temporalis muscle, and robust premolars. It is proposed that these features were specialized adaptations for the processing of carcass and bone associated with the hunting and scavenging of Pleistocene megafauna. Compared with modern wolves, some Pleistocene wolves showed an increase in tooth breakage similar to that seen in the extinct dire wolf. This suggests they either often processed carcasses, or that they competed with other carnivores and needed to consume their prey quickly. The frequency and location of tooth fractures in these wolves indicates they were habitual bone crackers like the modern spotted hyena.

Genomic studies suggest modern wolves and dogs descend from a common ancestral wolf population. A 2021 study found that the Himalayan wolf and the Indian plains wolf are part of a lineage that is basal to other wolves and split from them 200,000 years ago. Other wolves appear to share most of their common ancestry much more recently, within the last 23,000 years (around the peak and the end of the Last Glacial Maximum), originating from Siberia or Beringia. While some sources have suggested that this was a consequence of a population bottleneck, other studies have suggested that this a result of gene flow homogenising ancestry.

A 2016 genomic study suggests that Old World and New World wolves split around 12,500 years ago followed by the divergence of the lineage that led to dogs from other Old World wolves around 11,100–12,300 years ago. An extinct Late Pleistocene wolf may have been the ancestor of the dog, with the dog&#x27;s similarity to the extant wolf being the result of genetic admixture between the two. The dingo, Basenji, Tibetan Mastiff and Chinese indigenous breeds are basal members of the domestic dog clade. The divergence time for wolves in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia is estimated to be fairly recent at around 1,600 years ago. Among New World wolves, the Mexican wolf diverged around 5,400 years ago.

=== Admixture with other canids ===


In the distant past, there was gene flow between African wolves, golden jackals, and grey wolves. The African wolf is a descendant of a genetically admixed canid of 72% wolf and 28% Ethiopian wolf ancestry. One African wolf from the Egyptian Sinai Peninsula showed admixture with Middle Eastern grey wolves and dogs. There is evidence of gene flow between golden jackals and Middle Eastern wolves, less so with European and Asian wolves, and least with North American wolves. This indicates the golden jackal ancestry found in North American wolves may have occurred before the divergence of the Eurasian and North American wolves.

The common ancestor of the coyote and the wolf is admixed with a ghost population of an extinct unidentified canid. This canid was genetically close to the dhole and evolved after the divergence of the African hunting dog from the other canid species. The basal position of the coyote compared to the wolf has been proposed to be due to the coyote retaining more of the mitochondrial genome of this unidentified canid. Similarly, a museum specimen of a wolf from southern China collected in 1963 showed a genome that was 12–14% admixed from this unknown canid. In North America, some coyotes and wolves show varying degrees of past genetic admixture.

In more recent times, some male Italian wolves originated from dog ancestry, which indicates female wolves will breed with male dogs in the wild. In the Caucasus Mountains, ten percent of dogs including livestock guardian dogs, are first generation hybrids. Although mating between golden jackals and wolves has never been observed, evidence of jackal-wolf hybridization was discovered through mitochondrial DNA analysis of jackals living in the Caucasus Mountains and in Bulgaria. In 2021, a genetic study found that the dog&#x27;s similarity to the extant grey wolf was the result of substantial dog-into-wolf gene flow, with little evidence of the reverse.

== Description ==

The wolf is the largest extant member of the family Canidae, and is further distinguished from coyotes and jackals by a broader snout, shorter ears, a shorter torso and a longer tail. It is slender and powerfully built, with a large, deeply descending rib cage, a sloping back, and a heavily muscled neck. The wolf&#x27;s legs are moderately longer than those of other canids, which enables the animal to move swiftly, and to overcome the deep snow that covers most of its geographical range in winter, though more short-legged ecomorphs are found in some wolf populations. The ears are relatively small and triangular. The wolf&#x27;s head is large and heavy, with a wide forehead, strong jaws and a long, blunt muzzle. The skull is in length and in width. The teeth are heavy and large, making them better suited to crushing bone than those of other canids, though they are not as specialized as those found in hyenas. Its molars have a flat chewing surface, but not to the same extent as the coyote, whose diet contains more vegetable matter. Females tend to have narrower muzzles and foreheads, thinner necks, slightly shorter legs, and less massive shoulders than males.
Adult wolves measure in length and at shoulder height. The tail measures in length, the ears in height, and the hind feet are . The size and weight of the modern wolf increases proportionally with latitude in accordance with Bergmann&#x27;s rule. The mean body mass of the wolf is , the smallest specimen recorded at and the largest at . On average, European wolves weigh , North American wolves , and Indian and Arabian wolves . Females in any given wolf population typically weigh less than males. Wolves weighing over are uncommon, though exceptionally large individuals have been recorded in Alaska and Canada. In central Russia, exceptionally large males can reach a weight of .
=== Pelage ===

The wolf has very dense and fluffy winter fur, with a short undercoat and long, coarse guard hairs. Most of the undercoat and some guard hairs are shed in spring and grow back in autumn. The longest hairs occur on the back, particularly on the front quarters and neck. Especially long hairs grow on the shoulders and almost form a crest on the upper part of the neck. The hairs on the cheeks are elongated and form tufts. The ears are covered in short hairs and project from the fur. Short, elastic and closely adjacent hairs are present on the limbs from the elbows down to the calcaneal tendons. The winter fur is highly resistant to the cold. Wolves in northern climates can rest comfortably in open areas at by placing their muzzles between the rear legs and covering their faces with their tail. Wolf fur provides better insulation than dog fur and does not collect ice when warm breath is condensed against it.

In cold climates, the wolf can reduce the flow of blood near its skin to conserve body heat. The warmth of the foot pads is regulated independently from the rest of the body and is maintained at just above tissue-freezing point where the pads come in contact with ice and snow. In warm climates, the fur is coarser and scarcer than in northern wolves. Female wolves tend to have smoother furred limbs than males and generally develop the smoothest overall coats as they age. Older wolves generally have more white hairs on the tip of the tail, along the nose, and on the forehead. Winter fur is retained longest by lactating females, although with some hair loss around their teats. Hair length on the middle of the back is , and the guard hairs on the shoulders generally do not exceed , but can reach .
A wolf&#x27;s coat colour is determined by its guard hairs. Wolves usually have some hairs that are white, brown, grey and black. The coat of the Eurasian wolf is a mixture of ochreous (yellow to orange) and rusty ochreous (orange/red/brown) colours with light grey. The muzzle is pale ochreous grey, and the area of the lips, cheeks, chin, and throat is white. The top of the head, forehead, under and between the eyes, and between the eyes and ears is grey with a reddish film. The neck is ochreous. Long, black tips on the hairs along the back form a broad stripe, with black hair tips on the shoulders, upper chest and rear of the body. The sides of the body, tail, and outer limbs are a pale dirty ochreous colour, while the inner sides of the limbs, belly, and groin are white. Apart from those wolves which are pure white or black, these tones vary little across geographical areas, although the patterns of these colours vary between individuals.

In North America, the coat colours of wolves follow Gloger&#x27;s rule, wolves in the Canadian arctic being white and those in southern Canada, the U.S., and Mexico being predominantly grey. In some areas of the Rocky Mountains of Alberta and British Columbia, the coat colour is predominantly black, some being blue-grey and some with silver and black. Differences in coat colour between sexes is absent in Eurasia; females tend to have redder tones in North America. Black-coloured wolves in North America acquired their colour from wolf-dog admixture after the first arrival of dogs across the Bering Strait 12,000 to 14,000 years ago. Research into the inheritance of white colour from dogs into wolves has yet to be undertaken.

== Ecology ==
=== Distribution and habitat ===


Wolves occur across Eurasia and North America. However, deliberate human persecution because of livestock predation and fear of attacks on humans has reduced the wolf&#x27;s range to about one-third of its historic range; the wolf is now extirpated (locally extinct) from much of its range in Western Europe, the United States and Mexico, and completely in the British Isles and Japan. In modern times, the wolf occurs mostly in wilderness and remote areas. The wolf can be found between sea level and . Wolves live in forests, inland wetlands, shrublands, grasslands (including Arctic tundra), pastures, deserts, and rocky peaks on mountains. Habitat use by wolves depends on the abundance of prey, snow conditions, livestock densities, road densities, human presence and topography.

=== Diet ===

Like all land mammals that are pack hunters, the wolf feeds predominantly on ungulates that can be divided into large size and medium size , and have a body mass similar to that of the combined mass of the pack members. The wolf specializes in preying on the vulnerable individuals of large prey, with a pack of 15 able to bring down an adult moose. The variation in diet between wolves living on different continents is based on the variety of hoofed mammals and of available smaller and domesticated prey.

In North America, the wolf&#x27;s diet is dominated by wild large hoofed mammals (ungulates) and medium-sized mammals. In Asia and Europe, their diet is dominated by wild medium-sized hoofed mammals and domestic species. The wolf depends on wild species, and if these are not readily available, as in Asia, the wolf is more reliant on domestic species. Across Eurasia, wolves prey mostly on moose, red deer, roe deer and wild boar. In North America, important range-wide prey are elk, moose, caribou, white-tailed deer and mule deer. Prior to their extirpation from North America, wild horses were among the most frequently consumed prey of North American wolves. Wolves can digest their meal in a few hours and can feed several times in one day, making quick use of large quantities of meat. A well-fed wolf stores fat under the skin, around the heart, intestines, kidneys, and bone marrow, particularly during the autumn and winter.

Nonetheless, wolves are not fussy eaters. Smaller-sized animals that may supplement their diet include rodents, hares, insectivores and smaller carnivores. They frequently eat waterfowl and their eggs. When such foods are insufficient, they prey on lizards, snakes, frogs, and large insects when available. Wolves in some areas may consume fish and even marine life. Wolves also consume some plant material. In Europe, they eat apples, pears, figs, melons, berries and cherries. In North America, wolves eat blueberries and raspberries. They also eat grass, which may provide some vitamins, but is most likely used mainly to induce vomiting to rid themselves of intestinal parasites or long guard hairs. They are known to eat the berries of mountain-ash, lily of the valley, bilberries, cowberries, European black nightshade, grain crops, and the shoots of reeds.

In times of scarcity, wolves will readily eat carrion. In Eurasian areas with dense human activity, many wolf populations are forced to subsist largely on livestock and garbage. As prey in North America continue to occupy suitable habitats with low human density, North American wolves eat livestock and garbage only in dire circumstances. Cannibalism is not uncommon in wolves during harsh winters, when packs often attack weak or injured wolves and may eat the bodies of dead pack members.

=== Interactions with other predators ===

Wolves typically dominate other canid species in areas where they both occur. In North America, incidents of wolves killing coyotes are common, particularly in winter, when coyotes feed on wolf kills. Wolves may attack coyote den sites, digging out and killing their pups, though rarely eating them. There are no records of coyotes killing wolves, though coyotes may chase wolves if they outnumber them. According to a press release by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in 1921, the infamous Custer Wolf relied on coyotes to accompany him and warn him of danger. Though they fed from his kills, he never allowed them to approach him. Interactions have been observed in Eurasia between wolves and golden jackals, the latter&#x27;s numbers being comparatively small in areas with high wolf densities. Wolves also kill red, Arctic and corsac foxes, usually in disputes over carcasses, sometimes eating them.
Brown bears typically dominate wolf packs in disputes over carcasses, while wolf packs mostly prevail against bears when defending their den sites. Both species kill each other&#x27;s young. Wolves eat the brown bears they kill, while brown bears seem to eat only young wolves. Wolf interactions with American black bears are much rarer because of differences in habitat preferences. Wolves have been recorded on numerous occasions actively seeking out American black bears in their dens and killing them without eating them. Unlike brown bears, American black bears frequently lose against wolves in disputes over kills. Wolves also dominate and sometimes kill wolverines, and will chase off those that attempt to scavenge from their kills. Wolverines escape from wolves in caves or up trees.

Wolves may interact and compete with felids, such as the Eurasian lynx, which may feed on smaller prey where wolves are present and may be suppressed by large wolf populations. Wolves encounter cougars along portions of the Rocky Mountains and adjacent mountain ranges. Wolves and cougars typically avoid encountering each other by hunting at different elevations for different prey (niche partitioning). This is more difficult during winter. Wolves in packs usually dominate cougars and can steal their kills or even kill them, while one-to-one encounters tend to be dominated by the cat, who likewise will kill wolves. Wolves more broadly affect cougar population dynamics and distribution by dominating territory and prey opportunities and disrupting the feline&#x27;s behaviour. Wolf and Siberian tiger interactions are well-documented in the Russian Far East, where tigers significantly depress wolf numbers, sometimes to the point of localized extinction.

In Israel, Palestine, Central Asia and India wolves may encounter striped hyenas, usually in disputes over carcasses. Striped hyenas feed extensively on wolf-killed carcasses in areas where the two species interact. One-to-one, hyenas dominate wolves, and may prey on them, but wolf packs can drive off single or outnumbered hyenas. There is at least one case in Israel of a hyena associating and cooperating with a wolf pack.

===Infections===
Viral diseases carried by wolves include: rabies, canine distemper, canine parvovirus, infectious canine hepatitis, papillomatosis, and canine coronavirus. In wolves, the incubation period for rabies is eight to 21 days, and results in the host becoming agitated, deserting its pack, and travelling up to a day, thus increasing the risk of infecting other wolves. Although canine distemper is lethal in dogs, it has not been recorded to kill wolves, except in Canada and Alaska. The canine parvovirus, which causes death by dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, and endotoxic shock or sepsis, is largely survivable in wolves, but can be lethal to pups. Bacterial diseases carried by wolves include: brucellosis, Lyme disease, leptospirosis, tularemia, bovine tuberculosis, listeriosis and anthrax. Although lyme disease can debilitate individual wolves, it does not appear to significantly affect wolf populations. Leptospirosis can be contracted through contact with infected prey or urine, and can cause fever, anorexia, vomiting, anemia, hematuria, icterus, and death.

Wolves are often infested with a variety of arthropod exoparasites, including fleas, ticks, lice, and mites. The most harmful to wolves, particularly pups, is the mange mite (&quot;Sarcoptes scabiei&quot;), though they rarely develop full-blown mange, unlike foxes. Endoparasites known to infect wolves include: protozoans and helminths (flukes, tapeworms, roundworms and thorny-headed worms). Most fluke species reside in the wolf&#x27;s intestines. Tapeworms are commonly found in wolves, which they get though their prey, and generally cause little harm in wolves, though this depends on the number and size of the parasites, and the sensitivity of the host. Symptoms often include constipation, toxic and allergic reactions, irritation of the intestinal mucosa, and malnutrition. Wolves can carry over 30 roundworm species, though most roundworm infections appear benign, depending on the number of worms and the age of the host.

== Behaviour ==


=== Social structure ===


The wolf is a social animal. Its populations consist of packs and lone wolves, most lone wolves being temporarily alone while they disperse from packs to form their own or join another one. The wolf&#x27;s basic social unit is the nuclear family consisting of a mated pair accompanied by their offspring. The average pack size in North America is eight wolves and 5.5 in Europe. The average pack across Eurasia consists of a family of eight wolves (two adults, juveniles, and yearlings), or sometimes two or three such families, with examples of exceptionally large packs consisting of up to 42 wolves being known. Cortisol levels in wolves rise significantly when a pack member dies, indicating the presence of stress. During times of prey abundance caused by calving or migration, different wolf packs may join together temporarily.

Offspring typically stay in the pack for 10–54 months before dispersing. Triggers for dispersal include the onset of sexual maturity and competition within the pack for food. The distance travelled by dispersing wolves varies widely; some stay in the vicinity of the parental group, while other individuals may travel great distances of upwards of , , and from their natal (birth) packs. A new pack is usually founded by an unrelated dispersing male and female, travelling together in search of an area devoid of other hostile packs. Wolf packs rarely adopt other wolves into their fold and typically kill them. In the rare cases where other wolves are adopted, the adoptee is almost invariably an immature animal of one to three years old, and unlikely to compete for breeding rights with the mated pair. This usually occurs between the months of February and May. Adopted males may mate with an available pack female and then form their own pack. In some cases, a lone wolf is adopted into a pack to replace a deceased breeder.

Wolves are territorial and generally establish territories far larger than they require to survive assuring a steady supply of prey. Territory size depends largely on the amount of prey available and the age of the pack&#x27;s pups. They tend to increase in size in areas with low prey populations, or when the pups reach the age of six months when they have the same nutritional needs as adults. Wolf packs travel constantly in search of prey, covering roughly 9% of their territory per day, on average . The core of their territory is on average where they spend 50% of their time. Prey density tends to be much higher on the territory&#x27;s periphery. Wolves tend to avoid hunting on the fringes of their range to avoid fatal confrontations with neighbouring packs. The smallest territory on record was held by a pack of six wolves in northeastern Minnesota, which occupied an estimated , while the largest was held by an Alaskan pack of ten wolves encompassing . Wolf packs are typically settled, and usually leave their accustomed ranges only during severe food shortages. Territorial fights are among the principal causes of wolf mortality, one study concluding that 14–65% of wolf deaths in Minnesota and the Denali National Park and Preserve were due to other wolves.

===Communication===
Wolves communicate using vocalizations, body postures, scent, touch, and taste. The phases of the moon have no effect on wolf vocalization, and despite popular belief, wolves do not howl at the Moon. Wolves howl to assemble the pack usually before and after hunts, to pass on an alarm particularly at a den site, to locate each other during a storm, while crossing unfamiliar territory, and to communicate across great distances. Wolf howls can under certain conditions be heard over areas of up to . Other vocalizations include growls, barks and whines. Wolves do not bark as loudly or continuously as dogs do in confrontations, rather barking a few times and then retreating from a perceived danger. Aggressive or self-assertive wolves are characterized by their slow and deliberate movements, high body posture and raised hackles, while submissive ones carry their bodies low, flatten their fur, and lower their ears and tail.

Scent marking involves urine, feces, and preputial and anal gland scents. This is more effective at advertising territory than howling and is often used in combination with scratch marks. Wolves increase their rate of scent marking when they encounter the marks of wolves from other packs. Lone wolves will rarely mark, but newly bonded pairs will scent mark the most. These marks are generally left every throughout the territory on regular travelways and junctions. Such markers can last for two to three weeks, and are typically placed near rocks, boulders, trees, or the skeletons of large animals. Raised leg urination is considered to be one of the most important forms of scent communication in the wolf, making up 60–80% of all scent marks observed.

=== Reproduction ===

Wolves are monogamous, mated pairs usually remaining together for life. Should one of the pair die, another mate is found quickly. With wolves in the wild, inbreeding does not occur where outbreeding is possible. Wolves become mature at the age of two years and sexually mature from the age of three years. The age of first breeding in wolves depends largely on environmental factors: when food is plentiful, or when wolf populations are heavily managed, wolves can rear pups at younger ages to better exploit abundant resources. Females are capable of producing pups every year, one litter annually being the average. Oestrus and rut begin in the second half of winter and lasts for two weeks.
Dens are usually constructed for pups during the summer period. When building dens, females make use of natural shelters like fissures in rocks, cliffs overhanging riverbanks and holes thickly covered by vegetation. Sometimes, the den is the appropriated burrow of smaller animals such as foxes, badgers or marmots. An appropriated den is often widened and partly remade. On rare occasions, female wolves dig burrows themselves, which are usually small and short with one to three openings. The den is usually constructed not more than away from a water source. It typically faces southwards where it can be better warmed by sunlight exposure, and the snow can thaw more quickly. Resting places, play areas for the pups, and food remains are commonly found around wolf dens. The odor of urine and rotting food emanating from the denning area often attracts scavenging birds like magpies and ravens. Though they mostly avoid areas within human sight, wolves have been known to nest near homes, paved roads and railways. During pregnancy, female wolves remain in a den located away from the peripheral zone of their territories, where violent encounters with other packs are less likely to occur.

The gestation period lasts 62–75 days with pups usually being born in the spring months or early summer in very cold places such as on the tundra. Young females give birth to four to five young, and older females from six to eight young and up to 14. Their mortality rate is 60–80%. Newborn wolf pups look similar to German Shepherd Dog pups. They are born blind and deaf and are covered in short soft greyish-brown fur. They weigh at birth and begin to see after nine to 12 days. The milk canines erupt after one month. Pups first leave the den after three weeks. At one-and-a-half months of age, they are agile enough to flee from danger. Mother wolves do not leave the den for the first few weeks, relying on the fathers to provide food for them and their young. Pups begin to eat solid food at the age of three to four weeks. They have a fast growth rate during their first four months of life: during this period, a pup&#x27;s weight can increase nearly 30 times. Wolf pups begin play-fighting at the age of three weeks, though unlike young coyotes and foxes, their bites are gentle and controlled. Actual fights to establish hierarchy usually occur at five to eight weeks of age. This is in contrast to young coyotes and foxes, which may begin fighting even before the onset of play behaviour. By autumn, the pups are mature enough to accompany the adults on hunts for large prey.

===Hunting and feeding===
Single wolves or mated pairs typically have higher success rates in hunting than do large packs; single wolves have occasionally been observed to kill large prey such as moose, bison and muskoxen unaided. The size of a wolf hunting pack is related to the number of pups that survived the previous winter, adult survival, and the rate of dispersing wolves leaving the pack. The optimal pack size for hunting elk is four wolves, and for bison a large pack size is more successful. Wolves move around their territory when hunting, using the same trails for extended periods. Wolves are nocturnal predators. During the winter, a pack will commence hunting in the twilight of early evening and will hunt all night, traveling tens of kilometres. Sometimes hunting large prey occurs during the day. During the summer, wolves generally tend to hunt individually, ambushing their prey and rarely giving pursuit. 

When hunting large gregarious prey, wolves will try to isolate an individual from its group. If successful, a wolf pack can bring down game that will feed it for days, but one error in judgement can lead to serious injury or death. Most large prey have developed defensive adaptations and behaviours. Wolves have been killed while attempting to bring down bison, elk, moose, muskoxen, and even by one of their smallest hoofed prey, the white-tailed deer. With smaller prey like beaver, geese, and hares, there is no risk to the wolf. Although people often believe wolves can easily overcome any of their prey, their success rate in hunting hoofed prey is usually low. 

The wolf must give chase and gain on its fleeing prey, slow it down by biting through thick hair and hide, and then disable it enough to begin feeding. Wolves may wound large prey and then lie around resting for hours before killing it when it is weaker due to blood loss, thereby lessening the risk of injury to themselves. With medium-sized prey, such as roe deer or sheep, wolves kill by biting the throat, severing nerve tracks and the carotid artery, thus causing the animal to die within a few seconds to a minute. With small, mouselike prey, wolves leap in a high arc and immobilize it with their forepaws.

Once prey is brought down, wolves begin to feed excitedly, ripping and tugging at the carcass in all directions, and bolting down large chunks of it. The breeding pair typically monopolizes food to continue producing pups. When food is scarce, this is done at the expense of other family members, especially non-pups. Wolves typically commence feeding by gorging on the larger internal organs, like the heart, liver, lungs, and stomach lining. The kidneys and spleen are eaten once they are exposed, followed by the muscles. A wolf can eat 15–19% of its body weight in one sitting.

== Status and conservation ==
The global wild wolf population in 2003 was estimated at 300,000. Wolf population declines have been arrested since the 1970s. This has fostered recolonization and reintroduction in parts of its former range as a result of legal protection, changes in land use, and rural human population shifts to cities. Competition with humans for livestock and game species, concerns over the danger posed by wolves to people, and habitat fragmentation pose a continued threat to the wolf. Despite these threats, the IUCN classifies the wolf as Least Concern on its Red List due to its relatively widespread range and stable population. The species is listed under AppendixII of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), meaning international trade in the species (including parts and derivatives) is regulated. However, populations of Bhutan, India, Nepal and Pakistan are listed in AppendixI which prohibits commercial international trade in wild-sourced specimens.

=== North America ===

In Canada, 50,000–60,000 wolves live in 80% of their historical range, making Canada an important stronghold for the species. Under Canadian law, First Nations people can hunt wolves without restrictions, but others must acquire licenses for the hunting and trapping seasons. As many as 4,000 wolves may be harvested in Canada each year. The wolf is a protected species in national parks under the Canada National Parks Act. In Alaska, 7,000–11,000 wolves are found on 85% of the state&#x27;s area. Wolves may be hunted or trapped with a license; around 1,200 wolves are harvested annually.

In the contiguous United States, wolf declines were caused by the expansion of agriculture, the decimation of the wolf&#x27;s main prey species like the American bison, and extermination campaigns. Wolves were given protection under the Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973, and have since returned to parts of their former range thanks to both natural recolonizations and reintroductions in Yellowstone and Idaho. The repopulation of wolves in Midwestern United States has been concentrated in the Great Lakes states of Minnesota, Wisconsin and Michigan where wolves number over 4,000 as of 2018. Wolves also occupy much of the northern Rocky Mountains region and the northwest, with a total population over 3,000 as of the 2020s. In Mexico and parts of the southwestern United States, the Mexican and U.S. governments collaborated from 1977 to 1980 in capturing all Mexican wolves remaining in the wild to prevent their extinction and established captive breeding programs for reintroduction. As of 2024, the reintroduced Mexican wolf population numbers over 250 individuals.

=== Eurasia ===

The European Union has 20,300 wolves with breeding packs in 23 countries. In many EU countries, the wolf is strictly protected under the 1979 Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats (AppendixII) and the 1992 Council Directive 92/43/EEC on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and of Wild Fauna and Flora (AnnexII andIV). There is extensive legal protection in many European countries, although there are national exceptions.

Wolves have been persecuted in Europe for centuries, having been exterminated in Great Britain by 1684, in Ireland by 1770, in Central Europe by 1899, in France by the 1930s, and in much of Scandinavia by the early 1970s. They continued to survive in parts of Finland, Eastern Europe and Southern Europe. Since 1980, European wolves have rebounded and expanded into parts of their former range. The decline of the traditional pastoral and rural economies seems to have ended the need to exterminate the wolf in parts of Europe. As of 2016, estimates of wolf numbers include: 4,000 in the Balkans, 3,460–3,849 in the Carpathian Mountains, 1,700–2,240 in the Baltic states, 1,100–2,400 in the Italian Peninsula, and around 2,500 in the northwest Iberian peninsula as of 2007. In a study of wolf conservation in Sweden, it was found that there was little opposition between the policies of the European Union and those of the Swedish officials implementing domestic policy.

In the former Soviet Union, wolf populations have retained much of their historical range despite Soviet-era large scale extermination campaigns. Their numbers range from 1,500 in Georgia, to 20,000 in Kazakhstan and up to 45,000 in Russia. In Russia, the wolf is regarded as a pest because of its attacks on livestock, and wolf management means controlling their numbers by destroying them throughout the year. Russian history over the past century shows that reduced hunting leads to an abundance of wolves. The Russian government has continued to pay bounties for wolves and annual harvests of 20–30% do not appear to significantly affect their numbers.
In the Middle East, only Israel and Oman give wolves explicit legal protection. Israel has protected its wolves since 1954 and has maintained a moderately sized population of 150 through effective enforcement of conservation policies. These wolves have moved into neighboring countries. Approximately 300–600 wolves inhabit the Arabian Peninsula. The wolf also appears to be widespread in Iran. Turkey has an estimated population of about 7,000 wolves. Outside of Turkey, wolf populations in the Middle East may total 1,000–2,000.

In southern Asia, the northern regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan are important strongholds for wolves. The wolf has been protected in India since 1972. The Indian wolf is distributed across the states of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. As of 2019, it is estimated that there are around 2,000–3,000 Indian wolves in the country. In East Asia, Mongolia&#x27;s population numbers 10,000–20,000. In China, Heilongjiang has roughly 650 wolves, Xinjiang has 10,000 and Tibet has 2,000. 2017 evidence suggests that wolves range across all of mainland China. Wolves have been historically persecuted in China but have been legally protected since 1998. The last Japanese wolf was captured and killed in 1905.

== Relationships with humans ==
=== In culture ===
==== In folklore, religion and mythology ====

The wolf is a common motif in the mythologies and cosmologies of peoples throughout its historical range. The Ancient Greeks associated wolves with Apollo, the god of light and order. The Ancient Romans connected the wolf with their god of war and agriculture Mars, and believed their city&#x27;s founders, Romulus and Remus, were suckled by a she-wolf. Norse mythology includes the feared giant wolf Fenrir, and Geri and Freki, Odin&#x27;s faithful pets.

In Chinese astronomy, the wolf represents Sirius and guards the heavenly gate. In China, the wolf was traditionally associated with greed and cruelty and wolf epithets were used to describe negative behaviours such as cruelty (&quot;wolf&#x27;s heart&quot;), mistrust (&quot;wolf&#x27;s look&quot;) and lechery (&quot;wolf-sex&quot;). In both Hinduism and Buddhism, the wolf is ridden by gods of protection. In Vedic Hinduism, the wolf is a symbol of the night and the daytime quail must escape from its jaws. In Tantric Buddhism, wolves are depicted as inhabitants of graveyards and destroyers of corpses.

In the Pawnee creation myth, the wolf was the first animal brought to Earth. When humans killed it, they were punished with death, destruction and the loss of immortality. For the Pawnee, Sirius is the &quot;wolf star&quot; and its disappearance and reappearance signified the wolf moving to and from the spirit world. Both Pawnee and Blackfoot call the Milky Way the &quot;wolf trail&quot;. The wolf is also an important crest symbol for clans of the Pacific Northwest like the Kwakwakaʼwakw.

The concept of people turning into wolves, and the inverse, has been present in many cultures. One Greek myth tells of Lycaon being transformed into a wolf by Zeus as punishment for his evil deeds. The legend of the werewolf has been widespread in European folklore and involves people willingly turning into wolves to attack and kill others. The Navajo have traditionally believed that witches would turn into wolves by donning wolf skins and would kill people and raid graveyards. The Dena&#x27;ina believed wolves were once men and viewed them as brothers.

==== In fable and literature ====
Aesop featured wolves in several of his fables, playing on the concerns of Ancient Greece&#x27;s settled, sheep-herding world. His most famous is the fable of &quot;The Boy Who Cried Wolf&quot;, which is directed at those who knowingly raise false alarms, and from which the idiomatic phrase &quot;to &quot; is derived. Some of his other fables concentrate on maintaining the trust between shepherds and guard dogs in their vigilance against wolves, as well as anxieties over the close relationship between wolves and dogs. Although Aesop used wolves to warn, criticize and moralize about human behaviour, his portrayals added to the wolf&#x27;s image as a deceitful and dangerous animal. The Bible uses an image of a wolf lying with a lamb in a utopian vision of the future. In the New Testament, Jesus is said to have used wolves as illustrations of the dangers his followers, whom he represents as sheep, would face should they follow him.
Isengrim the wolf, a character first appearing in the 12th-century Latin poem &quot;Ysengrimus&quot;, is a major character in the Reynard Cycle, where he stands for the low nobility, whilst his adversary, Reynard the fox, represents the peasant hero. Isengrim is forever the victim of Reynard&#x27;s wit and cruelty, often dying at the end of each story. The tale of &quot;Little Red Riding Hood&quot;, first written in 1697 by Charles Perrault, is considered to have further contributed to the wolf&#x27;s negative reputation in the Western world. The Big Bad Wolf is portrayed as a villain capable of imitating human speech and disguising itself with human clothing. The character has been interpreted as an allegorical sexual predator. Villainous wolf characters also appear in &quot;The Three Little Pigs&quot; and &quot;The Wolf and the Seven Young Goats&quot;. The hunting of wolves, and their attacks on humans and livestock, feature prominently in Russian literature, and are included in the works of Leo Tolstoy, Anton Chekhov, Nikolay Nekrasov, Ivan Bunin, Leonid Pavlovich Sabaneyev, and others. Tolstoy&#x27;s &quot;War and Peace&quot; and Chekhov&#x27;s &quot;Peasants&quot; both feature scenes in which wolves are hunted with hounds and Borzois. The musical &quot;Peter and the Wolf&quot; involves a wolf being captured for eating a duck, but is spared and sent to a zoo.

Wolves are among the central characters of Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s &quot;The Jungle Book&quot;. His portrayal of wolves has been praised posthumously by wolf biologists for his depiction of them: rather than being villainous or gluttonous, as was common in wolf portrayals at the time of the book&#x27;s publication, they are shown as living in amiable family groups and drawing on the experience of infirm but experienced elder pack members. Farley Mowat&#x27;s largely fictional 1963 memoir &quot;Never Cry Wolf&quot; is widely considered to be the most popular book on wolves, having been adapted into a Hollywood film and taught in several schools decades after its publication. Although credited with having changed popular perceptions on wolves by portraying them as loving, cooperative and noble, it has been criticized for its idealization of wolves and its factual inaccuracies.

=== Conflicts ===

Human presence appears to stress wolves, as seen by increased cortisol levels in instances such as snowmobiling near their territory.

==== Predation on livestock ====

Livestock depredation has been one of the primary reasons for hunting wolves and can pose a severe problem for wolf conservation. As well as causing economic losses, the threat of wolf predation causes great stress on livestock producers, and no foolproof solution of preventing such attacks short of exterminating wolves has been found. Some nations help offset economic losses to wolves through compensation programs or state insurance. Domesticated animals are easy prey for wolves, as they have been bred under constant human protection, and are thus unable to defend themselves very well. Wolves typically resort to attacking livestock when wild prey is depleted. In Eurasia, a large part of the diet of some wolf populations consists of livestock, while such incidents are rare in North America, where healthy populations of wild prey have been largely restored.

The majority of losses occur during the summer grazing period, untended livestock in remote pastures being the most vulnerable to wolf predation. The most frequently targeted livestock species are sheep (Europe), domestic reindeer (northern Scandinavia), goats (India), horses (Mongolia), cattle and turkeys (North America). The number of animals killed in single attacks varies according to species: most attacks on cattle and horses result in one death, while turkeys, sheep and domestic reindeer may be killed in surplus. Wolves mainly attack livestock when the animals are grazing, though they occasionally break into fenced enclosures.

==== Competition with dogs ====

A review of the studies on the competitive effects of dogs on sympatric carnivores did not mention any research on competition between dogs and wolves. Competition would favour the wolf, which is known to kill dogs; however, wolves usually live in pairs or in small packs in areas with high human persecution, giving them a disadvantage when facing large groups of dogs.

Wolves kill dogs on occasion, and some wolf populations rely on dogs as an important food source. In Croatia, wolves kill more dogs than sheep, and wolves in Russia appear to limit stray dog populations. Wolves may display unusually bold behaviour when attacking dogs accompanied by people, sometimes ignoring nearby humans. Wolf attacks on dogs may occur both in house yards and in forests. Wolf attacks on hunting dogs are considered a major problem in Scandinavia and Wisconsin. Although the number of dogs killed each year by wolves is relatively low, it induces a fear of wolves entering villages and farmyards to prey on them. In many cultures, dogs are seen as family members, or at least working team members, and losing one can lead to strong emotional responses such as demanding more liberal hunting regulations.

Dogs that are employed to guard sheep help to mitigate human–wolf conflicts, and are often proposed as one of the non-lethal tools in the conservation of wolves. Shepherd dogs are not particularly aggressive, but they can disrupt potential wolf predation by displaying what is to the wolf ambiguous behaviours, such as barking, social greeting, invitation to play or aggression. The historical use of shepherd dogs across Eurasia has been effective against wolf predation, especially when confining sheep in the presence of several livestock guardian dogs. Shepherd dogs are sometimes killed by wolves.

==== Attacks on humans ====


The fear of wolves has been pervasive in many societies, though humans are not part of the wolf&#x27;s natural prey. How wolves react to humans depends largely on their prior experience with people: wolves lacking any negative experience of humans, or which are food-conditioned, may show little fear of people. Although wolves may react aggressively when provoked, such attacks are mostly limited to quick bites on extremities, and the attacks are not pressed.

Predatory attacks may be preceded by a long period of habituation, in which wolves gradually lose their fear of humans. The victims are repeatedly bitten on the head and face, and are then dragged off and consumed unless the wolves are driven off. Such attacks typically occur only locally and do not stop until the wolves involved are eliminated. Predatory attacks can occur at any time of the year, with a peak in the June–August period, when the chances of people entering forested areas (for livestock grazing or berry and mushroom picking) increase. Cases of non-rabid wolf attacks in winter have been recorded in Belarus, Kirov and Irkutsk oblasts, Karelia and Ukraine. Also, wolves with pups experience greater food stresses during this period. The majority of victims of predatory wolf attacks are children under the age of 18 and, in the rare cases where adults are killed, the victims are almost always women. Indian wolves have a history of preying on children, a phenomenon called &quot;child-lifting&quot;. They may be taken primarily in the spring and summer periods during the evening hours, and often within human settlements.

Cases of rabid wolves are low when compared to other species, as wolves do not serve as primary reservoirs of the disease, but can be infected by animals such as dogs, jackals and foxes. Incidents of rabies in wolves are very rare in North America, though numerous in the eastern Mediterranean, the Middle East and Central Asia. Wolves apparently develop the &quot;furious&quot; phase of rabies to a very high degree. This, coupled with their size and strength, makes rabid wolves perhaps the most dangerous of rabid animals. Bites from rabid wolves are 15 times more dangerous than those of rabid dogs. Rabid wolves usually act alone, travelling large distances and often biting large numbers of people and domestic animals. Most rabid wolf attacks occur in the spring and autumn periods. Unlike with predatory attacks, the victims of rabid wolves are not eaten, and the attacks generally occur only on a single day. The victims are chosen at random, though most cases involve adult men. During the fifty years up to 2002, there were eight fatal attacks in Europe and Russia, and more than two hundred in southern Asia.

====Human hunting of wolves ====

Theodore Roosevelt said wolves are difficult to hunt because of their elusiveness, sharp senses, high endurance, and ability to quickly incapacitate and kill hunting dogs. Historic methods included killing of spring-born litters in their dens, coursing with dogs (usually combinations of sighthounds, Bloodhounds and Fox Terriers), poisoning with strychnine, and trapping.

A popular method of wolf hunting in Russia involves trapping a pack within a small area by encircling it with fladry poles carrying a human scent. This method relies heavily on the wolf&#x27;s fear of human scents, though it can lose its effectiveness when wolves become accustomed to the odor. Some hunters can lure wolves by imitating their calls. In Kazakhstan and Mongolia, wolves are traditionally hunted using eagles and large falcons, though this practice is declining, as experienced falconers are becoming few in number. Shooting wolves from aircraft is highly effective, due to increased visibility and direct lines of fire. Several types of dog, including the Borzoi and Kyrgyz Tajgan, have been specifically bred for wolf hunting.

=== Wolves as pets and working animals ===

As domestic dogs, wolves have been pets for tens of thousands of years. In modern times, wolves and wolf-dog hybrids are sometimes kept as exotic pets, wolves do not show the same tractability as dogs in living alongside humans, being generally less responsive to human commands and more likely to act aggressively. Humans are more likely to be fatally mauled by a pet wolf or wolf-dog hybrid than by a dog.

== Notes ==

== References ==

== Bibliography ==
*
*
*
*

== External links ==


*The International Wolf Center
*Staying Safe in Wolf Country, ADFG (January 2009)
*Watch &quot;Death of a Legend&quot; and &quot;Cry of the Wild&quot; by Bill Mason</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="4" end="8" title="Wolf" label="wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="25" end="31" title="Wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="52" end="61" title="Wolf" label="grey wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="65" end="74" title="Wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q149892" start="81" end="87" title="Canis" label="canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="98" end="105" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="110" end="123" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076098" start="142" end="179" title="subspecies of Canis lupus" label="subspecies of &amp;quot;Canis lupus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="216" end="219" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q38584" start="224" end="229" title="dingo" label="dingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q128723" start="290" end="314" title="Wild type" label="naturally-occurring wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="356" end="362" title="Neontology" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324" start="384" end="391" title="Canidae" label="Canidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q149892" start="439" end="444" title="Canis" label="Canis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="639" end="645" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q128098" start="654" end="667" title="golden jackal" label="golden jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736622" start="688" end="695" title="Canid hybrid" label="hybrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="866" end="871" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058587" start="908" end="919" title="Generalist and specialist species" label="specialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842739" start="924" end="935" title="Pack hunter" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q107105227" start="936" end="948" title="Hunting behavior of gray wolves" label="game hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307505" start="1026" end="1039" title="Sociality" label="social nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q72711501" start="1065" end="1085" title="Wolf communication" label="expressive behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755925" start="1117" end="1124" title="howling" label="howling"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="1140" end="1156" title="Nuclear family" label="nuclear families"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960289" start="1173" end="1183" title="mated pair" label="mated pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758639" start="1254" end="1258" title="Pack (canine)" label="pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="1365" end="1376" title="Territory (animal)" label="territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="1470" end="1479" title="carnivore" label="carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="1504" end="1517" title="hooved mammal" label="hooved mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="1558" end="1565" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="1677" end="1685" title="Pathogen" label="Pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="1714" end="1726" title="rabies" label="rabies virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="1843" end="1856" title="Least-concern species" label="Least Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="1864" end="1910" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="2015" end="2023" title="Pastoralism" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q396108" start="2116" end="2124" title="Agrarian society" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="2129" end="2144" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="2306" end="2312" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029917" start="2314" end="2325" title="Wolf attack" label="Wolf attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2579" end="2590" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="2640" end="2654" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142838" start="2661" end="2685" title="Proto-Indo-European root" label="Proto-Indo-European root"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2724" end="2729" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="2883" end="2899" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="2912" end="2923" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="2955" end="2961" title="prefix" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="2965" end="2971" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="3486" end="3499" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="3523" end="3538" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="3549" end="3570" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q149892" start="3578" end="3583" title="Canis" label="Canis"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="3622" end="3625" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="3648" end="3653" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125525" start="3724" end="3730" title="jackal" label="jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324" start="3997" end="4002" title="canid" label="canid"/>
<link wikidata="Q111172813" start="4054" end="4081" title="Mammal Species of the World" label="Mammal Species of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q183904" start="4111" end="4122" title="mammalogist" label="mammalogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530777" start="4123" end="4148" title="W. Chris Wozencraft" label="W. Christopher Wozencraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032447" start="4293" end="4298" title="Canis lupus dingo" label="dingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38884" start="4367" end="4389" title="New Guinea singing dog" label="New Guinea singing dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="4395" end="4412" title="taxonomic synonym" label="taxonomic synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q38584" start="4421" end="4426" title="dingo" label="dingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="4458" end="4475" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076098" start="4554" end="4588" title="Subspecies of Canis lupus" label="subspecies of &amp;quot;C. lupus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="4610" end="4621" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="4647" end="4666" title="nominate subspecies" label="nominate subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q898061" start="4677" end="4690" title="Eurasian wolf" label="Eurasian wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="4730" end="4743" title="type specimen" label="type specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791456" start="4791" end="4803" title="Paleogenomics" label="paleogenomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="4859" end="4870" title="sister taxa" label="sister taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="4956" end="4968" title="Domestication" label="domesticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="5004" end="5008" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124833" start="5125" end="5130" title="feral dog" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="5206" end="5219" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="5245" end="5257" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20644616" start="5329" end="5344" title="Canis mosbachensis" label="C. mosbachensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682478" start="5387" end="5398" title="Canis etruscus" label="C. etruscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q498831" start="5993" end="6009" title="Late Pleistocene" label="Late Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6126" end="6131" title="Rostrum (anatomy)#Vertebrates" label="snout"/>
<link wikidata="Q599406" start="6165" end="6175" title="temporalis" label="temporalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q839483" start="6195" end="6203" title="premolar" label="premolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759232" start="6355" end="6376" title="Pleistocene megafauna" label="Pleistocene megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q496689" start="6504" end="6513" title="dire wolf" label="dire wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q178089" start="6775" end="6788" title="spotted hyena" label="spotted hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="6791" end="6798" title="Genome" label="Genomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468673" start="6915" end="6929" title="Himalayan wolf" label="Himalayan wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q855921" start="6938" end="6956" title="Indian wolf" label="Indian plains wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q332985" start="6971" end="6978" title="Lineage (evolution)" label="lineage"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="6987" end="6992" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q631768" start="7013" end="7018" title="Cladogenesis" label="split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="7192" end="7212" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="7232" end="7239" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="7243" end="7251" title="Beringia" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q815715" start="7320" end="7341" title="population bottleneck" label="population bottleneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q143089" start="7394" end="7403" title="gene flow" label="gene flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230536" start="7540" end="7550" title="Genetic divergence" label="divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720561" start="7654" end="7675" title="Megafaunal wolf" label="Late Pleistocene wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532875" start="7785" end="7802" title="genetic admixture" label="genetic admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q37871" start="7831" end="7838" title="Basenji" label="Basenji"/>
<link wikidata="Q39322" start="7840" end="7855" title="Tibetan Mastiff" label="Tibetan Mastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q531300" start="8087" end="8099" title="Mexican wolf" label="Mexican wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q143089" start="8203" end="8212" title="gene flow" label="gene flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q105272263" start="8221" end="8235" title="African wolf" label="African wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q128098" start="8237" end="8250" title="golden jackal" label="golden jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="8414" end="8429" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304522" start="8870" end="8886" title="ghost population" label="ghost population"/>
<link wikidata="Q132585" start="8961" end="8966" title="dhole" label="dhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q173651" start="9007" end="9026" title="African hunting dog" label="African hunting dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="9083" end="9089" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696387" start="9437" end="9454" title="Coywolf" label="genetic admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188023" start="9489" end="9503" title="Italian wolf" label="Italian wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477" start="9610" end="9628" title="Caucasus Mountains" label="Caucasus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q38920" start="9660" end="9682" title="livestock guardian dog" label="livestock guardian dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983787" start="9802" end="9820" title="jackal-wolf hybrid" label="jackal-wolf hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q143089" start="10069" end="10078" title="gene flow" label="gene flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324" start="10189" end="10196" title="Canidae" label="Canidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576226" start="10389" end="10397" title="rib cage" label="rib cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q42046" start="11050" end="11055" title="hyena" label="hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="11062" end="11068" title="Molar (tooth)" label="molars"/>
<link wikidata="Q143631" start="11538" end="11558" title="Bergmann&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Bergmann&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q624310" start="11726" end="11740" title="Arabian wolf" label="Arabian wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="12073" end="12082" title="Down hair" label="undercoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181974" start="12100" end="12110" title="guard hair" label="guard hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q42586" start="12573" end="12578" title="elbow" label="elbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q223172" start="12592" end="12608" title="calcaneal tendon" label="calcaneal tendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350326" start="13137" end="13152" title="Frostbite" label="tissue-freezing"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="13912" end="13917" title="ochre" label="ochre"/>
<link wikidata="Q543923" start="13944" end="13949" title="Rust (color)" label="rusty"/>
<link wikidata="Q908358" start="14744" end="14762" title="Gloger&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Gloger&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="14904" end="14919" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922502" start="15161" end="15182" title="Black wolf" label="Black-coloured wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="15713" end="15723" title="extirpated" label="extirpated"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="15836" end="15849" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="16010" end="16017" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q879641" start="16020" end="16029" title="shrubland" label="shrubland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="16032" end="16041" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="16061" end="16067" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="16070" end="16077" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="16248" end="16258" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842739" start="16306" end="16317" title="pack hunter" label="pack hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="16352" end="16361" title="ungulates" label="ungulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758639" start="16481" end="16485" title="Pack (canine)" label="pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="16618" end="16623" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="17175" end="17180" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="17182" end="17190" title="red deer" label="red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043583" start="17192" end="17200" title="Capreolus" label="roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="17205" end="17214" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="17264" end="17267" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="17276" end="17283" title="Reindeer" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="17285" end="17302" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="17307" end="17316" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27742" start="17365" end="17375" title="wild horse" label="wild horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="17823" end="17829" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="17832" end="17836" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="17839" end="17850" title="insectivore" label="insectivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651" start="17896" end="17905" title="waterfowl" label="waterfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="17969" end="17975" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="17978" end="17983" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="17986" end="17990" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q36146" start="18163" end="18167" title="Common fig" label="figs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16128920" start="18177" end="18184" title="Berry" label="berries"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="18189" end="18197" title="Cherry" label="cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="18228" end="18239" title="Blueberry" label="blueberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13179" start="18244" end="18255" title="Raspberry" label="raspberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q157964" start="18461" end="18473" title="Sorbus" label="mountain-ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q101711" start="18475" end="18493" title="lily of the valley" label="lily of the valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q60708120" start="18495" end="18505" title="Bilberry" label="bilberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q93235" start="18507" end="18517" title="Vaccinium vitis-idaea" label="cowberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q146400" start="18519" end="18544" title="Solanum nigrum" label="European black nightshade"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="18631" end="18638" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44595" start="18925" end="18936" title="Cannibalism" label="Cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28381990" start="19614" end="19625" title="Custer Wolf" label="Custer Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="19938" end="19941" title="Red fox" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="19943" end="19949" title="Arctic fox" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187024" start="19954" end="19964" title="corsac fox" label="corsac fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="20027" end="20037" title="Brown bear" label="Brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="20328" end="20347" title="American black bear" label="American black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="20689" end="20698" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25265" start="20859" end="20865" title="Felidae" label="felids"/>
<link wikidata="Q43375" start="20879" end="20892" title="Eurasian lynx" label="Eurasian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="21016" end="21022" title="cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="21206" end="21224" title="niche partitioning" label="niche partitioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q69581" start="21614" end="21628" title="Siberian tiger" label="Siberian tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="21669" end="21685" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="21762" end="21782" title="Local extinction" label="localized extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188657" start="21851" end="21864" title="striped hyena" label="striped hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928978" start="22230" end="22243" title="Viral disease" label="Viral disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="22272" end="22278" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q601037" start="22280" end="22296" title="canine distemper" label="canine distemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931887" start="22298" end="22315" title="canine parvovirus" label="canine parvovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q486550" start="22317" end="22344" title="infectious canine hepatitis" label="infectious canine hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223924" start="22346" end="22360" title="papillomatosis" label="papillomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032409" start="22366" end="22384" title="canine coronavirus" label="canine coronavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193566" start="22401" end="22418" title="incubation period" label="incubation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="22754" end="22765" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326943" start="22767" end="22788" title="electrolyte imbalance" label="electrolyte imbalance"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="22794" end="22803" title="Endotoxin" label="endotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="22813" end="22819" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q804517" start="22881" end="22899" title="Bacterial diseases" label="Bacterial diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q156050" start="22927" end="22938" title="brucellosis" label="brucellosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="22940" end="22952" title="Lyme disease" label="Lyme disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q155098" start="22954" end="22967" title="leptospirosis" label="leptospirosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153861" start="22969" end="22978" title="tularemia" label="tularemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133447" start="22980" end="22999" title="bovine tuberculosis" label="bovine tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160653" start="23001" end="23012" title="listeriosis" label="listeriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q129104" start="23017" end="23024" title="anthrax" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="23234" end="23239" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="23241" end="23249" title="Anorexia (symptom)" label="anorexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="23261" end="23267" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q373597" start="23269" end="23278" title="hematuria" label="hematuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="23280" end="23287" title="Jaundice" label="icterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="23345" end="23354" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q388162" start="23379" end="23383" title="flea" label="flea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304508" start="23386" end="23390" title="tick" label="tick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481228" start="23393" end="23397" title="Louse" label="lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="23403" end="23407" title="mite" label="mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q500869" start="23482" end="23499" title="Sarcoptes scabiei" label="Sarcoptes scabiei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358140" start="23546" end="23551" title="mange" label="mange"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="23613" end="23622" title="protozoan" label="protozoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129936" start="23628" end="23636" title="helminth" label="helminth"/>
<link wikidata="Q207547" start="23639" end="23645" title="Trematoda" label="flukes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280912" start="23647" end="23655" title="tapeworm" label="tapeworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="23658" end="23667" title="roundworm" label="roundworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q178235" start="23673" end="23691" title="thorny-headed worm" label="thorny-headed worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="23986" end="23998" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="24010" end="24027" title="allergic reaction" label="allergic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154506" start="24048" end="24065" title="intestinal mucosa" label="intestinal mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="24071" end="24083" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307505" start="24295" end="24308" title="Sociality" label="social animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="24512" end="24526" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960289" start="24543" end="24553" title="mated pair" label="mated pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="24896" end="24904" title="Cortisol" label="Cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q609370" start="25234" end="25249" title="sexual maturity" label="sexual maturity"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="26159" end="26170" title="Territory (animal)" label="territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q217136" start="27365" end="27398" title="Denali National Park and Preserve" label="Denali National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755925" start="27653" end="27657" title="howling" label="howl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188507" start="27975" end="27981" title="growling" label="growls"/>
<link wikidata="Q38681" start="27983" end="27988" title="bark (sound)" label="barks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295493" start="28252" end="28259" title="Posture (psychology)" label="posture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125503" start="28271" end="28278" title="hackles" label="hackles"/>
<link wikidata="Q655042" start="28418" end="28427" title="preputial gland" label="preputial"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="28991" end="29000" title="urination" label="urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="29169" end="29179" title="Monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479906" start="29742" end="29748" title="Litter (zoology)" label="litter"/>
<link wikidata="Q388121" start="29777" end="29784" title="Oestrus" label="Oestrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q596937" start="29789" end="29792" title="Rut (mammalian reproduction)" label="rut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495957" start="30732" end="30738" title="magpie" label="magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="30744" end="30749" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="30852" end="30856" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="30862" end="30869" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490716" start="31053" end="31069" title="gestation period" label="gestation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q38280" start="31366" end="31385" title="German Shepherd" label="German Shepherd Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="32640" end="32645" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q184004" start="32650" end="32656" title="muskox" label="muskox"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="33846" end="33852" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="34407" end="34412" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798312" start="34429" end="34446" title="Throat clamp" label="biting the throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q20757544" start="34478" end="34492" title="carotid artery" label="carotid artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="34571" end="34576" title="mouse" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="35056" end="35061" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="35063" end="35068" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="35070" end="35074" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="35081" end="35088" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="35101" end="35107" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371" start="35113" end="35119" title="spleen" label="spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="35771" end="35775" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="35799" end="35812" title="Least Concern" label="Least Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="35820" end="35828" title="IUCN Red List" label="Red List"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35919" end="35929" title="CITES#Appendix II" label="AppendixII"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="35937" end="36016" title="Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora" label="Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="36141" end="36147" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="36149" end="36154" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="36156" end="36161" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="36166" end="36174" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36189" end="36198" title="CITES#Appendix I" label="AppendixI"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="36443" end="36456" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015126" start="36695" end="36720" title="Canada National Parks Act" label="Canada National Parks Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="36896" end="36920" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="37126" end="37148" title="Endangered Species Act" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37262" end="37302" title="History of wolves in Yellowstone#Re-introduction (1995–present)" label="reintroductions in Yellowstone and Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q106959519" start="37308" end="37358" title="repopulation of wolves in Midwestern United States" label="repopulation of wolves in Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079236" start="37388" end="37399" title="Western Great Lakes forests" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q531300" start="37913" end="37925" title="Mexican wolf" label="Mexican wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="37989" end="38003" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q375083" start="38127" end="38205" title="Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats" label="Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q759874" start="38232" end="38327" title="Habitats Directive" label="Council Directive 92/43/EEC on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and of Wild Fauna and Flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030586" start="38531" end="38544" title="Wolves in Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030587" start="38557" end="38564" title="Wolves in Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="39066" end="39086" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="39107" end="39120" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="39141" end="39158" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="39194" end="39211" title="Iberian peninsula" label="Iberian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="39429" end="39448" title="former Soviet Union" label="former Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="40407" end="40424" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="40669" end="40677" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="40747" end="40752" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="40817" end="40824" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="40826" end="40835" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="40837" end="40844" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="40846" end="40859" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="40861" end="40875" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="40877" end="40888" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="40890" end="40899" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="40904" end="40918" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="41086" end="41098" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="41123" end="41131" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="41147" end="41152" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q375750" start="41338" end="41351" title="Japanese wolf" label="Japanese wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="41594" end="41608" title="Ancient Greeks" label="Ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="41632" end="41638" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="41672" end="41686" title="Ancient Romans" label="Ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="41744" end="41748" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197" start="41791" end="41808" title="Romulus and Remus" label="Romulus and Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136294" start="41828" end="41836" title="She-wolf (Roman mythology)" label="she-wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="41838" end="41853" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q182560" start="41885" end="41891" title="Fenrir" label="Fenrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q826455" start="41897" end="41911" title="Geri and Freki" label="Geri and Freki"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="41913" end="41917" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="41944" end="41961" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="41983" end="41989" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="42284" end="42292" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="42297" end="42305" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="42352" end="42357" title="Vedic" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072584" start="42418" end="42423" title="quail" label="quail"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="42454" end="42470" title="Tantric Buddhism" label="Tantric Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q750947" start="42556" end="42562" title="Pawnee people" label="Pawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="42884" end="42893" title="Blackfoot" label="Blackfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="42903" end="42912" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="42971" end="42976" title="Crest (heraldry)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137355" start="43028" end="43041" title="Kwakwakaʼwakw" label="Kwakwakaʼwakw"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="43143" end="43153" title="Greek myth" label="Greek myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q501667" start="43163" end="43169" title="Lycaon (king of Arcadia)" label="Lycaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="43203" end="43207" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="43260" end="43268" title="werewolf" label="werewolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075043" start="43292" end="43309" title="European folklore" label="European folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="43391" end="43397" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632346" start="43431" end="43438" title="skin-walker" label="witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186841" start="43531" end="43544" title="Dena&amp;#x27;ina" label="Dena&amp;#x27;ina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43423" start="43639" end="43644" title="Aesop" label="Aesop"/>
<link wikidata="Q865902" start="43679" end="43685" title="Aesop&amp;#x27;s Fables" label="fables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190945" start="43804" end="43826" title="The Boy Who Cried Wolf" label="The Boy Who Cried Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="44332" end="44337" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="44422" end="44435" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="44437" end="44442" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q374595" start="44666" end="44676" title="Ysengrimus" label="Ysengrimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131675513" start="44712" end="44719" title="Reynard" label="Reynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838" start="44955" end="44977" title="Little Red Riding Hood" label="Little Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q128460" start="45010" end="45026" title="Charles Perrault" label="Charles Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367867" start="45135" end="45147" title="Big Bad Wolf" label="Big Bad Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207313" start="45304" end="45319" title="sexual predator" label="sexual predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q651532" start="45369" end="45390" title="The Three Little Pigs" label="The Three Little Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11848" start="45407" end="45441" title="The Wolf and the Seven Young Goats" label="The Wolf and the Seven Young Goats"/>
<link wikidata="Q179161" start="45538" end="45556" title="Russian literature" label="Russian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="45591" end="45602" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="45604" end="45617" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q208003" start="45619" end="45635" title="Nikolay Nekrasov" label="Nikolay Nekrasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q46602" start="45637" end="45647" title="Ivan Bunin" label="Ivan Bunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330838" start="45649" end="45675" title="Leonid Pavlovich Sabaneyev" label="Leonid Pavlovich Sabaneyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q161531" start="45710" end="45723" title="War and Peace" label="War and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q37866" start="45833" end="45839" title="Borzoi" label="Borzoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q677403" start="45860" end="45878" title="Peter and the Wolf" label="Peter and the Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="46012" end="46027" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q189509" start="46041" end="46056" title="The Jungle Book" label="The Jungle Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q966679" start="46411" end="46423" title="Farley Mowat" label="Farley Mowat"/>
<link wikidata="Q421492" start="46467" end="46481" title="Never Cry Wolf" label="Never Cry Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301603" start="46575" end="46589" title="Never Cry Wolf (film)" label="Hollywood film"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="46938" end="46946" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640734" start="48128" end="48145" title="Reindeer herding" label="domestic reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="48170" end="48174" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="48185" end="48190" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="48204" end="48210" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q848706" start="48215" end="48222" title="Domestic turkey" label="turkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246431" start="48652" end="48661" title="Sympatry" label="sympatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136816" start="50938" end="50949" title="habituation" label="habituation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="51390" end="51397" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="51503" end="51510" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387" start="51512" end="51517" title="Kirov Oblast" label="Kirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585" start="51522" end="51529" title="Irkutsk Oblast" label="Irkutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q192273" start="51539" end="51546" title="Karelia" label="Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="51551" end="51558" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="52308" end="52321" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="52327" end="52338" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="52343" end="52355" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="53184" end="53202" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q515302" start="53428" end="53436" title="coursing" label="coursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39344" start="53472" end="53482" title="sighthound" label="sighthound"/>
<link wikidata="Q21098" start="53485" end="53495" title="Bloodhound" label="Bloodhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q39220" start="53501" end="53512" title="Fox Terrier" label="Fox Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q194406" start="53531" end="53541" title="strychnine" label="strychnine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34168" start="53547" end="53555" title="trapping" label="trapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456603" start="53668" end="53674" title="fladry" label="fladry"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="53911" end="53921" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="53926" end="53934" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211011" start="53961" end="53973" title="falconry" label="hunted using"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53974" end="53980" title="Golden eagles in human culture#Falconry" label="eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q37866" start="54229" end="54235" title="Borzoi" label="Borzoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39239" start="54240" end="54253" title="Taigan" label="Kyrgyz Tajgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068902" start="54446" end="54461" title="wolf-dog hybrid" label="wolf-dog hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247163" start="54485" end="54495" title="exotic pet" label="exotic pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708528" start="54899" end="54903" title="Alaska Department of Fish and Game" label="ADFG"/>
<link wikidata="Q862286" start="54991" end="55001" title="Bill Mason" label="Bill Mason"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33703" wikidata="Q189144" url="?curid=33703" title="Walter Raleigh">
<text>Sir Walter Raleigh (; – 29 October 1618) was an English statesman, soldier, writer and explorer. One of the most notable figures of the Elizabethan era, he played a leading part in English colonisation of North America, suppressed rebellion in Ireland, helped defend England against the Spanish Armada and held political positions under Elizabeth I.

Raleigh was born to a landed gentry family of Protestant faith in Devon, the son of Walter Raleigh and Catherine Champernowne. He was the younger half-brother of Sir Humphrey Gilbert and a cousin of Sir Richard Grenville. Little is known of his early life, though in his late teens he spent some time in France taking part in the religious civil wars. In his 20s he took part in the suppression of rebellion in the colonisation of Ireland; he also participated in the siege of Smerwick. Later, he became a landlord of property in Ireland and mayor of Youghal in east Munster, where his house still stands in Myrtle Grove. He rose rapidly in the favour of Queen Elizabeth I and was knighted in 1585. He was granted a royal patent to explore Virginia, paving the way for future English settlements. In 1591, he secretly married Elizabeth Throckmorton, one of the Queen&#x27;s ladies-in-waiting, without the Queen&#x27;s permission, for which he and his wife were sent to the Tower of London. After his release, they retired to his estate at Sherborne, Dorset.

In 1594, Raleigh heard of a &quot;City of Gold&quot; in South America and sailed to find it, publishing an exaggerated account of his experiences in a book that contributed to the legend of &quot;El Dorado&quot;. After Queen Elizabeth died in 1603, Raleigh was again imprisoned in the Tower, this time for being involved in the Main Plot against King James I, who was not favourably disposed towards him. In 1616, he was released to lead a second expedition in search of El Dorado. During the expedition, men led by his top commander sacked a Spanish outpost, in violation of both the terms of his pardon and the 1604 peace treaty with Spain. Raleigh returned to England and, to appease the Spanish, he was arrested and executed in 1618.

==Early life==

Little is known about Sir Walter Raleigh&#x27;s birth but he is believed to have been born on 22 January 1552 (or possibly 1554). He grew up in the house of Hayes Barton (in the parish of East Budleigh), in East Devon. He was the youngest of the five sons of Walter Raleigh (1510–1581) (or Rawleigh) of Fardel Manor (in the parish of Cornwood), in South Devon. His mother, Katherine (Catherine) Champernon (Champernowne), was born before 1518 and died on April 19, 1594. Her mother&#x27;s maiden name was Carew. Raleigh&#x27;s family is generally assumed to have been a junior branch of the Raleigh family, 11th-century lords of the manor of Raleigh, Pilton in North Devon, although the two branches are known to have borne entirely dissimilar coats of arms, adopted at the start of the age of heraldry (–1215).

His mother was Katherine Champernowne, the third wife of Walter Raleigh senior. She was the fourth daughter of Sir Philip Champernowne (1479–1545), lord of the manor of Modbury, Devon, by his wife Catherine Carew, a daughter of Sir Edmund Carew (d. 1513) of Mohuns Ottery (in the parish of Luppitt), Devon. Katherine was the widow of Otes Gilbert (1513–1546/7) of Greenway (in the parish of Brixham) and of Compton Castle (in the parish of Marldon), both in Devon. (The coat of arms of Otes Gilbert and Katherine Champernowne survives in a stained glass window in Churston Ferrers Church, near Greenway.)

Katherine Champernowne&#x27;s paternal aunt was Kat Ashley, governess of Queen Elizabeth I, who introduced Raleigh and his brothers to the court. Raleigh&#x27;s maternal uncle was Sir Arthur Champernowne (–1578), a Member of Parliament, Sheriff of Devon and Admiral of the West.

Walter Raleigh junior&#x27;s immediate family included his full brother Carew Raleigh, and half-brothers John Gilbert, Humphrey Gilbert and Adrian Gilbert. As a consequence of their kinship with the Champernowne family, all of the Raleigh and Gilbert brothers became prominent during the reigns of Elizabeth I and James I.

Raleigh&#x27;s family was highly Protestant in religious orientation and had a number of near escapes during the reign of Roman Catholic Queen Mary I of England. In the most notable of these, his father had to hide in a tower to avoid execution. As a result, Raleigh developed a hatred of Roman Catholicism during his childhood, and proved himself quick to express it after Protestant Queen Elizabeth I came to the throne in 1558. In matters of religion, Elizabeth was more moderate than her half-sister Mary.

In 1569, Raleigh went to France to serve with the Huguenots in the French religious civil wars. In 1572, Raleigh was registered as an undergraduate at Oriel College, Oxford, but he left in 1574 without a degree. Raleigh proceeded to finish his education in the Inns of Court. In 1575, he was admitted to the Middle Temple, having previously been a member of Lyon&#x27;s Inn, one of the Inns of Chancery. At his trial in 1603, he stated that he had never studied law. Much of his life is uncertain between 1569 and 1575, but in his &quot;History of the World&quot;, he claimed to have been an eyewitness at the Battle of Moncontour (3 October 1569) in France. In 1575 or 1576, Raleigh returned to England.

In 1577 and again in 1579 Raleigh made voyages with his half-brother Sir Humphrey Gilbert in attempts to find a Northwest Passage. They failed to find a passage, but succeeded in raiding Spanish ships.

==Ireland==

From 1579 to late 1580, Raleigh took part in the suppression of the Desmond Rebellions. He was present at the siege of Smerwick, where he led the party that beheaded some 600 Spanish and Italian soldiers who had surrendered. In September 1584, Queen Elizabeth I had the land surveyed to be divided amongst her &quot;undertakers&quot; (people she appointed to undertake supervision of colonization of the region) to colonize.

In 1585, Raleigh received (approximately 0.2% of Ireland) in the Munster Plantation, including the coastal walled town of Youghal and, further up the Blackwater River, the village of Lismore.

Raleigh made the town of Youghal in Ireland his occasional home during his 17 years as an Irish landlord, frequently being domiciled at Killua Castle, Clonmellon, County Westmeath. He was mayor there from 1588 to 1589. Raleigh encouraged veterans of the earlier attempts of the Roanoke Colony settle in Ireland, including Thomas Hariot and John White from the 1585 trip. (He was the governor of the 1587 trip, but returned with the delivery ship to acquire additional supplies.) Raleigh is credited with introducing potatoes to England and Ireland. though potatoes are more likely to have arrived through the Irish trade with Spain; they were known as &quot;An Spáinneach Geal&quot; (the bright Spaniard) before his time, A potato crop failure in the nineteenth century would lead to the Great Famine when they were the only crop not exported in bulk to Britain from 1840 to 1852, a time when potatoes across the continent were destroyed by a gigantic outbreak of blight known as the European potato failure.

Amongst Raleigh&#x27;s acquaintances in Munster was another Englishman who had been granted land in the Irish colonies, poet Edmund Spenser. Raleigh&#x27;s management of his Irish estates ran into difficulties which contributed to a decline in his fortunes. In 1602, he sold the lands to Richard Boyle, 1st Earl of Cork, who subsequently prospered under kings James I and Charles I.

==New World==

On March 25, 1584, Queen Elizabeth granted Raleigh a royal charter authorising him to explore, colonise and rule any &quot;remote, heathen and barbarous lands, countries and territories, not actually possessed of any Christian Prince or inhabited by Christian People&quot;, in return for one-fifth of all the gold and silver that might be mined there. This charter specified that Raleigh had seven years in which to establish a settlement, or else lose his right to do so. Raleigh and Elizabeth intended that the venture should provide riches from the New World and a base from which to send privateers on raids against the treasure fleets of Spain. The charter was originally given to Sir Humphrey Gilbert who pitched the idea to Queen Elizabeth I and died at sea while attempting to accomplish it.

On April 27, 1584, the Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlowe expedition set sail from England on an exploratory mission to determine what resources were available in North America. They returned with two of the local inhabitants, Manteo and Wanchese, in August 1584, and reported of their findings. The region (the majority of the east coast) received the name &quot;Virginia&quot; for the Virgin Queen Elizabeth I, which is the origin of the name of the modern day state.

In 1585, he sent a militarized group to North America to set up a fort to raid Spanish ships and become the first English colony in North America. The voyage was led by Sir Richard Grenville and the colony on Roanoke Island was governed by Ralph Lane. The colony ran out of food after clashes with the local inhabitants and eventually left with Sir Francis Drake in June 1586 after resupply attempts failed. Sir Richard Grenvile arrived shortly after the Lane colony left with Drake. He left supplies and 15 men on Roanoke Island and returned to England. They were never seen again.

On July 22, 1587, Raleigh attempted a second expedition, again establishing a settlement on Roanoke Island. This time, a more diverse group of settlers was sent, including some entire families, under the governance of John White. After a short while in America, White returned to England to obtain more supplies for the colony, planning to return in a year. Unfortunately for the colonists at Roanoke, one year became three. The first delay came when Queen Elizabeth I ordered all vessels to remain at port for potential use against the Spanish Armada. After England&#x27;s 1588 victory over the Spanish Armada, the ships were given permission to sail.

The second delay came after White&#x27;s small fleet set sail for Roanoke and his crew insisted on sailing first towards Cuba in hopes of capturing treasure-laden Spanish merchant ships. Enormous riches described by their pilot, an experienced Portuguese navigator hired by Raleigh, outweighed White&#x27;s objections to the delay.

When the supply ship arrived in Roanoke, three years later than planned, the colonists had disappeared. The only clue to their fate was the word &quot;CROATOAN&quot; and the letters &quot;CRO&quot; carved into tree trunks. White had arranged with the settlers that if they should move, the name of their destination be carved into a tree or corner post. This suggested the possibility that they had moved to Croatoan Island, but a hurricane prevented John White from investigating the island for survivors. Other speculation includes their having starved, or been swept away or lost at sea during the stormy weather of 1588. No further attempts at contact were recorded for some years. Whatever the fate of the settlers, the settlement is now remembered as the &quot;Roanoke Colony&quot; later known as the &quot;Lost Colony&quot;.

Raleigh himself never visited North America, although he led expeditions in 1595 and 1617 to the Orinoco river basin in South America in search of the golden city of El Dorado. These expeditions were funded primarily by Raleigh and his friends but never provided the steady stream of revenue necessary to maintain a colony in America.

==1580s==

In 1580 Raleigh went to fight in Ireland against the 2nd Desmond Rebellion. In December 1581, he returned to England. He took part in court life and became a favourite of Queen Elizabeth I because of his efforts at increasing the Protestant Church in Ireland. In 1585, Raleigh was knighted and was appointed warden of the stannaries, that is of the tin mines of Cornwall and Devon, Lord Lieutenant of Cornwall and vice-admiral of the two counties. He was a member of parliament for Devonshire in 1585 and 1586. He was also granted the right to colonise America.

Raleigh commissioned shipbuilder R. Chapman of Deptford to build a ship for him. She was originally called &quot;Ark&quot; but became &quot;Ark Raleigh&quot;, following the convention at the time by which the ship bore the name of her owner. The Crown (in the person of Queen Elizabeth I) purchased the ship from Raleigh in January 1587 for £5,000 (£ million in 2015). This took the form of a reduction in the sum that Sir Walter owed the queen; he received Exchequer tallies but no money. As a result, the ship was renamed &quot;Ark Royal&quot;.

In 1586 one of Raleigh&#x27;s expeditions caught Spanish explorer Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa. Raleigh held Gamboa prisoner in his house and had long conversations with him. Gamboa passed messages to the Spanish ambassador who forwarded them to King Philip II. Raleigh wanted to defect to Spain and sell his ship the &quot;Ark.&quot; Philip refused to buy the ship, but encouraged the passing of information from Raleigh.

In 1588, Raleigh had some involvement with defence against the Spanish Armada at Devon. The ship that he had built, offered to sell to Spain, and later sold to the crown, the &quot;Ark Royal&quot;, was Lord High Admiral Howard&#x27;s flagship.

==1590–1594==
In 1592, Raleigh was given many rewards by the Queen, including Durham House in the Strand and the estate of Sherborne, Dorset. He was appointed Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard. However, he had not been given any of the great offices of state.

In 1591, Raleigh secretly married Elizabeth &quot;Bess&quot; Throckmorton (or Throgmorton). She was one of the Queen&#x27;s ladies-in-waiting, 11 years his junior, and was pregnant at the time. She gave birth to a son, believed to be named Damerei, who was given to a wet nurse at Durham House, and died of plague in October 1592. Bess resumed her duties to the queen. The following year, the unauthorised marriage was discovered and the Queen ordered Raleigh to be imprisoned and Bess dismissed from court. Both were imprisoned in the Tower of London in June 1592. He was released from prison in August 1592 to manage a recently returned expedition and attack on the Spanish coast. The fleet was recalled by the Queen, but not before it captured an incredibly rich prize—a merchant ship (carrack) named &quot;Madre de Deus&quot; (Mother of God) off Flores. Raleigh was sent to organise and divide the spoils of the ship. He was sent back to the Tower, but by early 1593 had been released and become a member of Parliament.

It was several years before Raleigh returned to favour, and he travelled extensively in this time. Raleigh and his wife remained devoted to each other. They had two more sons, Walter (known as Wat) in 1593 and Carew in 1605.

Raleigh was elected a burgess of Mitchell, Cornwall, in the parliament of 1593. He retired to his estate at Sherborne, where he built a new house, completed in 1594, known then as Sherborne Lodge. Since extended, it is now known as Sherborne New Castle. He made friends with the local gentry, such as Sir Ralph Horsey of Clifton Maybank and Charles Thynne of Longleat. During this period at a dinner party at Horsey&#x27;s, Raleigh had a heated discussion about religion with Reverend Ralph Ironsides. The argument later gave rise to charges of atheism against Raleigh, though the charges were dismissed. He was elected to Parliament, speaking on religious and naval matters.

==First voyage to Guiana==

In 1594, he came into possession of a Spanish account of a great golden city at the headwaters of the Caroní River. A year later, he explored what is now Guyana and eastern Venezuela in search of Lake Parime and Manoa, the legendary city. Once back in England, he published &quot;The Discovery of Guiana&quot; (1596), an account of his voyage which made exaggerated claims as to what had been discovered. The book can be seen as a contribution to the El Dorado legend. Venezuela has gold deposits, but no evidence indicates that Raleigh found any mines. He is sometimes said to have discovered Angel Falls, but these claims are considered far-fetched.

==1596–1603==

In 1596, Raleigh took part in the capture of Cádiz, where he was wounded. He also served as the rear admiral (a principal command) of the Islands Voyage to the Azores in 1597. On his return from the Azores, Raleigh helped England defend itself against the major threat of the 3rd Spanish Armada during the autumn of 1597. The Armada was dispersed in the Channel and later was devastated by a storm off Ireland. Lord Howard of Effingham and Raleigh were able to organise a fleet that resulted in the capture of a Spanish ship in retreat carrying vital information regarding the Spanish plans.

In 1597 Raleigh was chosen as member of parliament for Dorset and in 1601 for Cornwall. He was unique in the Elizabethan period in sitting for three counties.

From 1600 to 1603, as governor of the Channel Island of Jersey, Raleigh modernised its defences. This included the construction of a new fort protecting the approaches to Saint Helier, Fort Isabella Bellissima, or Elizabeth Castle. 

==Trial and imprisonment==

Royal favour with Queen Elizabeth had been restored by this time, but his good fortune did not last; the Queen died on 24 March 1603. Raleigh was arrested on 19 July 1603 at what is now the Old Exeter Inn in Ashburton, charged with treason for his involvement in the Main Plot against Elizabeth&#x27;s successor, James I, and imprisoned in the Tower of London.

Raleigh&#x27;s trial began on 17 November in the converted Great Hall of Winchester Castle. Raleigh conducted his own defence. The chief evidence against him was the signed and sworn confession of his friend Henry Brooke, 11th Baron Cobham. Raleigh repeatedly requested that Cobham be called to testify. &quot;[Let] my acuser come face to face, and be deposed. Were the case but for a small copyhold, you would have witnesses or good proof to lead the jury to a verdict; and I am here for my life!&quot; Raleigh argued that the evidence against him was &quot;hearsay&quot;, but the tribunal refused to allow Cobham to testify and be cross-examined. Raleigh&#x27;s trial has been regularly cited as influential in establishing a common law right to confront accusers in court. Raleigh was convicted, but King James spared his life.

While imprisoned in the Tower, Raleigh wrote his incomplete &quot;The History of the World&quot;. Using a wide array of sources in six languages, Raleigh was fully abreast of the latest continental scholarship. He wrote not about England, but of the ancient world with a heavy emphasis on geography. Despite his intention of providing current advice to the King of England, King James I complained that it was &quot;too sawcie in censuring Princes&quot;. Raleigh remained imprisoned in the Tower until 1616. His son, Carew, was conceived and born (in 1604 or 1605) while Raleigh was imprisoned in the Tower.

==Second voyage to Guiana==

In 1617, Raleigh was pardoned by the King and granted permission to conduct a second expedition to Venezuela in search of El Dorado. During the expedition, a detachment of Raleigh&#x27;s men under the command of his long-time friend Lawrence Kemys attacked the Spanish outpost of Santo Tomé de Guayana on the Orinoco river, in violation of peace treaties with Spain and against Raleigh&#x27;s orders. A condition of Raleigh&#x27;s pardon was avoidance of any hostility against Spanish colonies or shipping. In the initial attack on the settlement, Raleigh&#x27;s son, Walter, was fatally shot. Kemys informed Raleigh of his son&#x27;s death and begged for forgiveness, but did not receive it, and at once committed suicide. On Raleigh&#x27;s return to England, an outraged Count Gondomar, the Spanish ambassador, demanded that Raleigh&#x27;s death sentence be reinstated by King James, who had little choice but to do so. Raleigh was brought to London from Plymouth by Sir Lewis Stukley, where he passed up numerous opportunities to make an effective escape.

==Execution and aftermath==

Raleigh was beheaded in the Old Palace Yard at the Palace of Westminster on 29 October 1618. &quot;Let us dispatch&quot;, he said to his executioner. &quot;At this hour my ague comes upon me. I would not have my enemies think I quaked from fear.&quot; After he was allowed to see the axe that would be used to behead him, he mused: &quot;This is a sharp Medicine, but it is a Physician for all diseases and miseries.&quot; According to biographers, Raleigh&#x27;s last words, spoken to the hesitating executioner, were: &quot;What dost thou fear? Strike, man, strike!&quot;

Having been one of the people to popularise tobacco smoking in England, he left a small tobacco pouch, found in his cell shortly after his execution. Engraved upon the pouch was a Latin inscription: &quot;Comes meus fuit in illo miserrimo tempore&quot; (&quot;It was my companion at that most miserable time&quot;).

Raleigh&#x27;s head was embalmed and presented to his wife. His body was to be buried in the local church in Beddington, Surrey, the home of Lady Raleigh, but was finally laid to rest in St. Margaret&#x27;s, Westminster, where his tomb is located. &quot;The Lords&quot;, she wrote, &quot;have given me his dead body, though they have denied me his life. God hold me in my wits.&quot; It has been said that Lady Raleigh kept her husband&#x27;s head in a velvet bag until her death. After Raleigh&#x27;s wife&#x27;s death 29 years later, his head was removed to his tomb and interred at St. Margaret&#x27;s Church. Although Raleigh&#x27;s popularity had waned considerably since his Elizabethan heyday, his execution was seen by many, both at the time and since, as unnecessary and unjust, as for many years his involvement in the Main Plot seemed to have been limited to a meeting with Lord Cobham. One of the judges at his trial later said: &quot;The justice of England has never been so degraded and injured as by the condemnation of the honourable Sir Walter Raleigh.&quot;
==Works==
*

==Poetry==

Raleigh&#x27;s poetry is written in the relatively straightforward, unornamented mode known as the plain style. C. S. Lewis considered Raleigh one of the era&#x27;s &quot;silver poets&quot;, a group of writers who resisted the Italian Renaissance influence of dense classical reference and elaborate poetic devices. His writing contains strong personal treatments of themes such as love, loss, beauty, and time. Most of his poems are short lyrics that were inspired by actual events.

In poems such as &quot;What is Our Life&quot; and &quot;The Lie&quot;, Raleigh expresses a &quot;contemptus mundi&quot; (contempt of the world) attitude more characteristic of the Middle Ages than of the dawning era of humanistic optimism. But his lesser-known long poem &quot;The Ocean&#x27;s Love to Cynthia&quot; combines this vein with the more elaborate conceits associated with his contemporaries Edmund Spenser and John Donne, expressing a melancholy sense of history. The poem was written during his imprisonment in the Tower of London.

Raleigh wrote a poetic response to Christopher Marlowe&#x27;s &quot;The Passionate Shepherd to His Love&quot; of 1592, entitled &quot;The Nymph&#x27;s Reply to the Shepherd&quot;. Both were written in the style of traditional pastoral poetry and follow the structure of six four-line stanzas employing a rhyme scheme of AABB, with Raleigh&#x27;s an almost line-for-line refutation of Marlowe&#x27;s sentiments. Years later, the 20th-century poet William Carlos Williams would join the poetic &quot;argument&quot; with his &quot;Raleigh Was Right&quot;.

===List of poems===
All finished, and some unfinished, poems written by Raleigh or plausibly attributed to him:
* &quot;The Advice&quot;
* &quot;Another of the Same&quot;
* &quot;Conceit begotten by the Eyes&quot;
* &quot;Epitaph on Sir Philip Sidney&quot;
* &quot;Epitaph on the Earl of Leicester&quot;
* &quot;Even such is Time&quot;
* &quot;The Excuse&quot;
* &quot;False Love&quot;
* &quot;Farewell to the Court&quot;
* &quot;His Petition to Queen Anne of Denmark&quot;
* &quot;If Cynthia be a Queen&quot;
* &quot;In Commendation of George Gascoigne&#x27;s Steel Glass&quot;
* &quot;The Lie&quot;
* &quot;Like Hermit Poor&quot;
* &quot;Lines from Catullus&quot;
* &quot;Love and Time&quot;
* &quot;My Body in the Walls captive&quot;
* &quot;The Nymph&#x27;s Reply to the Shepherd&quot;
* &quot;Of Spenser&#x27;s Faery Queen&quot;
* &quot;On the Snuff of a Candle&quot;
* &quot;The Ocean&#x27;s Love to Cynthia&quot;
* &quot;A Poem entreating of Sorrow&quot;
* &quot;A Poem put into my Lady Laiton&#x27;s Pocket&quot;
* &quot;The Pilgrimage&quot;
* &quot;A Prognistication upon Cards and Dice&quot;
* &quot;The Shepherd&#x27;s Praise of Diana&quot;
* &quot;Sweet Unsure&quot;
* &quot;To His Mistress&quot;
* &quot;To the Translator of Lucan&#x27;s Pharsalia&quot;
* &quot;What is Our Life?&quot;
* &quot;The Wood, the Weed, the Wag&quot;
===Writing Shakespeare===

In 1845, Shakespeare scholar Delia Bacon first proposed that a group of authors had actually written the plays later attributed to William Shakespeare, the main writer being Walter Raleigh. Later, George S. Caldwell asserted that Raleigh was actually the sole author. These claims have been supported by other scholars throughout subsequent years, including Albert J. Beveridge and Henry Pemberton, but are rejected by the majority of Shakespearean scholars today.

==Legacy==

In 2002, Raleigh was featured in the BBC poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.

A galliard was composed in honour of Raleigh by either Francis Cutting or Richard Allison.

The state capital of North Carolina, its second-largest city, was named Raleigh in 1792, after Sir Walter, sponsor of the Roanoke Colony. In the city, a bronze statue, which has been moved around different locations within the city, was cast in honour of the city&#x27;s namesake. The &quot;Lost Colony&quot; is commemorated at the Fort Raleigh National Historic Site on Roanoke Island, North Carolina.

Raleigh County, West Virginia, is named after him.

Mount Raleigh in the Pacific Ranges of the Coast Mountains in British Columbia, Canada, was named for him, with related features the Raleigh Glacier and Raleigh Creek named in association with the mountain. Mount Gilbert, just to Mount Raleigh&#x27;s south, was named for his half-brother, Sir Humphrey.

Raleigh has been widely speculated to be responsible for introducing the potato to Europe, and was a key figure in bringing it to Ireland. However, modern historians dispute this claim, suggesting it impossible for Raleigh to have discovered the potato in the places he visited.

Due to Raleigh&#x27;s role in the popularisation of smoking, John Lennon humorously referred to him as &quot;such a stupid get&quot; in the song &quot;I&#x27;m So Tired&quot; on the &quot;White Album&quot; &quot;The Beatles&quot; (1968).

Various colourful stories are told about him, such as laying his cloak over a puddle for the Queen, but they are probably apocryphal. The story of Raleigh&#x27;s trial is included in John George Phillimore&#x27;s 1850 book &quot;The History and Principles of Evidence&quot;, and his commentary on the story is included in many law school textbooks on evidence in common law countries.

The author George Garrett&#x27;s historical fiction novel &quot;Death of the Fox&quot; explores Raleigh&#x27;s relationships with Elizabeth I and her successor James I.

==Raleigh&#x27;s descendants==
Many people claim descent from Sir Walter Raleigh, but nearly all have no basis in fact. The only authentic lines of descent are as follows:

Raleigh&#x27;s only surviving child, Carew Raleigh, had three surviving children—Walter (d. 1660), Anne (d. 1708) and Philip (d. 1705).
The elder son, Walter Raleigh, was knighted in June 1660, but died two months later. He was buried at West Horsley. He left three surviving childrenElizabeth, Philippa and Anne. Philippa (who married Oliver Weekes, of Tortingdon, Sussex) and Anne (who married William Knight, of Barrells, Warwickshire) left descendants. It was Philippa Weekes&#x27; daughter, Elizabeth Elwes, who seems to have owned the main store of Raleigh memorabilia and was consulted by William Oldys in 1735 when he was writing his &quot;Life of Raleigh&quot; 

Anne Raleigh married Sir Peter Tyrrell, Bt. of Castlethorpe, Bucks. Their son Thomas Tyrrell, 2nd Bt. left two daughters – Christobella, who married as her third husband, Richard Fiennes, 6th Viscount Saye &amp; Sele, but died without surviving issue in 1789. The younger daughter, Harriet, married Francis Mann, of Kidlington, Oxfordshire, and died in 1785, having had a daughter, Harriet, who married Capt. Joseph Mead and died in 1784, leaving issue.

Philip Raleigh championed his grandfather&#x27;s cause, publishing several of his hitherto unpublished papers. He had a family of four sons and three daughters. The youngest son, Carew Raleigh, page of honour to William III, was serving as a captain&#x27;s servant on when he died of fever in the West Indies in 1697, aged seventeen. The second son, Lieut. Brudenell Raleigh, was also serving in the navy in the West Indies when he died of fever in June 1698, aged 22. The eldest son, Captain Walter Raleigh, Grenadier Guards, was page of honour to Queen Mary, and was killed at the siege of Schellenberg in 1704, aged 31. He was unmarried. After Walter&#x27;s death, his father was granted a pension by the crown, &#x27;in consideration of his 3 sons being slain in the late and present war&#x27;. The third son, Captain-Lieutenant Grenville Raleigh, served in the Duke of Marlborough&#x27;s army throughout the War of the Spanish Succession and died of fever in 1717, while guarding the prisoners at Chester after the 1715 Jacobite rising. He had married and had two sons and a daughter, Mary. On the death of his daughter in Bath in 1783, it was noted that she was &#x27;the only surviving descendant in the direct line of Sir Walter Raleigh&#x27;.

Of Philip Raleigh&#x27;s daughters, Anne and Elizabeth both died unmarried. The eldest daughter, Frances, married William Honywood, eldest son of Sir William Honywood, of Evington Place, Elmsted, Kent and died in 1730. Her many descendants include the present Lord Mountbatten and the actor Hugh Grant.

==See also==
* List of colonial governors of Virginia
* Sir Walter, a race horse
* The Armada Service

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
* Raleigh as a writer and poet.
* 
* 
*
*
*
* 
* 
*
*
*


===Further reading===

* Adamson, J.H. and Folland, H. F. &quot;Shepherd of the Ocean&quot;, 1969.
* Beer, Anna. &quot;Sir Walter Raleigh and his readers in the Seventeenth Century&quot; (Springer, 1997).
* Beer, Anna. &quot;Patriot or Traitor: The Life and Death of Sir Walter Ralegh&quot; (Oneworld, 2018).
* Bevan, Bryan. &quot;The Great Seamen of Elizabeth I&quot; (Robert Hale, 1971).
* Hiscock, Andrew. &quot;Walter Ralegh and the Arts of Memory.&quot; &quot;Literature Compass&quot; 4.4 (2007): 1030–1058.
* Dwyer, Jack. &quot;Dorset Pioneers&quot; The History Press, 2009. 
* Gallay, Alan. &quot;Walter Ralegh: Architect of Empire&quot; (2019), a major scholarly biography excerpt 
* Holmes, John. &quot;The Guiana Projects: Imperial and Colonial Ideologies in Ralegh and Purchas.&quot; &quot;Literature &amp; History&quot; 14.2 (2005): 1–13.
* Lawson-Peebles, Robert. &quot;The many faces of Sir Walter Ralegh&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; 48.3 (1998): 17+.
* Lewis, C. S. &quot;English Literature in the Sixteenth Century Excluding Drama,&quot; (1954).
* Lyons, Mathew. &quot;The Favourite: Ralegh and His Queen&quot; (Hachette UK, 2011).
* Lyons, Mathew. &quot;Cloaked in Mystery.&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (2012) 62.7 pp 72–72
* Pemberton, Henry (Author); Carroll Smyth (Editor), Susan L. Pemberton (Contributor) &quot;Shakespeare And Sir Walter Raleigh: Including Also Several Essays Previously Published In The New Shakspeareana&quot;, Kessinger Publishing, LLC; 264 pages, 2007. 
* Ralegh, Sir Walter, and Michael Rudick. &quot;The Poems of Sir Walter Ralegh: A Historical Edition.&quot; (Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies/Renaissance English Text Society, 1999).
* Stebbing, William: &quot;Sir Walter Ralegh&quot; Oxford, 1899 Project Gutenberg eText 


==External links==

* The Sir Walter Raleigh Collection in Wilson Library at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Sir Walter Raleigh&#x27;s Grave
* Biography of Sir Walter Raleigh at Britannia.com
* Sir Walter Raleigh at the Fort Raleigh website
* Quotes attributed to Sir Walter Raleigh
* Story of Raleigh&#x27;s last years and his beheading
* Poetry by Sir Walter Raleigh, plus commentary
* Searching for the Lost Colony Blog
* Robert Viking O&#x27;Brien &amp; Stephen Kent O&#x27;Brien, &quot;Discovery of Guiana&quot; essay, &quot;Yearbook of Comparative and General Literature&quot; 
* Sir Walter Raleigh portal at luminarium.org
* 
* &quot;The History of the World&quot; at Hathi Trust</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189144" start="0" end="18" title="Walter Raleigh" label="Sir Walter Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="136" end="151" title="Elizabethan era" label="Elizabethan era"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="181" end="218" title="English colonisation of North America" label="English colonisation of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="244" end="251" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="267" end="274" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="287" end="301" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="337" end="348" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304279" start="373" end="386" title="landed gentry" label="landed gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="397" end="407" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="417" end="422" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q447200" start="517" end="533" title="Humphrey Gilbert" label="Humphrey Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q389665" start="554" end="571" title="Richard Grenville" label="Richard Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="655" end="661" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="681" end="701" title="French Wars of Religion" label="religious civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262722" start="766" end="778" title="Plantations of Ireland" label="colonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="782" end="789" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510412" start="819" end="836" title="siege of Smerwick" label="siege of Smerwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012476" start="902" end="909" title="Youghal" label="Youghal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131438" start="918" end="925" title="Munster" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948618" start="959" end="971" title="Myrtle Grove, Youghal" label="Myrtle Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="1012" end="1023" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="1067" end="1079" title="royal patent" label="royal patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="1091" end="1099" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331334" start="1177" end="1199" title="Elizabeth Throckmorton" label="Elizabeth Throckmorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q715222" start="1225" end="1242" title="Lady-in-waiting" label="ladies-in-waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="1324" end="1339" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="1390" end="1399" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="1401" end="1407" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1466" end="1479" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q192550" start="1606" end="1615" title="El Dorado" label="El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736034" start="1738" end="1747" title="Main Plot" label="Main Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1756" end="1768" title="James VI and I" label="King James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014021" start="2023" end="2051" title="Treaty of London (1604)" label="1604 peace treaty with Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="2328" end="2334" title="Barton (demesne)" label="Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368316" start="2353" end="2366" title="East Budleigh" label="East Budleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="2377" end="2382" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42851363" start="2468" end="2480" title="Fardel Manor" label="Fardel Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922890" start="2499" end="2507" title="Cornwood" label="Cornwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286878" start="2798" end="2822" title="manor of Raleigh, Pilton" label="manor of Raleigh, Pilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="2959" end="2967" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="3126" end="3143" title="lord of the manor" label="lord of the manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242590" start="3147" end="3154" title="Modbury" label="Modbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q31839995" start="3236" end="3249" title="Mohuns Ottery" label="Mohuns Ottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126962" start="3268" end="3275" title="Luppitt" label="Luppitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544827" start="3342" end="3350" title="Greenway Estate" label="Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q921326" start="3369" end="3376" title="Brixham" label="Brixham"/>
<link wikidata="Q746423" start="3385" end="3399" title="Compton Castle" label="Compton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916753" start="3418" end="3425" title="Marldon" label="Marldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15210345" start="3542" end="3558" title="Churston Ferrers" label="Churston Ferrers"/>
<link wikidata="Q273217" start="3632" end="3642" title="Katherine Champernowne" label="Kat Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798223" start="3768" end="3787" title="Arthur Champernowne" label="Arthur Champernowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="3799" end="3819" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797842" start="3821" end="3837" title="Sheriff of Devon" label="Sheriff of Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924995" start="3842" end="3861" title="Vice-Admiral of the West" label="Admiral of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039076" start="3936" end="3949" title="Carew Raleigh" label="Carew Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q447200" start="3983" end="3999" title="Humphrey Gilbert" label="Humphrey Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="4162" end="4173" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="4178" end="4185" title="James VI and I" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="4221" end="4231" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4310" end="4324" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="4331" end="4348" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063123" start="4467" end="4494" title="Anti-Catholicism" label="hatred of Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="4749" end="4757" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q81170" start="4850" end="4871" title="Oriel College, Oxford" label="Oriel College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q278697" start="4960" end="4973" title="Inns of Court" label="Inns of Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q925942" start="5007" end="5020" title="Middle Temple" label="Middle Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243205" start="5057" end="5072" title="Lyon&amp;#x27;s Inn" label="Lyon&amp;#x27;s Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12403873" start="5085" end="5101" title="Inns of Chancery" label="Inns of Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q591727" start="5309" end="5329" title="Battle of Moncontour" label="Battle of Moncontour"/>
<link wikidata="Q447200" start="5474" end="5494" title="Humphrey Gilbert" label="Sir Humphrey Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="5517" end="5534" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwest Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200808" start="5689" end="5707" title="Desmond Rebellions" label="Desmond Rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510412" start="5731" end="5748" title="siege of Smerwick" label="siege of Smerwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="5865" end="5882" title="Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262722" start="6112" end="6130" title="Munster Plantation" label="Munster Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012476" start="6169" end="6176" title="Youghal" label="Youghal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464482" start="6197" end="6213" title="Munster Blackwater" label="Blackwater River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828038" start="6230" end="6237" title="Lismore, County Waterford" label="Lismore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012476" start="6265" end="6272" title="Youghal" label="Youghal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407910" start="6376" end="6389" title="Killua Castle" label="Killua Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385433" start="6391" end="6401" title="Clonmellon" label="Clonmellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182633" start="6403" end="6419" title="County Westmeath" label="County Westmeath"/>
<link wikidata="Q59222" start="6518" end="6532" title="Roanoke Colony" label="Roanoke Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q315402" start="6562" end="6575" title="Thomas Harriot" label="Thomas Hariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182736" start="6580" end="6590" title="John White (colonist and artist)" label="John White"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="7028" end="7040" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398511" start="7224" end="7247" title="European potato failure" label="European potato failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352055" start="7375" end="7389" title="Edmund Spenser" label="Edmund Spenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485385" start="7538" end="7569" title="Richard Boyle, 1st Earl of Cork" label="Richard Boyle, 1st Earl of Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="7610" end="7617" title="James VI and I" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="7622" end="7631" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="7700" end="7715" title="Royal charter" label="a royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="8241" end="8250" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="8292" end="8297" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q447200" start="8335" end="8355" title="Humphrey Gilbert" label="Sir Humphrey Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="8380" end="8397" title="Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18415034" start="8473" end="8486" title="Philip Amadas" label="Philip Amadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797916" start="8491" end="8505" title="Arthur Barlowe" label="Arthur Barlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="8842" end="8859" title="Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="8911" end="8916" title="Virginia" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q389665" start="9088" end="9109" title="Richard Grenville" label="Sir Richard Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636839" start="9128" end="9142" title="Roanoke Island" label="Roanoke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133984" start="9159" end="9169" title="Ralph Lane" label="Ralph Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="9264" end="9281" title="Francis Drake" label="Sir Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611804" start="9622" end="9654" title="List of colonists at Roanoke" label="a more diverse group of settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182736" start="9721" end="9731" title="John White (colonist and artist)" label="John White"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="10040" end="10054" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="10278" end="10282" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="10401" end="10411" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509872" start="10898" end="10913" title="Croatoan Island" label="Croatoan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q59222" start="11257" end="11271" title="Roanoke Colony" label="Roanoke Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="11420" end="11427" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="11443" end="11456" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q192550" start="11489" end="11498" title="El Dorado" label="El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200808" start="11723" end="11744" title="Desmond Rebellions" label="2nd Desmond Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680009" start="11978" end="12002" title="Lord Warden of the Stannaries" label="warden of the stannaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865570" start="12019" end="12028" title="Mining in Cornwall and Devon" label="tin mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679545" start="12052" end="12079" title="Lord Lieutenant of Cornwall" label="Lord Lieutenant of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924994" start="12084" end="12096" title="List of vice-admirals of the coast" label="vice-admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267681" start="12152" end="12162" title="Devon (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308650" start="12280" end="12288" title="Deptford" label="Deptford"/>
<link wikidata="Q671748" start="12373" end="12384" title="English ship Ark Royal (1587)" label="Ark Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="12475" end="12484" title="The Crown" label="The Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q933008" start="12691" end="12708" title="Tally stick" label="Exchequer tallies"/>
<link wikidata="Q671748" start="12763" end="12772" title="English ship Ark Royal (1587)" label="Ark Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q205303" start="12847" end="12872" title="Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa" label="Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="13024" end="13038" title="Philip II of Spain" label="King Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="13265" end="13279" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q954089" start="13422" end="13428" title="Charles Howard, 1st Earl of Nottingham" label="Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316524" start="13525" end="13537" title="Durham House, London" label="Durham House"/>
<link wikidata="Q756819" start="13541" end="13551" title="Strand, London" label="the Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036884" start="13606" end="13640" title="Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard" label="Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546165" start="13684" end="13706" title="Great Offices of State" label="great offices of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331334" start="13743" end="13782" title="Elizabeth Raleigh" label="Elizabeth &amp;quot;Bess&amp;quot; Throckmorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q715222" start="13833" end="13850" title="lady-in-waiting" label="ladies-in-waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="13977" end="13986" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15197201" start="14447" end="14480" title="Battle of Flores (1592)" label="captured an incredibly rich prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281901" start="14519" end="14532" title="Madre de Deus" label="Madre de Deus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216752" start="14559" end="14565" title="Flores Island (Azores)" label="Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039078" start="14944" end="14949" title="Carew Raleigh (1605–1666)" label="Carew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881119" start="14993" end="15001" title="Mitchell (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15192" end="15212" title="Sherborne Castle#New castle" label="Sherborne New Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="15245" end="15251" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376308" start="15281" end="15296" title="Clifton Maybank" label="Clifton Maybank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726158" start="15319" end="15327" title="Longleat" label="Longleat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="15505" end="15512" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q590533" start="15767" end="15779" title="Caroní River" label="Caroní River"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="15819" end="15825" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540504" start="15830" end="15847" title="Guayana Region, Venezuela" label="eastern Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477288" start="15861" end="15872" title="Lake Parime" label="Lake Parime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730318" start="15945" end="15968" title="The Discovery of Guiana" label="The Discovery of Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q192550" start="16116" end="16125" title="El Dorado" label="El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="16134" end="16143" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="16148" end="16152" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q80299" start="16259" end="16270" title="Angel Falls" label="Angel Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535988" start="16367" end="16383" title="capture of Cádiz" label="capture of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848812" start="16471" end="16485" title="Islands Voyage" label="Islands Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="16493" end="16499" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919490" start="16609" end="16627" title="3rd Spanish Armada" label="3rd Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q954089" start="16744" end="16768" title="Charles Howard, 1st Earl of Nottingham" label="Lord Howard of Effingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298834" start="16981" end="16987" title="Dorset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171940" start="17004" end="17012" title="Cornwall (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="17124" end="17138" title="Channel Island" label="Channel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="17142" end="17148" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q147738" start="17257" end="17269" title="Saint Helier" label="Saint Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500961" start="17300" end="17316" title="Elizabeth Castle" label="Elizabeth Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q724915" start="17556" end="17565" title="Ashburton, Devon" label="Ashburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="17580" end="17587" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736034" start="17615" end="17624" title="Main Plot" label="Main Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="17661" end="17668" title="James VI and I" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="17692" end="17707" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q256915" start="17769" end="17779" title="Great hall" label="Great Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704670" start="17783" end="17800" title="Winchester Castle" label="Winchester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718691" start="17918" end="17949" title="Henry Brooke, 11th Baron Cobham" label="Henry Brooke, 11th Baron Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990719" start="18101" end="18109" title="copyhold" label="copyhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211464" start="18269" end="18276" title="hearsay" label="hearsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q195414" start="18343" end="18357" title="cross-examination" label="cross-examined"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="18438" end="18448" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q119009423" start="18608" end="18632" title="The History of the World (Raleigh)" label="The History of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504270" start="19413" end="19427" title="Lawrence Kemys" label="Lawrence Kemys"/>
<link wikidata="Q26906" start="19460" end="19481" title="Santo Tomé de Guayana" label="Santo Tomé de Guayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="19489" end="19496" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q451093" start="19953" end="19967" title="Diego Sarmiento de Acuña, 1st Count of Gondomar" label="Count Gondomar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="20137" end="20145" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537090" start="20153" end="20166" title="Lewis Stukley" label="Lewis Stukley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881523" start="20297" end="20312" title="Old Palace Yard" label="Old Palace Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="20320" end="20341" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="20441" end="20445" title="Fever" label="ague"/>
<link wikidata="Q776933" start="20932" end="20945" title="tobacco pouch" label="tobacco pouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="21024" end="21029" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437783" start="21270" end="21280" title="Beddington" label="Beddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="21282" end="21288" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q823412" start="21348" end="21380" title="St. Margaret&amp;#x27;s, Westminster" label="St. Margaret&amp;#x27;s, Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718691" start="22046" end="22057" title="Henry Brooke, 11th Baron Cobham" label="Lord Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="22374" end="22385" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="22489" end="22508" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212662" start="22803" end="22810" title="The Lie (poem)" label="The Lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165044" start="22844" end="22860" title="contemptus mundi" label="contemptus mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="22927" end="22938" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352055" start="23150" end="23164" title="Edmund Spenser" label="Edmund Spenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q140412" start="23169" end="23179" title="John Donne" label="John Donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975" start="23328" end="23347" title="Christopher Marlowe" label="Christopher Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756286" start="23361" end="23396" title="The Passionate Shepherd to His Love" label="The Passionate Shepherd to His Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754542" start="23427" end="23465" title="The Nymph&amp;#x27;s Reply to the Shepherd" label="The Nymph&amp;#x27;s Reply to the Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q390001" start="23519" end="23534" title="pastoral poetry" label="pastoral poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264652" start="23597" end="23609" title="rhyme scheme" label="rhyme scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100591" start="23613" end="23617" title="Clerihew" label="AABB"/>
<link wikidata="Q178106" start="23739" end="23762" title="William Carlos Williams" label="William Carlos Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286962" start="23821" end="23838" title="Raleigh Was Right" label="Raleigh Was Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212662" start="24434" end="24441" title="The Lie (poem)" label="The Lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754542" start="24592" end="24630" title="The Nymph&amp;#x27;s Reply to the Shepherd" label="The Nymph&amp;#x27;s Reply to the Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q457286" start="25244" end="25255" title="Delia Bacon" label="Delia Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="25346" end="25365" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q982853" start="25573" end="25592" title="Albert J. Beveridge" label="Albert J. Beveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607145" start="25597" end="25612" title="Henry Pemberton" label="Henry Pemberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q165177" start="25746" end="25766" title="100 Greatest Britons" label="100 Greatest Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q288824" start="25771" end="25779" title="galliard" label="galliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404004" start="25824" end="25839" title="Francis Cutting" label="Francis Cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323698" start="25843" end="25858" title="Richard Allison (composer)" label="Richard Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="25882" end="25896" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="25933" end="25940" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q59222" start="25983" end="25997" title="Roanoke Colony" label="Roanoke Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438664" start="26193" end="26228" title="Fort Raleigh National Historic Site" label="Fort Raleigh National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636839" start="26232" end="26246" title="Roanoke Island" label="Roanoke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q501815" start="26265" end="26294" title="Raleigh County, West Virginia" label="Raleigh County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8521076" start="26317" end="26330" title="Mount Raleigh" label="Mount Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285418" start="26338" end="26352" title="Pacific Ranges" label="Pacific Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q920070" start="26360" end="26375" title="Coast Mountains" label="Coast Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="26379" end="26395" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920897" start="26524" end="26537" title="Mount Gilbert (British Columbia)" label="Mount Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="26695" end="26701" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="26954" end="26961" title="smoking" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="26963" end="26974" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982051" start="27025" end="27028" title="Git (slang)" label="get"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507914" start="27053" end="27070" title="I&amp;#x27;m So Tired" label="I&amp;#x27;m So Tired"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295515" start="27114" end="27125" title="The Beatles (album)" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235155" start="27324" end="27346" title="John George Phillimore" label="John George Phillimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="27504" end="27514" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539634" start="27538" end="27552" title="George Garrett (poet)" label="George Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388243" start="27591" end="27607" title="Death of the Fox" label="Death of the Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039078" start="27907" end="27920" title="Carew Raleigh (1605–1666)" label="Carew Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962740" start="28713" end="28758" title="Viscount Saye and Sele" label="Richard Fiennes, 6th Viscount Saye &amp;amp; Sele"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="29863" end="29882" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="29910" end="29939" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="30022" end="30037" title="Jacobite rising" label="Jacobite rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529631" start="30396" end="30416" title="Sir William Honywood, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir William Honywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948021" start="30510" end="30526" title="Norton Knatchbull, 3rd Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Lord Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q163286" start="30541" end="30551" title="Hugh Grant" label="Hugh Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611796" start="30569" end="30607" title="List of colonial governors of Virginia" label="List of colonial governors of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529355" start="30610" end="30620" title="Sir Walter" label="Sir Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934290" start="30637" end="30655" title="The Armada Service" label="The Armada Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739770" start="31353" end="31370" title="The History Press" label="The History Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="31768" end="31780" title="C. S. Lewis" label="Lewis, C. S."/>
<link wikidata="Q18531591" start="32504" end="32521" title="William Stebbing" label="Stebbing, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="32674" end="32702" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q671812" start="32706" end="32717" title="Chapel Hill, North Carolina" label="Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128305" start="33286" end="33297" title="Hathi Trust" label="Hathi Trust"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33709" wikidata="Q40994" url="?curid=33709" title="Walrus">
<text>The walrus (Odobenus rosmarus) is a large pinniped marine mammal with discontinuous distribution about the North Pole in the Arctic Ocean and subarctic seas of the Northern Hemisphere. It is the only extant species in the family Odobenidae and genus &quot;Odobenus&quot;. This species is subdivided into two subspecies: the Atlantic walrus (&quot;O. r. rosmarus&quot;), which lives in the Atlantic Ocean, and the Pacific walrus (&quot;O. r. divergens&quot;), which lives in the Pacific Ocean.

Adult walrus are characterised by prominent tusks and whiskers, and considerable bulk: adult males in the Pacific can weigh more than and, among pinnipeds, are exceeded in size only by the two species of elephant seals. Walrus live mostly in shallow waters above the continental shelves, spending significant amounts of their lives on the sea ice looking for benthic bivalve molluscs. Walruses are relatively long-lived, social animals, and are considered to be a &quot;keystone species&quot; in the Arctic marine regions.

The walrus has played a prominent role in the cultures of many indigenous Arctic peoples, who have hunted it for meat, fat, skin, tusks, and bone. During the 19th century and the early 20th century, walrus were widely hunted for their blubber, walrus ivory, and meat. The population of walruses dropped rapidly all around the Arctic region. It has rebounded somewhat since, though the populations of Atlantic and Laptev walruses remain fragmented and at low levels compared with the time before human interference.

==Etymology==

The origin of the word &quot;walrus&quot; derives from a Germanic language, and it has been attributed largely to either Dutch or Old Norse. Its first part is thought to derive from a word such as Old Norse (&#x27;whale&#x27;) and the second part has been hypothesized to come from the Old Norse word (&#x27;horse&#x27;). For example, the Old Norse word means &#x27;horse-whale&#x27; and is thought to have been passed in an inverted form to both Dutch and the dialects of northern Germany as and . An alternative theory is that it comes from the Dutch words &#x27;shore&#x27; and &#x27;giant&#x27;.

The species name &quot;rosmarus&quot; is Scandinavian. The Norwegian manuscript &quot;Konungs skuggsjá&quot;, thought to date from around AD 1240, refers to the walrus as in Iceland and in Greenland (walruses were by now extinct in Iceland and Norway, while the word evolved in Greenland). Several place names in Iceland, Greenland and Norway may originate from walrus sites: Hvalfjord, Hvallatrar and Hvalsnes to name some, all being typical walrus breeding grounds.

The archaic English word for walrus—&quot;morse&quot;—is widely thought to have come from the Slavic languages, which in turn borrowed it from Finno-Ugric languages, and ultimately (according to Ante Aikio) from an unknown Pre-Finno-Ugric substrate language of Northern Europe. Compare () in Russian, in Finnish, in Northern Saami, and in French. Olaus Magnus, who depicted the walrus in the in 1539, first referred to the walrus as the , probably a Latinization of , and this was adopted by Linnaeus in his binomial nomenclature.

The coincidental similarity between &quot;morse&quot; and the Latin word (&#x27;a bite&#x27;) supposedly contributed to the walrus&#x27;s reputation as a &quot;terrible monster&quot;.

The compound &quot;Odobenus&quot; comes from &#x27; (Greek for &#x27;teeth&#x27;) and &#x27; (Greek for &#x27;walk&#x27;), based on observations of walruses using their tusks to pull themselves out of the water. The term in Latin means &#x27;turning apart&#x27;, referring to their tusks.

The Inuttitut term for the creature is &quot;aivik&quot;, similar to the Inuktitut word: &quot;aiviq&quot; ᐊᐃᕕᖅ.

==Taxonomy and evolution==

The walrus is a mammal in the order Carnivora. It is the sole surviving member of the family Odobenidae, one of three lineages in the suborder Pinnipedia along with true seals (Phocidae) and eared seals (Otariidae). While there has been some debate as to whether all three lineages are monophyletic, i.e. descended from a single ancestor, or diphyletic, recent genetic evidence suggests all three descended from a caniform ancestor most closely related to modern bears. Recent multigene analysis indicates the odobenids and otariids diverged from the phocids about 20–26 million years ago, while the odobenids and the otariids separated 15–20 million years ago. Odobenidae was once a highly diverse and widespread family, including at least twenty species in the subfamilies Imagotariinae, Dusignathinae and Odobeninae. The key distinguishing feature was the development of a squirt/suction feeding mechanism; tusks are a later feature specific to Odobeninae, of which the modern walrus is the last remaining (relict) species.

Two subspecies of walrus are widely recognized: the Atlantic walrus, &quot;O. r. rosmarus&quot; (Linnaeus, 1758) and the Pacific walrus, &quot;O. r. divergens&quot; (Illiger, 1815). Fixed genetic differences between the Atlantic and Pacific subspecies indicate very restricted gene flow, but relatively recent separation, estimated at 500,000 and 785,000 years ago. These dates coincide with the hypothesis derived from fossils that the walrus evolved from a tropical or subtropical ancestor that became isolated in the Atlantic Ocean and gradually adapted to colder conditions in the Arctic.

The modern walrus is mostly known from Arctic regions, but a substantial breeding population occurred on isolated Sable Island, southeast of Nova Scotia and due east of Portland, Maine, until the early Colonial period. Abundant walrus remains have also been recovered from the southern North Sea dating to the Eemian interglacial period, when that region would have been submerged as it is today, unlike the intervening glacial lowstand when the shallow North Sea was dry land. Fossils known from San Francisco, Vancouver, and the Atlantic US coast as far south as North Carolina have been referred to glacial periods.

An isolated population in the Laptev Sea was considered by some authorities, including many Russian biologists and the canonical &quot;Mammal Species of the World&quot;, to be a third subspecies, &quot;O. r. laptevi&quot; (Chapskii, 1940), but has since been determined to be of Pacific walrus origin.

==Anatomy==
While some outsized Pacific males can weigh as much as , most weigh between . An occasional male of the Pacific subspecies far exceeds normal dimensions. In 1909, a walrus hide weighing was collected from an enormous bull in Franz Josef Land, while in August 1910, Jack Woodson shot a walrus, harvesting its hide. Since a walrus&#x27;s hide usually accounts for about 20% of its body weight, the total body mass of these two giants is estimated to have been at least . The Atlantic subspecies weighs about 10–20% less than the Pacific subspecies. Male Atlantic walrus weigh an average of . The Atlantic walrus also tends to have relatively shorter tusks and somewhat more of a flattened snout. Females weigh about two-thirds as much as males, with the Atlantic females averaging , sometimes weighing as little as , and the Pacific female averaging . Length typically ranges from . Newborn walruses are already quite large, averaging in weight and in length across both sexes and subspecies. All told, the walrus is the third largest pinniped species, after the two elephant seals. Walruses maintain such a high body weight because of the blubber stored underneath their skin. This blubber keeps them warm and the fat provides energy to the walrus.

The walrus&#x27;s body shape shares features with both sea lions (eared seals: Otariidae) and seals (true seals: Phocidae). As with otariids, it can turn its rear flippers forward and move on all fours; however, its swimming technique is more like that of true seals, relying less on flippers and more on sinuous whole body movements. Also like phocids, it lacks external ears.

The extraocular muscles of the walrus are well-developed. This and its lack of orbital roof allow it to protrude its eyes and see in both a frontal and dorsal direction. However, vision in this species appears to be more suited for short-range.

===Tusks and dentition===
While this was not true of all extinct walruses, the most prominent feature of the living species is its long tusks. These are elongated canines, which are present in both male and female walruses and can reach a length of 1 m (3 ft 3 in) and weigh up to 5.4 kg (12 lb). Tusks are slightly longer and thicker among males, which use them for fighting, dominance and display; the strongest males with the largest tusks typically dominate social groups. Tusks are also used to form and maintain holes in the ice and aid the walrus in climbing out of water onto ice. Tusks were once thought to be used to dig out prey from the seabed, but analyses of abrasion patterns on the tusks indicate they are dragged through the sediment while the upper edge of the snout is used for digging. While the dentition of walruses is highly variable, they generally have relatively few teeth other than the tusks. The maximal number of teeth is 38 with dentition formula: , but over half of the teeth are rudimentary and occur with less than 50% frequency, such that a typical dentition includes only 18 teeth 

===Vibrissae (whiskers)===
Surrounding the tusks is a broad mat of stiff bristles (&quot;mystacial vibrissae&quot;), giving the walrus a characteristic whiskered appearance. There can be 400 to 700 vibrissae in 13 to 15 rows reaching 30 cm (12 in) in length, though in the wild they are often worn to much shorter lengths due to constant use in foraging. The vibrissae are attached to muscles and are supplied with blood and nerves, making them highly sensitive organs capable of differentiating shapes thick and wide.

===Skin===
Aside from the vibrissae, the walrus is sparsely covered with fur and appears bald. Its skin is highly wrinkled and thick, up to around the neck and shoulders of males. The blubber layer beneath is up to thick. Young walruses are deep brown and grow paler and more cinnamon-colored as they age. Old males, in particular, become nearly pink. Because skin blood vessels constrict in cold water, the walrus can appear almost white when swimming. As a secondary sexual characteristic, males also acquire significant nodules, called &quot;bosses&quot;, particularly around the neck and shoulders.

The walrus has an air sac under its throat which acts like a flotation bubble and allows it to bob vertically in the water and sleep. The males possess a large baculum (penis bone), up to in length, the largest of any land mammal, both in absolute size and relative to body size.

==Life history==
===Reproduction===
Walruses live to about 20–30 years old in the wild. The males reach sexual maturity as early as seven years, but do not typically mate until fully developed at around 15 years of age. They rut from January through April, decreasing their food intake dramatically. The females begin ovulating as soon as four to six years old. The females are diestrous, coming into heat in late summer and around February, yet the males are fertile only around February; the potential fertility of this second period is unknown. Breeding occurs from January to March, peaking in February. Males aggregate in the water around ice-bound groups of estrous females and engage in competitive vocal displays. The females join them and copulate in the water.
Gestation lasts 15 to 16 months. The first three to four months are spent with the blastula in suspended development before it implants itself in the uterus. This strategy of delayed implantation, common among pinnipeds, presumably evolved to optimize both the mating season and the birthing season, determined by ecological conditions that promote newborn survival. Calves are born during the spring migration, from April to June. They weigh at birth and are able to swim. The mothers nurse for over a year before weaning, but the young can spend up to five years with the mothers. Walrus milk contains higher amounts of fats and protein compared to land animals but lower compared to phocid seals. This lower fat content in turn causes a slower growth rate among calves and a longer nursing investment for their mothers. Young may be suckled at sea as well as during long haul-outs, making walrus the only pinnipeds that exhibit aquatic suckling. Because ovulation is suppressed until the calf is weaned, females give birth at most every two years, leaving the walrus with the lowest reproductive rate of any pinniped.

===Migration===
The rest of the year (late summer and fall), walruses tend to form massive aggregations of tens of thousands of individuals on rocky beaches or outcrops. The migration between the ice and the beach can be long-distance and dramatic. In late spring and summer, for example, several hundred thousand Pacific walruses migrate from the Bering Sea into the Chukchi Sea through the relatively narrow Bering Strait.

==Ecology==
===Range and habitat===
The majority of the population of the Pacific walrus spends its summers north of the Bering Strait in the Chukchi Sea of the Arctic Ocean along the northern coast of eastern Siberia, around Wrangel Island, in the Beaufort Sea along the northern shore of Alaska south to Unimak Island, and in the waters between those locations. Smaller numbers of males summer in the Gulf of Anadyr on the southern coast of the Siberian Chukchi Peninsula, and in Bristol Bay off the southern coast of Alaska, west of the Alaska Peninsula. In the spring and fall, walruses congregate throughout the Bering Strait, reaching from the western coast of Alaska to the Gulf of Anadyr. They winter over in the Bering Sea along the eastern coast of Siberia south to the northern part of the Kamchatka Peninsula, and along the southern coast of Alaska. A 28,000-year-old fossil walrus was dredged up from the bottom of San Francisco Bay, indicating that Pacific walruses ranged that far south during the last Ice Age.

Commercial harvesting reduced the population of the Pacific walrus to between 50,000 and 100,000 in the 1950s–1960s. Limits on commercial hunting allowed the population to increase to a peak in the 1970s-1980s, but subsequently, walrus numbers have again declined. Early aerial censuses of Pacific walrus conducted at five-year intervals between 1975 and 1985 estimated populations of above 220,000 in each of the three surveys.

In 2006, the population of the Pacific walrus was estimated to be around 129,000 on the basis of an aerial census combined with satellite tracking. There were roughly 200,000 Pacific walruses in 1990.

The much smaller population of Atlantic walruses ranges from the Canadian Arctic, across Greenland, Svalbard, and the western part of Arctic Russia. There are eight hypothetical subpopulations of Atlantic walruses, based largely on their geographical distribution and movements: five west of Greenland and three east of Greenland. The Atlantic walrus once ranged south to Sable Island, off of Nova Scotia; as late as the 18th century, they could be found in large numbers in the Greater Gulf of St. Lawrence region, sometimes in colonies of 7-8,000 individuals. This population was nearly eradicated by commercial harvest; their current numbers, though difficult to estimate, probably remain below 20,000. In April 2006, the Canadian Species at Risk Act listed the populations of northwestern Atlantic walrus in Québec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Labrador as having been eradicated in Canada. A genetically distinct population existed in Iceland that was wiped out after Norse settlement around 1213–1330 AD.

An isolated population is restricted, year-round, to the central and western regions of the Laptev Sea, from the eastern Kara Sea to the westernmost regions of the East Siberian Sea. The current population of these Laptev walruses has been estimated at between 5-10,000.

Even though walruses can dive to depths beyond 500 meters, they spend most of their time in shallow waters (and the nearby ice floes) hunting for bivalves.

In March 2021, a single walrus, nicknamed Wally the Walrus, was sighted at Valentia Island, Ireland, far south of its typical range, potentially due to having fallen asleep on an iceberg that then drifted south towards Ireland. Days later, a walrus, thought to be the same animal, was spotted on the Pembrokeshire coast, Wales.
In June 2022, a single walrus was sighted on the shores of the Baltic Sea - at Rügen Island, Germany, Mielno, Poland and Skälder Bay, Sweden. In July 2022, there was a report of a lost, starving walrus (nicknamed as Stena) in the coastal waters of the towns of Hamina and Kotka in Kymenlaakso, Finland, that, despite rescue attempts, died of starvation when the rescuers tried to transport it to the Korkeasaari Zoo for treatment.

===Diet===

Walruses prefer shallow shelf regions and forage primarily on the sea floor, often from sea ice platforms. They are not particularly deep divers compared to other pinnipeds; the deepest dives in a study of Atlantic walrus near Svalbard were only . However, a more recent study recorded dives exceeding in Smith Sound, between NW Greenland and Arctic Canada – in general, peak dive depth can be expected to depend on prey distribution and seabed depth.

The walrus has a diverse and opportunistic diet, feeding on more than 60 genera of marine organisms, including shrimp, crabs, priapulids, spoon worms, tube worms, soft corals, tunicates, sea cucumbers, various mollusks (such as snails, octopuses, and squid), some types of slow-moving fish, and even parts of other pinnipeds. However, it prefers benthic bivalve mollusks, especially clams, for which it forages by grazing along the sea bottom, searching and identifying prey with its sensitive vibrissae and clearing the murky bottoms with jets of water and active flipper movements. The walrus sucks the meat out by sealing its powerful lips to the organism and withdrawing its piston-like tongue rapidly into its mouth, creating a vacuum. The walrus palate is uniquely vaulted, enabling effective suction; researchers measured pressures in the oral cavity as low as -87.9 kPa in air, and -118.8 kPa underwater. Walruses at the Tierpark Hagenbeck were easily able to suck the five-pound metal plug out of the bottom of their pool, at a water depth of 1.1 metres. The diet of the Pacific walrus consist almost exclusively of benthic invertebrates (97 percent).

Aside from the large numbers of organisms actually consumed by the walrus, its foraging has a large peripheral impact on benthic communities. It disturbs (bioturbates) the sea floor, releasing nutrients into the water column, encouraging mixing and movement of many organisms and increasing the patchiness of the benthos.

Seal tissue has been observed in a fairly significant proportion of walrus stomachs in the Pacific, but the importance of seals in the walrus diet is under debate. There have been isolated observations of walruses preying on seals up to the size of a bearded seal. Rarely, incidents of walruses preying on seabirds, particularly the Brünnich&#x27;s guillemot (&quot;Uria lomvia&quot;), have been documented. Walruses may occasionally prey on ice-entrapped narwhals and scavenge on whale carcasses but there is little evidence to prove this.

===Predators===
Due to its great size and tusks, the walrus has only two natural predators: the orca and the polar bear. The walrus does not, however, comprise a significant component of either of these predators&#x27; diets. Both the orca and the polar bear are also most likely to prey on walrus calves. The polar bear often hunts the walrus by rushing at beached aggregations and consuming the individuals crushed or wounded in the sudden exodus, typically younger or infirm animals. The bears also isolate walruses when they overwinter and are unable to escape a charging bear due to inaccessible diving holes in the ice. However, even an injured walrus is a formidable opponent for a polar bear, and direct attacks are rare. Armed with its ivory tusks, walruses have been known to fatally injure polar bears in battles if the latter follows the other into the water, where the bear is at a disadvantage. Polar bear–walrus battles are often extremely protracted and exhausting, and bears have been known to break away from the attack after injuring a walrus. Orcas regularly attack walruses, although walruses are believed to have successfully defended themselves via counterattack against the larger cetacean. However, orcas have been observed successfully attacking walruses with few or no injuries.

==Relationship with humans==

===Conservation===

In the 18th and 19th centuries, the walrus was heavily exploited by American and European sealers and whalers, leading to the near-extirpation of the Atlantic subspecies. As early as 1871 traditional hunters were expressing concern about the numbers of walrus being hunted by whaling fleets. Commercial walrus harvesting is now outlawed throughout its range, although Chukchi, Yupik and Inuit peoples are permitted to kill small numbers towards the end of each summer.

Traditional hunters used all parts of the walrus. The meat, often preserved, is an important winter nutrition source; the flippers are fermented and stored as a delicacy until spring; tusks and bone were historically used for tools, as well as material for handicrafts; the oil was rendered for warmth and light; the tough hide made rope and house and boat coverings; and the intestines and gut linings made waterproof parkas. While some of these uses have faded with access to alternative technologies, walrus meat remains an important part of local diets, and tusk carving and engraving remain a vital art form.

According to Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld, European hunters and Arctic explorers found walrus meat not particularly tasty, and only ate it in case of necessity; however walrus tongue was a delicacy.

Walrus hunts are regulated by resource managers in Russia, the United States, Canada, and Greenland, and by representatives of the respective hunting communities. An estimated four to seven thousand Pacific walruses are harvested in Alaska and in Russia, including a significant portion (about 42%) of struck and lost animals. Several hundred are removed annually around Greenland. The sustainability of these levels of harvest is difficult to determine given uncertain population estimates and parameters such as fecundity and mortality. The &quot;Boone and Crockett Big Game Record&quot; book has entries for Atlantic and Pacific walrus. The recorded largest tusks are just over 30 inches and 37 inches long respectively.

The effects of global climate change are another element of concern. The extent and thickness of the pack ice has reached unusually low levels in several recent years. The walrus relies on this ice while giving birth and aggregating in the reproductive period. Thinner pack ice over the Bering Sea has reduced the amount of resting habitat near optimal feeding grounds. This more widely separates lactating females from their calves, increasing nutritional stress for the young and lower reproductive rates. Reduced coastal sea ice has also been implicated in the increase of stampeding deaths crowding the shorelines of the Chukchi Sea between eastern Russia and western Alaska. Analysis of trends in ice cover published in 2012 indicate that Pacific walrus populations are likely to continue to decline for the foreseeable future, and shift further north, but that careful conservation management might be able to limit these effects.

Currently, two of the three walrus subspecies are listed as &quot;least-concern&quot; by the IUCN, while the third is &quot;data deficient&quot;. The Pacific walrus is not listed as &quot;depleted&quot; according to the Marine Mammal Protection Act nor as &quot;threatened&quot; or &quot;endangered&quot; under the Endangered Species Act. The Russian Atlantic and Laptev Sea populations are classified as Category 2 (decreasing) and Category 3 (rare) in the Russian Red Book. Global trade in walrus ivory is restricted according to a CITES Appendix 3 listing. In October 2017, the Center for Biological Diversity announced they would sue the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to force it to classify the Pacific Walrus as a threatened or endangered species.

In 1952, walruses in Svalbard were nearly gone due to ivory hunting over a 300 years period, but the Norwegian government banned their commercial hunting and the walruses began to repopulate. By 2018, the population had increased to an estimated 5,503 walruses in the Svalbard area.

===Culture===
====Folklore====
The walrus plays an important role in the religion and folklore of many Arctic peoples. Skin and bone are used in some ceremonies, and the animal appears frequently in legends. For example, in a Chukchi version of the widespread myth of the Raven, in which Raven recovers the sun and the moon from an evil spirit by seducing his daughter, the angry father throws the daughter from a high cliff and, as she drops into the water, she turns into a walrus . According to various legends, the tusks are formed either by the trails of mucus from the weeping girl or her long braids. This myth is possibly related to the Chukchi myth of the old walrus-headed woman who rules the bottom of the sea, who is in turn linked to the Inuit goddess Sedna. Both in Chukotka and Alaska, the aurora borealis is believed to be a special world inhabited by those who died by violence, the changing rays representing deceased souls playing ball with a walrus head.

Most of the distinctive 12th-century Lewis Chessmen from northern Europe are carved from walrus ivory, though a few have been found to be made of whales&#x27; teeth.

====Literature====
Because of its distinctive appearance, great bulk, and immediately recognizable whiskers and tusks, the walrus also appears in the popular cultures of peoples with little direct experience with the animal, particularly in English children&#x27;s literature. Perhaps its best-known appearance is in Lewis Carroll&#x27;s whimsical poem &quot;The Walrus and the Carpenter&quot; that appears in his 1871 book &quot;Through the Looking-Glass&quot;. In the poem, the eponymous antiheroes use trickery to consume a great number of oysters. Although Carroll accurately portrays the biological walrus&#x27;s appetite for bivalve mollusks, oysters, primarily nearshore and intertidal inhabitants, these organisms in fact comprise an insignificant portion of its diet in captivity.

The &quot;walrus&quot; in the cryptic song &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot; by the Beatles is a reference to the Lewis Carroll poem.

Another appearance of the walrus in literature is in the story &quot;The White Seal&quot; in Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s &quot;The Jungle Book&quot;, where it is the &quot;old Sea Vitch—the big, ugly, bloated, pimpled, fat-necked, long-tusked walrus of the North Pacific, who has no manners except when he is asleep&quot;.

== See also ==

*Elephant seal
== References ==
== Further reading ==


== External links ==
* 
*Biologist Tracks Walruses Forced Ashore As Ice Melts – audio report by &quot;NPR&quot;
*Thousands Of Walruses Crowd Ashore Due To Melting Sea Ice – video by &quot;National Geographic&quot;
*Voices in the Sea – Sounds of the Walrus. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40994" start="4" end="10" title="Walrus" label="walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="42" end="50" title="pinniped" label="pinniped"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="107" end="117" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="125" end="137" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342399" start="142" end="151" title="subarctic" label="subarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="164" end="183" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="207" end="214" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292156" start="229" end="239" title="Odobenidae" label="Odobenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="244" end="249" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="308" end="318" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="389" end="403" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="478" end="491" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q185635" start="538" end="542" title="tusk" label="tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q913572" start="548" end="556" title="whiskers" label="whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="639" end="647" title="pinniped" label="pinniped"/>
<link wikidata="Q185231" start="698" end="711" title="elephant seal" label="elephant seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="761" end="780" title="continental shelves" label="continental shelves"/>
<link wikidata="Q213926" start="833" end="840" title="sea ice" label="sea ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="853" end="860" title="benthic zone" label="benthic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="861" end="868" title="bivalvia" label="bivalve"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="869" end="877" title="Mollusca" label="molluscs"/>
<link wikidata="Q518808" start="964" end="980" title="keystone species" label="keystone species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987120" start="1081" end="1106" title="circumpolar peoples" label="indigenous Arctic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q885539" start="1253" end="1260" title="blubber" label="blubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352389" start="1262" end="1274" title="walrus ivory" label="walrus ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="1606" end="1623" title="Germanic language" label="Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="1670" end="1675" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1679" end="1688" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394199" start="2236" end="2252" title="Konungs skuggsjá" label="Konungs skuggsjá"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="2713" end="2729" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q20912986" start="2814" end="2824" title="Ante Aikio" label="Ante Aikio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167333" start="2842" end="2867" title="Pre-Finno-Ugric substrate" label="Pre-Finno-Ugric substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="2923" end="2930" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33947" start="2935" end="2949" title="Northern Sami language" label="Northern Saami"/>
<link wikidata="Q315804" start="2966" end="2978" title="Olaus Magnus" label="Olaus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="3111" end="3119" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="3127" end="3148" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3389" end="3394" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3560" end="3565" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642" start="3630" end="3639" title="Inuttitut" label="Inuttitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="3699" end="3708" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="3798" end="3803" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25306" start="3804" end="3813" title="Carnivora" label="Carnivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="3854" end="3860" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="3902" end="3910" title="suborder" label="suborder"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="3911" end="3921" title="Pinnipedia" label="Pinnipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25587" start="3945" end="3953" title="Phocidae" label="Phocidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26700" start="3972" end="3981" title="Otariidae" label="Otariidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="4054" end="4066" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="4110" end="4120" title="diphyletic" label="diphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27414" start="4182" end="4190" title="caniform" label="caniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248233" start="4778" end="4784" title="Relict (biology)" label="relict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336091" start="5504" end="5516" title="Sable Island" label="Sable Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="5531" end="5542" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="5559" end="5574" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295340" start="5700" end="5706" title="Eemian" label="Eemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="5887" end="5900" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="5902" end="5911" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="5955" end="5969" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988" start="6040" end="6050" title="Laptev Sea" label="Laptev Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q185018" start="6550" end="6566" title="Franz Josef Land" label="Franz Josef Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q167896" start="7012" end="7017" title="snout" label="snout"/>
<link wikidata="Q185231" start="7390" end="7404" title="elephant seals" label="elephant seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q26700" start="7640" end="7650" title="eared seal" label="eared seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25587" start="7675" end="7685" title="earless seal" label="true seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q533979" start="7957" end="7976" title="extraocular muscles" label="extraocular muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q156075" start="8032" end="8044" title="Orbit (anatomy)" label="orbital roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q19625" start="8362" end="8369" title="canine teeth" label="canines"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="9015" end="9024" title="dentition" label="dentition"/>
<link wikidata="Q913572" start="9417" end="9426" title="vibrissae" label="vibrissae"/>
<link wikidata="Q885539" start="10022" end="10035" title="blubber" label="blubber layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784017" start="10297" end="10328" title="secondary sexual characteristic" label="secondary sexual characteristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743609" start="10460" end="10484" title="throat sac" label="air sac under its throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q835986" start="10602" end="10609" title="baculum" label="baculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q609370" start="10827" end="10842" title="sexual maturity" label="sexual maturity"/>
<link wikidata="Q596937" start="10948" end="10951" title="Rut (mammalian reproduction)" label="rut"/>
<link wikidata="Q388121" start="11101" end="11110" title="oestrus" label="diestrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600878" start="11471" end="11479" title="Copulation (zoology)" label="copulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="11494" end="11503" title="Gestation" label="Gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125116225" start="11577" end="11585" title="blastula" label="blastula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456044" start="11669" end="11689" title="delayed implantation" label="delayed implantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="12180" end="12191" title="Pinniped" label="phocid seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="12964" end="12974" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q159252" start="12984" end="12995" title="Chukchi Sea" label="Chukchi Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="13026" end="13039" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="13163" end="13176" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q159252" start="13184" end="13195" title="Chukchi Sea" label="Chukchi Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="13252" end="13259" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106594" start="13268" end="13282" title="Wrangel Island" label="Wrangel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q131274" start="13291" end="13303" title="Beaufort Sea" label="Beaufort Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="13332" end="13338" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q375615" start="13348" end="13361" title="Unimak Island" label="Unimak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q483824" start="13445" end="13459" title="Gulf of Anadyr" label="Gulf of Anadyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002" start="13498" end="13515" title="Chukchi Peninsula" label="Chukchi Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q60064" start="13582" end="13598" title="Alaska Peninsula" label="Alaska Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="13763" end="13773" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="13843" end="13862" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="13970" end="13987" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="14055" end="14067" title="Wisconsin glaciation" label="last Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="14791" end="14800" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="14802" end="14810" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336091" start="15074" end="15086" title="Sable Island" label="Sable Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="15095" end="15106" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="15189" end="15209" title="Gulf of St. Lawrence" label="Gulf of St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574961" start="15436" end="15455" title="Species at Risk Act" label="Species at Risk Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="15514" end="15520" title="Québec" label="Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="15537" end="15548" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988" start="15822" end="15832" title="Laptev Sea" label="Laptev Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33629" start="15851" end="15859" title="Kara Sea" label="Kara Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q163434" start="15894" end="15911" title="East Siberian Sea" label="East Siberian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="16148" end="16156" title="bivalves" label="bivalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q111949334" start="16201" end="16217" title="Wally the Walrus" label="Wally the Walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146838" start="16234" end="16249" title="Valentia Island" label="Valentia Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="16251" end="16258" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213361" start="16459" end="16472" title="Pembrokeshire" label="Pembrokeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="16480" end="16485" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="16550" end="16560" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237" start="16566" end="16571" title="Rügen" label="Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="16580" end="16587" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013119" start="16589" end="16595" title="Mielno" label="Mielno"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="16597" end="16603" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208706" start="16608" end="16619" title="Skälder Bay" label="Skälder Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="16621" end="16627" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q113192818" start="16703" end="16708" title="Stena (walrus)" label="Stena"/>
<link wikidata="Q367780" start="16748" end="16754" title="Hamina" label="Hamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q192155" start="16759" end="16764" title="Kotka" label="Kotka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698" start="16768" end="16779" title="Kymenlaakso" label="Kymenlaakso"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="16781" end="16788" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q220045" start="16887" end="16902" title="Korkeasaari Zoo" label="Korkeasaari Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="16955" end="16960" title="Continental shelf" label="shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="17158" end="17166" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164842" start="17236" end="17247" title="Smith Sound" label="Smith Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="17495" end="17501" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184" start="17510" end="17520" title="Priapulida" label="priapulids"/>
<link wikidata="Q64119" start="17522" end="17533" title="Echiura" label="spoon worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555694" start="17535" end="17545" title="Tube worm (body plan)" label="tube worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="17552" end="17557" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q165118" start="17560" end="17568" title="tunicate" label="tunicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127470" start="17571" end="17583" title="Holothuroidea" label="sea cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="17594" end="17602" title="Mollusca" label="mollusks"/>
<link wikidata="Q381180" start="17612" end="17617" title="Sea snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q40152" start="17620" end="17627" title="octopus" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="17635" end="17640" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="17669" end="17673" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="17738" end="17754" title="Bivalvia" label="bivalve mollusks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192868" start="17767" end="17771" title="clam" label="clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q913572" start="17878" end="17887" title="vibrissae" label="vibrissae"/>
<link wikidata="Q502326" start="18313" end="18331" title="Tierpark Hagenbeck" label="Tierpark Hagenbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q864907" start="18701" end="18712" title="bioturbation" label="bioturbates"/>
<link wikidata="Q182238" start="18859" end="18866" title="benthos" label="benthos"/>
<link wikidata="Q149405" start="19120" end="19132" title="bearded seal" label="bearded seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q728682" start="19202" end="19227" title="Brünnich&amp;#x27;s guillemot" label="Brünnich&amp;#x27;s guillemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q159426" start="19325" end="19332" title="narwhal" label="narwhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="19507" end="19511" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="19520" end="19530" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138714" start="19940" end="19950" title="Overwintering" label="overwinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502014" start="20858" end="20865" title="Seal hunting" label="sealers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="20870" end="20877" title="Whaling" label="whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="20899" end="20910" title="Local extinction" label="extirpation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106991" start="21136" end="21143" title="Chukchi people" label="Chukchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37014" start="21145" end="21150" title="Yupik peoples" label="Yupik"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="21155" end="21160" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q156749" start="21866" end="21889" title="Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld" label="Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558649" start="22024" end="22030" title="Tongue (foodstuff)" label="tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="22099" end="22105" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="22138" end="22147" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="22281" end="22287" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587899" start="22562" end="22571" title="fecundity" label="fecundity"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="22576" end="22585" title="mortality rate" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="22788" end="22809" title="global climate change" label="global climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q159252" start="23398" end="23409" title="Chukchi Sea" label="Chukchi Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="23804" end="23808" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q921424" start="23931" end="23959" title="Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972" label="Marine Mammal Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="24026" end="24048" title="Endangered Species Act" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q569223" start="24177" end="24185" title="Red Data Book of the Russian Federation" label="Red Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352389" start="24203" end="24215" title="walrus ivory" label="walrus ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="24245" end="24250" title="CITES" label="CITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="24292" end="24323" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="24353" end="24383" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="24488" end="24496" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="24837" end="24845" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="24854" end="24860" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106991" start="24977" end="24984" title="Chukchi people" label="Chukchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11748447" start="25011" end="25028" title="Raven in mythology" label="myth of the Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359507" start="25039" end="25044" title="Kutkh" label="Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q875507" start="25516" end="25521" title="Sedna (mythology)" label="Sedna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984" start="25531" end="25539" title="Chukotka Autonomous Okrug" label="Chukotka"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="25544" end="25550" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="25556" end="25571" title="aurora borealis" label="aurora borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217796" start="25764" end="25778" title="Lewis chessmen" label="Lewis Chessmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="26211" end="26224" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290846" start="26253" end="26281" title="The Walrus and the Carpenter" label="The Walrus and the Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q220331" start="26324" end="26349" title="Through the Looking-Glass" label="Through the Looking-Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="26374" end="26383" title="eponymous" label="eponymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="26384" end="26394" title="antiheroes" label="antiheroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="26437" end="26443" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="26562" end="26571" title="Littoral zone" label="nearshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q421069" start="26576" end="26586" title="intertidal" label="intertidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138639" start="26734" end="26749" title="I Am the Walrus" label="I Am the Walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="26759" end="26770" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="26907" end="26922" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q189509" start="26936" end="26951" title="The Jungle Book" label="The Jungle Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q185231" start="27150" end="27163" title="Elephant seal" label="Elephant seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="27307" end="27310" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="27393" end="27412" title="National Geographic Channel" label="National Geographic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33710" wikidata="Q8034110" url="?curid=33710" title="Woozy">
<text>Woozy may refer to:

* Woozy (Oz), a fictional creature in the children&#x27;s novel &quot;The Patchwork Girl of Oz&quot; 
* Woozy Winks, the sidekick of fictional superhero Plastic Man
* &quot;Woozy&quot;, a track by Faithless used in the soundtrack to &quot;The Beach&quot;
* Woozy (artist), a Greek street artist
* Woozy, a rock band from New Orleans

==See also==
* Wu Zi Mu, a character in the video game &quot;Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas&quot;
* Woosie, nickname of golfer Ian Woosnam</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8034110" start="0" end="5" title="Woozy" label="Woozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335227" start="23" end="33" title="Woozy (Oz)" label="Woozy (Oz)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040095" start="125" end="136" title="Woozy Winks" label="Woozy Winks"/>
<link wikidata="Q470692" start="260" end="269" title="The Beach (film)" label="The Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q16218933" start="278" end="292" title="Woozy (artist)" label="Woozy (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25056401" start="318" end="323" title="Woozy (band)" label="Woozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="327" end="331" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83265" start="370" end="378" title="Wu Zi Mu" label="Wu Zi Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q545161" start="481" end="492" title="Ian Woosnam" label="Ian Woosnam"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33716" wikidata="Q475953" url="?curid=33716" title="Wolfville">
<text>Wolfville is a Canadian town in the Annapolis Valley, Kings County, Nova Scotia, located about northwest of the provincial capital, Halifax. The town is home to Acadia University and Landmark East School.

The town is a tourist destination due to its views of Cape Blomidon, the Bay of Fundy and Gaspereau Valley, as well as its wine industry. The downtown portion of Wolfville is home to pubs, bars, cafes and shops. Wolfville is also home to the Acadia Cinema Cooperative, a non-profit organization that runs the local movie/performance house. In the past few years, several Victorian houses in Wolfville have been converted to bed and breakfast establishments.

==History==
===First Nations===
From ancient times, the area of Wolfville was a hunting ground for First Nations peoples, including the Clovis, Laurentian, Bear River, and Shields Archaic groups. They were attracted by the salmon in the Gaspereau River and the agate stone at Cape Blomidon, with which they could make stone tools.

Many centuries before European contact, Mi&#x27;kmaq people, related to the Algonquin and Ojibwe peoples, migrated into Nova Scotia. The Mi&#x27;kmaq were seasonal hunters, using dogs and traveling on webbed snowshoes to hunt deer. They used the various semi-precious stones (including jasper, quartz, and even amethyst) from the Blomidon area to make arrowheads.

===French rule===
After an initial effort in 1604 by Pierre Dugua, Sieur de Mons and his cartographer Samuel de Champlain to establish a colony at Saint Croix Island, the colony was relocated to the Habitation at Port-Royal. The French and the Mi&#x27;kmaq quickly established a reciprocal trading relationship which continued to serve both peoples well until the mid eighteenth-century. The French found the area to be rich in furs and fine fertile land. Reports sent to France by individuals such as Samuel de Champlain, Marc Lescarbot and Nicolas Denys proclaimed the rich bounty to be found in the Annapolis Valley area.

French settlement efforts continued in fits and starts. By 1636 under Charles de Menou d&#x27;Aulnay, Port Royal was reestablished after Acadia/Nova Scotia was transferred from England to the French under the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye. The progeny of these settlers, as well as the second wave of settlers under Hector d&#x27;Andigné de Grandfontaine, would eventually become known as the Acadians. By the late 1690s their population numbered about 350.

French settlement in the Wolfville area began in about 1680, when Pierre Melanson established his family at Grand-Pré. The Acadians prospered as farmers by enclosing the estuarine salt marshes with dykes, and successfully converting the reclaimed lands into fertile fields for crops and pasturage. In 1710, however, Acadia was lost by the French crown after the English laid siege to Annapolis Royal. Under the 1713 Peace of Utrecht, signed at the close of the War of the Spanish Succession, Acadia was ceded for the final time to the British.

For the next 36 years, until the establishment of Halifax in 1749, the British remained at Annapolis Royal and Canso. The French-speaking Catholic population grew over the intervening years to well over 10,000 and the Minas region (Wolfville and environs) quickly became the principal settlement. Acadia was a borderland region between the British and French empires, and this caused a complex socio-political environment to develop for the Acadians. Both the British and the French coaxed and threatened the Acadians in attempts to secure their loyalty, as is evidenced by the various oaths of allegiance each side attempted to extract from them. This complex situation led many Acadians to attempt to maintain a neutral path; while others openly supported either the French or the British. During the War of the Austrian Succession, the Acadians in the Wolfville area were implicated in the Battle of Grand Pré, during which a French military force, reinforced by Mi&#x27;kmaq and Acadian allies, defeated a British force.

After the outbreak of the Seven Years&#x27; War between Great Britain and France, the Acadians in the Wolfville area, along with all Acadians in peninsular Nova Scotia, were involved in the deportations which took place as part of the expulsion of the Acadians (see also the Bay of Fundy Campaign). Beginning in September 1755 and continuing into the fall, approximately 2,000 Acadians were deported by the British from the area around Wolfville. The villages lying beyond Grand-Pré were burned by British forces, and still more buildings were destroyed by both sides during the guerrilla war that took place until 1758.

===British rule===
In around 1760, the British authorities in Nova Scotia made several township plots of land available in the Annapolis Valley for colonization by English-speaking settlers. Horton Township was created in the Grand-Pré/Wolfville Area. Because of pressure on agricultural lands in New England, Anglophone farmers moved north in search of fertile land at a reasonable price. It is thought that between 1760 and 1789, more than 8,000 people known as New England Planters immigrated to the land around the Annapolis Valley. In 1763, there were 154 families living in the area of Horton Township.

The New England Planters set up a primarily agricultural economy, exporting cattle, potatoes, and grain, and later apples, as well as developing lumbering and shipbuilding. They settled and re-used the same dyke-lands as the Acadians had used before them, repairing and later expanding the agricultural dykes. They developed a major expansion in 1808, the three-mile-long Wickwire Dyke, which connected the Wolfville and Grand Pre dykes. This allowed the agricultural development of an additional 8,000 acres. The town site for Horton was initially surveyed in the Grand-Pré area at Horton Landing near the mouth of the Gaspereau River. However, the town developed around the sheltered harbour on the Cornwallis River at Wolfville, at first known as Mud Creek.

The first official record of a Baptist church in Canada was that of the Horton Baptist Church (now Wolfville), established on October 29, 1778. The church was established with the assistance of the New Light evangelist Henry Alline. The Baptist movement remained strong in the area. In 1838 Acadia University was founded as a Baptist college.

In 1830, the town of Mud Creek changed its name to Wolfville, in honour of Elisha DeWolf, the town&#x27;s postmaster at the time. In the mid-19th century, Wolfville was renowned as the world&#x27;s smallest port. The town became part of Canada with Confederation in 1867.

===Canada===
The Windsor and Annapolis Railway arrived in 1868, later becoming the Dominion Atlantic Railway. Wolfville became a seaport devoted principally to the export of apples from the orchards of the fertile Annapolis Valley. Wolfville Harbour was also a terminus of the MV &quot;Kipawo&quot; ferry, the last of a long succession of ferries that connected Wolfville, Kingsport, and Parrsboro for 200 years. The harbour, which empties twice a day due to the high tides of the Bay of Fundy, was once described by Robert Ripley as the smallest in the world. On March 20, 1893, the Town was incorporated, with E. Perry Bowles elected as its first mayor.

In 1985, the town was declared a nuclear free zone. Wolfville was declared Canada&#x27;s first fair trade town on April 17, 2007. In May 2016, Wolfville was designated as the third Cittaslow in Canada.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Wolfville had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

With Acadia University having a full time student population of 3,765, the population can fluctuate greatly with the school semesters.

==Arts and culture ==
The Acadia University Art Gallery and The Festival Theatre are both located on Main Street, along with many bistros and boutiques. The town&#x27;s history is presented at the Randall House Museum, operated by the Wolfville Historical Society. Each year, the Annapolis Valley Music Festival is held at Acadia Campus, where musicians from across the valley compete. Wolfville hosts two annual arts festivals, the Deep Roots Music Festival in September and Devour! The Food Film Fest in late October.

The Al Whittle Theatre operated by the Acadia Cinema Cooperative has for generations served as a nexus of culture and entertainment for the town&#x27;s populace. Opened in 1911 and operating as an opera house until 1923 when it became a community theater and cinema, the theater underwent various changes in ownership until 1997 under the management of Acadia Cinems. With the retirement of its long-serving manager Al Whittle (1929–2021), the theater closed in 2000. In 2004, the theater was re-opened by the Acadia Cinema Cooperative Ltd. and named in honour of Al Whittle. The theater has continued to serve as a local gathering place and centre for the arts ever since, from hosting local theater productions to screening international independent films.

Wolfville has a farmers market located in the DeWolfe building, a former apple packing warehouse. In July 2022, the town hosted the first Annapolis Valley Pride Festival.

It has a library called Wolfville Memorial Library.

==Education==
* Acadia University
* Landmark East School
* Wolfville School
* Horton High School

==Notable people==
*Joseph Barss, privateer
*Bob Chambers (1905–1996), political cartoonist
*Alex Colville (1920–2013) WWII artist
*Gilbert Lafayette Foster, 6th Canadian Surgeon General
*William Hall (1827–1904), third Canadian to receive the Victoria Cross.
*Benjamin Jackson, sailor and American Civil War veteran
*Arthur Chute McGill (1926–1980) theologian and philosopher
*Eddy (M) Melanson was born in Wolfville, Nova Scotia, on July 25, 1938.
*Mona Louise Parsons (1901–1976) member of the Dutch resistance, WW2

==Parks==
*Canada Parks
*Lumsden Pond Provincial Park
*Reservoir Park
*Rotary Park

==See also==
* List of municipalities in Nova Scotia

==References==
==Relevant literature==
Prentice Roger H. ed., 2024. &quot;Baptists in Early North America -- Wolfville, Nova Scotia&quot;. Mercer University Press.

==External links==
*Town of Wolfville Municipal Web Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q475953" start="0" end="9" title="Wolfville" label="Wolfville"/>
<link wikidata="Q564530" start="36" end="52" title="Annapolis Valley" label="Annapolis Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q671105" start="54" end="79" title="Kings County, Nova Scotia" label="Kings County, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="132" end="139" title="Halifax Regional Municipality" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q337382" start="161" end="178" title="Acadia University" label="Acadia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050573" start="183" end="203" title="Landmark East School" label="Landmark East School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937006" start="260" end="273" title="Cape Blomidon" label="Cape Blomidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q181857" start="279" end="291" title="Bay of Fundy" label="Bay of Fundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526617" start="296" end="312" title="Gaspereau Valley" label="Gaspereau Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="577" end="586" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q367914" start="630" end="647" title="bed and breakfast" label="bed and breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="764" end="777" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485378" start="801" end="807" title="Clovis culture" label="Clovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790301" start="809" end="819" title="Laurentian language" label="Laurentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937006" start="941" end="954" title="Cape Blomidon" label="Cape Blomidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q495751" start="1037" end="1049" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q135863" start="1073" end="1082" title="Algonquin people" label="Algonquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="1087" end="1093" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534846" start="1415" end="1442" title="Pierre Dugua, Sieur de Mons" label="Pierre Dugua, Sieur de Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q68529" start="1464" end="1483" title="Samuel de Champlain" label="Samuel de Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026700" start="1509" end="1527" title="Saint Croix Island, Maine" label="Saint Croix Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125393" start="1561" end="1585" title="Habitation at Port-Royal" label="Habitation at Port-Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288216" start="1885" end="1899" title="Marc Lescarbot" label="Marc Lescarbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340248" start="1904" end="1917" title="Nicolas Denys" label="Nicolas Denys"/>
<link wikidata="Q564530" start="1964" end="1980" title="Annapolis Valley" label="Annapolis Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960643" start="2058" end="2088" title="Charles de Menou d&amp;#x27;Aulnay" label="Charles de Menou d&amp;#x27;Aulnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778616" start="2197" end="2228" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1632)" label="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129293" start="2306" end="2344" title="Hector d&amp;#x27;Andigné de Grandfontaine" label="Hector d&amp;#x27;Andigné de Grandfontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="2383" end="2391" title="Acadians" label="Acadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100749" start="2557" end="2566" title="Grand-Pré, Nova Scotia" label="Grand-Pré"/>
<link wikidata="Q564536" start="2833" end="2848" title="Annapolis Royal" label="Annapolis Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="2865" end="2881" title="Peace of Utrecht" label="Peace of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="2910" end="2939" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="3797" end="3827" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888679" start="3887" end="3906" title="Battle of Grand Pré" label="Battle of Grand Pré"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="4046" end="4067" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723587" start="4255" end="4280" title="expulsion of the Acadians" label="expulsion of the Acadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874200" start="4295" end="4316" title="Bay of Fundy Campaign (1755)" label="Bay of Fundy Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="4599" end="4608" title="guerrilla" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636082" start="4729" end="4737" title="Township (Nova Scotia)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="4939" end="4950" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391555" start="5106" end="5126" title="New England Planters" label="New England Planters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906976" start="5835" end="5849" title="Hortonville, Nova Scotia" label="Horton Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15957682" start="5872" end="5887" title="Gaspereau River (Nova Scotia)" label="Gaspereau River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172037" start="5953" end="5969" title="Cornwallis River" label="Cornwallis River"/>
<link wikidata="Q15498515" start="6233" end="6245" title="Henry Alline" label="Henry Alline"/>
<link wikidata="Q337382" start="6305" end="6322" title="Acadia University" label="Acadia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361750" start="6433" end="6446" title="Elisha DeWolf" label="Elisha DeWolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="6607" end="6620" title="Confederation of Canada" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024735" start="6648" end="6677" title="Windsor and Annapolis Railway" label="Windsor and Annapolis Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291031" start="6714" end="6739" title="Dominion Atlantic Railway" label="Dominion Atlantic Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11679485" start="6908" end="6929" title="MV Kipawo" label="MV &amp;quot;Kipawo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413389" start="7004" end="7013" title="Kingsport, Nova Scotia" label="Kingsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q499355" start="7019" end="7028" title="Parrsboro, Nova Scotia" label="Parrsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q732327" start="7148" end="7161" title="Robert Ripley" label="Robert Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278776" start="7321" end="7338" title="nuclear free zone" label="nuclear free zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q44136" start="7383" end="7398" title="Fairtrade Town" label="fair trade town"/>
<link wikidata="Q677741" start="7469" end="7478" title="Cittaslow" label="Cittaslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="7517" end="7542" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="7556" end="7573" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q337382" start="7757" end="7774" title="Acadia University" label="Acadia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030236" start="8123" end="8151" title="Wolfville Historical Society" label="Wolfville Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q337382" start="9410" end="9427" title="Acadia University" label="Acadia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050573" start="9430" end="9450" title="Landmark East School" label="Landmark East School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107843" start="9472" end="9490" title="Horton High School (Nova Scotia)" label="Horton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078502" start="9512" end="9524" title="Joseph Barss" label="Joseph Barss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932049" start="9537" end="9549" title="Bob Chambers (cartoonist)" label="Bob Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832922" start="9585" end="9598" title="Alex Colville" label="Alex Colville"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865867" start="9624" end="9648" title="Gilbert Lafayette Foster" label="Gilbert Lafayette Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646182" start="9663" end="9678" title="Surgeon General (Canada)" label="Surgeon General"/>
<link wikidata="Q546725" start="9680" end="9692" title="William Hall (VC)" label="William Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888867" start="9753" end="9769" title="Benjamin Jackson (sailor)" label="Benjamin Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="9782" end="9800" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798267" start="9810" end="9829" title="Arthur Chute McGill" label="Arthur Chute McGill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109518" start="9870" end="9887" title="Eddy (M) Melanson" label="Eddy (M) Melanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954701" start="9943" end="9962" title="Mona Louise Parsons" label="Mona Louise Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474417" start="9989" end="10005" title="Dutch resistance" label="Dutch resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218838" start="10111" end="10148" title="List of municipalities in Nova Scotia" label="List of municipalities in Nova Scotia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33717" wikidata="Q128723" url="?curid=33717" title="Wild type">
<text>The wild type (WT) is the phenotype of the typical form of a species as it occurs in nature. Originally, the wild type was conceptualized as a product of the standard &quot;normal&quot; allele at a locus, in contrast to that produced by a non-standard, &quot;mutant&quot; allele. &quot;Mutant&quot; alleles can vary to a great extent, and even become the wild type if a genetic shift occurs within the population. Continued advancements in genetic mapping technologies have created a better understanding of how mutations occur and interact with other genes to alter phenotype. It is now appreciated that most or all gene loci exist in a variety of allelic forms, which vary in frequency throughout the geographic range of a species, and that a uniform wild type does not exist. In general, however, the most prevalent allele – i.e., the one with the highest gene frequency – is the one deemed wild type.

The concept of wild type is useful in some experimental organisms such as fruit flies &quot;Drosophila melanogaster&quot;, in which the standard phenotypes for features such as eye color or wing shape are known to be altered by particular mutations that produce distinctive phenotypes, such as &quot;white eyes&quot; or &quot;vestigial wings&quot;. Wild-type alleles are indicated with a &quot;+&quot; superscript, for example &quot;w+&quot; and &quot;vg+&quot; for red eyes and full-size wings, respectively. Manipulation of the genes behind these traits led to the current understanding of how organisms form and how traits mutate within a population. Research involving the manipulation of wild-type alleles has application in many fields, including fighting disease and commercial food production.

==Medical applications==
The genetic sequence for wild-type versus &quot;mutant&quot; phenotypes and how these genes interact in expression is the subject of much research. Better understanding of these processes is hoped to bring about methods for preventing and curing diseases that are currently incurable such as infection with the herpes virus. One example of such promising research in these fields was the study done examining the link between wild-type mutations and certain types of lung cancer. Research is also being done dealing with the manipulation of certain wild-type traits in viruses to develop new vaccines. This research may lead to new ways to combat deadly viruses such as the Ebola virus and HIV. Research using wild-type mutations is also being done to establish how viruses transition between species to identify harmful viruses with the potential to infect humans.

==Commercial applications==
Selective breeding to enhance the most beneficial traits is the structure upon which agriculture is built, this expedited the evolution process to make crop plants and animals larger and more disease resistant. Genetic manipulation went further. Genetic alteration of plants leads to not only larger crop production, but also more nutritious products, allowing isolated populations to receive vital vitamins and minerals that would otherwise be unavailable to them. Utilization of these wild-type mutations has also led to plants capable of growing in extremely arid environments, making more of the planet habitable than ever before. As more is understood about these genes, agriculture will continue to become a more efficient process, which will be relied upon to sustain a continually growing population. Amplification of advantageous genes allows the best traits in a population to be present at much higher percentages than normal, although this practice has been the subject of some ethical debate. These changes have also been the reason behind certain plants and animals being almost unrecognizable when compared to their ancestral lines.

== See also ==
* Genotype
* Phenotype
* Crop wild relative

== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;Absence of the wild-type allele&quot; – Pediatrics
* &quot;Genetically-spliced bacteria may benefit agriculture&quot; – Sarasota Herald-Tribune
* &quot;Reading of DNA allows creation of synthetic vaccines&quot; – Star News
* &quot;A Curious Clue in Cats&quot; – Newsday
* &quot;A Genetically Engineered Agriculture Revolution?&quot; – The Telegraph
* &quot;Wild Type Learning Activity&quot; 
* &quot;Wild-Type vs. Mutant&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128723" start="4" end="13" title="Wild type" label="wild type"/>
<link wikidata="Q128723" start="15" end="17" title="Wild type" label="WT"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="26" end="35" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="61" end="68" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="186" end="192" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285695" start="259" end="265" title="mutant" label="mutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="678" end="687" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="998" end="1021" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="Drosophila melanogaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="1145" end="1154" title="mutations" label="mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q51993" start="2408" end="2419" title="Ebola virus disease" label="Ebola virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="2424" end="2427" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="2629" end="2647" title="Selective breeding" label="Selective breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575667" start="3619" end="3633" title="Genetically modified food controversies" label="ethical debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="3795" end="3803" title="Genotype" label="Genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="3806" end="3815" title="Phenotype" label="Phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141015" start="3818" end="3836" title="Crop wild relative" label="Crop wild relative"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33718" wikidata="Q38392" url="?curid=33718" title="William Faulkner">
<text>William Cuthbert Faulkner (; September 25, 1897 – July 6, 1962) was an American writer. He is best known for his novels and short stories set in the fictional Yoknapatawpha County, Mississippi, a stand-in for Lafayette County where he spent most of his life. A Nobel laureate, Faulkner is one of the most celebrated writers of American literature and often is considered the greatest writer of Southern literature.

Faulkner was born in New Albany, Mississippi, and raised in Oxford, Mississippi. During World War I, he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force, but did not serve in combat. Returning to Oxford, he attended the University of Mississippi for three semesters before dropping out. He moved to New Orleans, where he wrote his first novel &quot;Soldiers&#x27; Pay&quot; (1925). He went back to Oxford and wrote &quot;Sartoris&quot; (1927), his first work set in Yoknapatawpha County. In 1929, he published &quot;The Sound and the Fury&quot;. The following year, he wrote &quot;As I Lay Dying&quot;. Later that decade, he wrote &quot;Light in August&quot;, &quot;Absalom, Absalom!&quot; and &quot;The Wild Palms&quot;. He also worked as a screenwriter, contributing to Howard Hawks&#x27;s &quot;To Have and Have Not&quot; and &quot;The Big Sleep&quot;, adapted from Raymond Chandler&#x27;s novel. The former film, adapted from Ernest Hemingway&#x27;s novel, is the only film with contributions by two Nobel laureates.

Faulkner&#x27;s reputation grew following publication of Malcolm Cowley&#x27;s &quot;The Portable Faulkner,&quot; and he was awarded the 1949 Nobel Prize in Literature for &quot;his powerful and unique contribution to the modern American novel.&quot; He is the only Mississippi-born Nobel laureate. Two of his works, &quot;A Fable&quot; (1954) and &quot;The Reivers&quot; (1962), won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction. Faulkner died from a heart attack on July 6, 1962, following a fall from his horse the month before. Ralph Ellison called him &quot;the greatest artist the South has produced&quot;.

==Life==
===Childhood and heritage===

Faulkner was born on September 25, 1897, in New Albany, Mississippi, the first of four sons of Murry Cuthbert Falkner and Maud Butler. His family was upper middle-class, but &quot;not quite of the old feudal cotton aristocracy&quot;. After Maud rejected Murry&#x27;s plan to become a rancher in Texas, the family moved to Oxford, Mississippi in 1902, where Faulkner&#x27;s father established a livery stable and hardware store before becoming the University of Mississippi&#x27;s business manager. Except for short periods elsewhere, Faulkner lived in Oxford for the rest of his life.

Faulkner spent his boyhood listening to stories told to him by his elders – stories that spanned the Civil War, slavery, the Ku Klux Klan, and the Faulkner family. Young William was greatly influenced by the history of his family and the region in which he lived. Mississippi marked his sense of humor, his sense of the tragic position of &quot;black and white&quot; Americans, his characterization of Southern characters, and his timeless themes, including fiercely intelligent people who are dwelling behind the façades of good ol&#x27; boys and simpletons. He was particularly influenced by stories of his great-grandfather William Clark Falkner, who had become a near legendary figure in North Mississippi. Born into poverty, the elder Falkner was a strict disciplinarian and was a Confederate colonel. Tried and acquitted twice on charges of murder, he became a member of the Mississippi House and became a part-owner of a railroad before being murdered by his co-owner. Faulkner incorporated many aspects of his great-grandfather&#x27;s biography into his later works.
Faulkner initially excelled in school and skipped the second grade. However, beginning somewhere in the fourth and fifth grades, he became a quieter and more withdrawn child. He occasionally played truant and became indifferent about schoolwork. Instead, he took an interest in studying the history of Mississippi. The decline of his performance in school continued, and Faulkner wound up repeating the eleventh and twelfth grades, never graduating from high school. As a teenager in Oxford, Faulkner dated Estelle Oldham (1897–1972), the popular daughter of Major Lemuel and Lida Oldham, and he also believed he would marry her. However, Estelle dated other boys during their romance, and, in 1918, Cornell Franklin (five years Faulkner&#x27;s senior) proposed marriage to her before Faulkner did. She accepted.

===Trip to the North and early writings===

When he was 17, Faulkner met Phil Stone, who became an important early influence on his writing. Stone was four years his senior and came from one of Oxford&#x27;s older families; he was passionate about literature and had bachelor&#x27;s degrees from Yale and the University of Mississippi. Stone read and was impressed by some of Faulkner&#x27;s early poetry, becoming one of the first to recognize and encourage Faulkner&#x27;s talent. Stone mentored the young Faulkner, introducing him to the works of writers like James Joyce, who influenced Faulkner&#x27;s own writing. In his early 20s, Faulkner gave poems and short stories he had written to Stone in hopes of their being published. Stone sent these to publishers, but they were uniformly rejected. In spring 1918, Faulkner traveled to live with Stone at Yale, his first trip to the North. Through Stone, Faulkner met writers like Sherwood Anderson, Robert Frost, and Ezra Pound.

Faulkner attempted to join the US Army. There are accounts of this that indicate he was rejected for being under weight and his short stature of 5&#x27;5&quot;. Other accounts purport to prove that the aforementioned accounts are false. Although he initially planned to join the British Army in hopes of being commissioned as an officer, Faulkner then joined the Canadian RAF with a forged letter of reference and left Yale to receive training in Toronto. Records indicate that Faulkner was never actually a member of the British Royal Flying Corps and never saw active service during the First World War. Despite claiming so in his letters, Faulkner did not receive cockpit training or ever fly. Returning to Oxford in December 1918, Faulkner told acquaintances false war-stories and even faked a war wound.

In 1918, Faulkner&#x27;s surname changed from &quot;Falkner&quot; to &quot;Faulkner&quot;. According to one story, a careless typesetter made an error. When the misprint appeared on the title page of his first book, Faulkner was asked whether he wanted the change. He supposedly replied, &quot;Either way suits me.&quot; In adolescence, Faulkner began writing poetry almost exclusively. He did not write his first novel until 1925. His literary influences are deep and wide. He once stated that he modeled his early writing on the Romantic era in late 18th- and early 19th-century England.

He attended the University of Mississippi, enrolling in 1919, studying for three semesters before dropping out in November 1920. Faulkner joined the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity, and pursued his dream to become a writer. He skipped classes often and received a &quot;D&quot; grade in English. However, some of his poems were published in campus publications. In 1922, his poem &quot;Portrait&quot; was published in the New Orleans literary magazine &quot;Double Dealer&quot;. The magazine published his &quot;New Orleans&quot; short story collection three years later. After dropping out, he took a series of odd jobs: at a New York City bookstore, as a carpenter in Oxford, and as the Ole Miss postmaster. He resigned from the post office with the declaration: &quot;I will be damned if I propose to be at the beck and call of every itinerant scoundrel who has two cents to invest in a postage stamp.&quot;

===New Orleans and early novels===

While most writers of Faulkner&#x27;s generation traveled to and lived in Europe, Faulkner remained writing in the United States. Faulkner spent the first half of 1925 in New Orleans, Louisiana, where many bohemian artists and writers lived, specifically in the French Quarter where Faulkner lived beginning in March. During his time in New Orleans, Faulkner&#x27;s focus drifted from poetry to prose and his literary style made a marked transition from Victorian to modernist. &quot;The Times-Picayune&quot; published several of his short works of prose.

After being directly influenced by Sherwood Anderson, Faulkner wrote his first novel, &quot;Soldiers&#x27; Pay,&quot; in New Orleans. &quot;Soldiers&#x27; Pay&quot; and his other early works were written in a style similar to contemporaries Ernest Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald, at times nearly exactly appropriating phrases. Anderson assisted in the publication of &quot;Soldiers&#x27; Pay&quot; and &quot;Mosquitoes&quot; by recommending them to his publisher.

The miniature house at 624 Pirate&#x27;s Alley, just around the corner from St. Louis Cathedral in New Orleans, is now the site of Faulkner House Books, where it also serves as the headquarters of the Pirate&#x27;s Alley Faulkner Society.

During the summer of 1927, Faulkner wrote his first novel set in his fictional Yoknapatawpha County, &quot;Flags in the Dust&quot;. This novel drew heavily from the traditions and history of the South, in which Faulkner had been engrossed in his youth. He was extremely proud of the novel upon its completion and he believed it a significant step up from his previous two novels—however, when submitted for publication to Boni &amp; Liveright, it was rejected. Faulkner was devastated by this rejection but he eventually allowed his literary agent, Ben Wasson, to edit the text, and the novel was published in 1929 as &quot;Sartoris.&quot; The work was notable in that it was his first novel that dealt with the Civil War rather than the contemporary emphasis on World War I and its legacy. Eventually Faulkner&#x27;s daughter, Jill, would approach University of Virginia professor Douglas Day about restoring the text. Almost a fourth of the original manuscript had been cut by Wasson to meet the demands of publishers Harcourt, Brace in 1929. Working from a surviving typescript, Day reinstated cut passages but also included at least one added section from the published text. This new edition, published in 1973, also restored Faulkner&#x27;s original title, &quot;Flags in the Dust.&quot; A third version by Noel Polk has since replaced Day&#x27;s and is considered the definitive text by Random House, the current publishers of Faulkner&#x27;s fiction.

===&quot;The Sound and the Fury&quot;===

In autumn 1928, just after his 31st birthday, Faulkner began working on &quot;The Sound and the Fury&quot;. He started by writing three short stories about a group of children with the last name Compson, but soon began to feel that the characters he had created might be better suited for a full-length novel. Perhaps as a result of disappointment in the initial rejection of &quot;Flags in the Dust&quot;, Faulkner had now become indifferent to his publishers and wrote this novel in a much more experimental style. In describing the writing process for this work, Faulkner later said, &quot;One day I seemed to shut the door between me and all publisher&#x27;s addresses and book lists. I said to myself, &#x27;Now I can write.&#x27;&quot; After its completion, Faulkner insisted that Wasson not do any editing or add any punctuation for clarity.

=== 19291931 ===
In 1929, Faulkner married Estelle Oldham, with Andrew Kuhn serving as best man at the wedding. Estelle brought with her two children from her previous marriage to Cornell Franklin and Faulkner hoped to support his new family as a writer. Faulkner and Estelle later had a daughter, Jill, in 1933. He began writing &quot;As I Lay Dying&quot; in 1929 while working night shifts at the University of Mississippi Power House. The novel was published in 1930.

Beginning in 1930, Faulkner sent some of his short stories to various national magazines. Several of these were published and brought him enough income to buy a house in Oxford for his family, which he named Rowan Oak. Fueled by a desire to make money, Faulkner wrote &quot;Sanctuary&quot;. With limited royalties from his work, he published short stories in magazines such as &quot;The Saturday Evening Post&quot; to supplement his income.

===&quot;Light in August&quot; and Hollywood years===

By 1932, Faulkner was in need of money. He asked Wasson to sell the serialization rights for his newly completed novel, &quot;Light in August&quot;, to a magazine for $5,000, but none accepted the offer. Then MGM Studios offered Faulkner work as a screenwriter in Hollywood. Faulkner was not an avid movie goer and had reservations about working in the movie industry. As André Bleikasten comments, he &quot;was in dire need of money and had no idea how to get it...So he went to Hollywood.&quot; It has been noted that authors like Faulkner were not always hired for their writing prowess but &quot;to enhance the prestige of the ...writers who hired them.&quot; He arrived in Culver City, California, in May 1932. The job began a sporadic relationship with moviemaking and with California, which was difficult but he endured in order to earn &quot;a consistent salary that supported his family back home.&quot;

Initially, he declared a desire to work on Mickey Mouse cartoons, not realizing that they were produced by Walt Disney Productions and not MGM. His first screenplay was for &quot;Today We Live&quot;, an adaptation of his short story &quot;Turnabout&quot;, which received a mixed response. He then wrote a screen adaptation of &quot;Sartoris&quot; that was never produced. From 1932 to 1954, Faulkner worked on around 50 films. In early 1944, Faulkner wrote a screenplay adaptation of Ernest Hemingway&#x27;s novel &quot;To Have and Have Not&quot;. The film was the first starring Lauren Bacall and Humphrey Bogart. Bogart and Bacall would star in Hawks&#x27;s &quot;The Big Sleep&quot;, another film Faulkner worked on.

Faulkner was highly critical of what he found in Hollywood, and he wrote letters that were &quot;scathing in tone, painting a miserable portrait of a literary artist imprisoned in a cultural Babylon.&quot; Many scholars have brought attention to the dilemma he experienced and the predicament that caused him serious unhappiness. In Hollywood he worked with director Howard Hawks, with whom he quickly developed a friendship, as they both enjoyed drinking and hunting. Howard Hawks&#x27; brother, William Hawks, became Faulkner&#x27;s Hollywood agent. Faulkner continued to find reliable work as a screenwriter from the 1930s to the 1950s. While staying in Hollywood, Faulkner adopted a &quot;vagrant&quot; lifestyle, living in brief stints in hotels like the Garden of Allah Hotel and frequenting the bar at the Roosevelt Hotel and the Musso &amp; Frank Grill where he was said to have regularly gone behind the bar to mix his own Mint Juleps. He had an extramarital affair with Hawks&#x27; secretary and script girl, Meta Carpenter.

With the onset of World War II, in 1942, Faulkner tried to join the United States Air Force but was rejected. He instead worked on local civil defense. The war drained Faulkner of his enthusiasm. He described the war as &quot;bad for writing&quot;. Amid this creative slowdown, in 1943, Faulkner began work on a new novel that merged World War I&#x27;s Unknown Soldier with the Passion of Christ. Published over a decade later as &quot;A Fable&quot;, it won the 1954 Pulitzer Prize. The award for &quot;A Fable&quot; was a controversial political choice. The jury had selected Milton Lott&#x27;s &quot;The Last Hunt&quot; for the prize, but Pulitzer Prize Administrator Professor John Hohenberg convinced the Pulitzer board that Faulkner was long overdue for the award, despite &quot;A Fable&quot; being a lesser work of his, and the board overrode the jury&#x27;s selection, much to the disgust of its members.

By the time of &quot;The Portable Faulkner&quot;″s publication, most of his novels had been out of print.

===Nobel Prize and later years===

Faulkner was awarded the 1949 Nobel Prize in Literature for &quot;his powerful and artistically unique contribution to the modern American novel&quot;. It was awarded at the following year&#x27;s banquet along with the 1950 Prize to Bertrand Russell.

When Faulkner visited Stockholm in December 1950 to receive the Nobel Prize, he met Else Jonsson (1912–1996), who was the widow of journalist Thorsten Jonsson (1910–1950). Jonsson, a reporter for &quot;Dagens Nyheter&quot; from 1943 to 1946, had interviewed Faulkner in 1946 and introduced his works to Swedish readers. Faulkner and Else had an affair that lasted until the end of 1953. At the banquet where they met in 1950, publisher Tor Bonnier introduced Else as the widow of the man responsible for Faulkner winning the Nobel Prize.

Faulkner&#x27;s Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech on the immortality of the artists, although brief, contained a number of allusions and references to other literary works. However, Faulkner detested the fame and glory that resulted from his recognition. His aversion was so great that his 17-year-old daughter learned of the Nobel Prize only when she was called to the principal&#x27;s office during the school day. He began by saying: &quot;I feel that this award was not made to me as a man, but to my work – a life&#x27;s work in the agony and sweat of the human spirit, not for glory and least of all for profit, but to create out of the materials of the human spirit something which did not exist before. So this award is only mine in trust. It will not be difficult to find a dedication for the money part of it commensurate with the purpose and significance of its origin.&quot; He donated part of his Nobel money &quot;to establish a fund to support and encourage new fiction writers&quot;, eventually resulting in the William Faulkner Foundation (1960–1970).

In 1951, Faulkner received the Chevalier de la Légion d&#x27;honneur medal from the government of France.

Faulkner served as the first Writer-in-Residence at the University of Virginia at Charlottesville from February to June 1957 and again in 1958.

In 1961, Faulkner began writing his nineteenth and final novel, &quot;The Reivers&quot;. The novel is a nostalgic reminiscence, in which an elderly grandfather relates a humorous episode in which he and two boys stole a car to drive to a Memphis bordello. In summer 1961, he finished the first draft. During this time, he injured himself in a series of falls.

On June 17, 1962, Faulkner suffered a serious injury in a fall from his horse, which led to thrombosis. He suffered a fatal heart attack on July 6, 1962, at the age of 64, at Wright&#x27;s Sanatorium in Byhalia, Mississippi. Faulkner is buried with his family in St. Peter&#x27;s Cemetery in Oxford.

==Writing==

From the early 1920s to the outbreak of World War II, Faulkner published 13 novels and many short stories. This body of work formed the basis of his reputation and earned him the Nobel Prize at age 52. Faulkner&#x27;s prodigious output include celebrated novels such as &quot;The Sound and the Fury&quot; (1929), &quot;As I Lay Dying&quot; (1930), &quot;Light in August&quot; (1932), and &quot;Absalom, Absalom!&quot; (1936). He was also a prolific writer of short stories.

Faulkner&#x27;s first short story collection, &quot;These 13&quot; (1931), includes many of his most acclaimed (and most frequently anthologized) stories, including &quot;A Rose for Emily&quot;, &quot;Red Leaves&quot;, &quot;That Evening Sun&quot;, and &quot;Dry September&quot;. He set many of his short stories and novels in Yoknapatawpha County—which was based on and nearly geographically identical to Lafayette County (of which his hometown of Oxford, Mississippi, is the county seat). Yoknapatawpha was Faulkner&#x27;s &quot;postage stamp&quot;, and the bulk of work that it represents is widely considered by critics to amount to one of the most monumental fictional creations in the history of literature. Three of his novels, &quot;The Hamlet&quot;, &quot;The Town&quot; and &quot;The Mansion&quot;, known collectively as the Snopes trilogy, document the town of Jefferson and its environs, as an extended family headed by Flem Snopes insinuates itself into the lives and psyches of the general populace. Yoknapatawpha County has been described as a mental landscape.

His short story &quot;A Rose for Emily&quot; was his first story published in a major magazine, the &quot;Forum&quot;, but received little attention from the public. After revisions and reissues, it gained popularity and is now considered one of his best.

Faulkner wrote two volumes of poetry which were published in small printings, &quot;The Marble Faun&quot; (1924), and &quot;A Green Bough&quot; (1933), and a collection of mystery stories, &quot;Knight&#x27;s Gambit&quot; (1949).

===Style and technique===
Carl Rollyson has argued that, &quot;as an artist,&quot; Faulkner believed &quot;he should be above worldly concerns and even morality.&quot; Faulkner was known for his experimental style with meticulous attention to diction and cadence. In contrast to the minimalist understatement of his contemporary Ernest Hemingway, Faulkner made frequent use of stream of consciousness in his writing, and wrote often highly emotional, subtle, cerebral, complex, and sometimes Gothic or grotesque stories of a wide variety of characters including former slaves or descendants of slaves, poor white, agrarian, or working-class Southerners, and Southern aristocrats.

Faulkner&#x27;s contemporary critical reception was mixed, with &quot;The New York Times&quot; noting that many critics regarded his work as &quot;raw slabs of pseudorealism that had relatively little merit as serious writing&quot;. His style has been described as &quot;impenetrably convoluted&quot;.

In an interview with &quot;The Paris Review&quot; in 1956, Faulkner remarked: Let the writer take up surgery or bricklaying if he is interested in technique. There is no mechanical way to get the writing done, no shortcut. The young writer would be a fool to follow a theory. Teach yourself by your own mistakes; people learn only by error. The good artist believes that nobody is good enough to give him advice. He has supreme vanity. No matter how much he admires the old writer, he wants to beat him. In that same interview, Jean Stein says &quot;Some people say they can&#x27;t understand your writing, even after they read it two or three times. What approach would you suggest for them?&quot; Faulkner replies: &quot;Read it four times.&quot;

When asked about his influences, Faulkner says &quot;the books I read are the ones I knew and loved when I was a young man and to which I return as you do to old friends: the Old Testament, Dickens, Conrad, Cervantes, &quot;Don Quixote—&quot;I read that every year, as some do the Bible. Flaubert, Balzac—he created an intact world of his own, a bloodstream running through twenty books—Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, Shakespeare. I read Melville occasionally and, of the poets, Marlowe, Campion, Jonson, Herrick, Donne, Keats, and Shelley.&quot;

Like his contemporaries James Joyce and T. S. Eliot, Faulkner uses stories and themes from classic literature in a modern context. Joyce, in &quot;Ulysses&quot;, modeled the journey of his hero Leopold Bloom on the adventures of Odysseus. Eliot, in his essay &quot;Ulysses, Order and Myth&quot;, wrote that &quot;In using the myth, in manipulating a continuous parallel between contemporaneity and antiquity, Mr. Joyce is pursuing a method which others must pursue after him. They will not be imitators, any more than the scientist who uses the discoveries of an Einstein in pursuing his own, independent, further investigations. It is simply a way of controlling, of ordering, of giving a shape and a significance to the immense panorama of futility and anarchy which is contemporary history.&quot; Faulkner&#x27;s allusions to earlier authors are evidenced by his titles; the title of &quot;The Sound and the Fury&quot; comes from Macbeth&#x27;s soliloquy: &quot;it is a tale/ Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,/ Signifying nothing.&quot; The opening of the novel is told from the perspective of the intellectually disabled Benjy Compson. The title of &quot;As I Lay Dying&quot; comes from Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot;, where it is spoken by Agamemnon in the past tense: &quot;As I lay dying, the woman with the dog&#x27;s eyes would not close my eyes as I descended into Hades.&quot; Faulkner&#x27;s novel, in contrast, is narrated in the present tense. The title of &quot;Go Down, Moses&quot; is from an African American spiritual, and the book is dedicated &quot;To Mammy / Caroline Barr / Mississippi / [1840–1940] Who was born in slavery and who gave to my family a fidelity without stint or calculation of recompense and to my childhood an immeasurable devotion and love.&quot;

===Themes and analysis===
Faulkner was against forced desegregation and argued that civil rights activists should &quot;go slow&quot; and be more moderate in their positions. The essayist and novelist James Baldwin was highly critical of his views around integration. Ralph Ellison said that &quot;No one in American fiction has done so much to explore the types of Negro personality as has Faulkner.&quot;

The New Critics became interested in Faulkner&#x27;s work, with Cleanth Brooks writing &quot;The Yoknapatawpha Country&quot; and Michael Millgate writing &quot;The Achievement of William Faulkner&quot;. Since then, critics have looked at Faulkner&#x27;s work using other approaches, such as feminist and psychoanalytic methods. Faulkner&#x27;s works have been placed within the literary traditions of modernism and the Southern Renaissance.

French philosopher Albert Camus wrote that Faulkner successfully imported classical tragedy into the 20th century through his &quot;interminably unwinding spiral of words and sentences that conducts the speaker to the abyss of sufferings buried in the past&quot;.

==Legacy==

===Influence===
Faulkner is widely considered a towering figure in Southern literature; Flannery O&#x27;Connor wrote that &quot;the presence alone of Faulkner in our midst makes a great difference in what the writer can and cannot permit himself to do. Nobody wants his mule and wagon stalled on the same track the &quot;Dixie Limited&quot; is roaring down&quot;. In 1943, while working at Warner Brothers, Faulkner wrote a letter of encouragement to a young Mississippi writer, Eudora Welty. According to critic and translator Valerie Miles, Faulkner&#x27;s influence on Latin American fiction is considerable, with fictional worlds created by Gabriel García Márquez (Macondo) and Juan Carlos Onetti (Santa Maria) being &quot;very much in the vein of&quot; Yoknapatawpha, and that &quot;Carlos Fuentes&#x27;s &quot;The Death of Artemio Cruz&quot; wouldn&#x27;t exist if not for &quot;As I Lay Dying&quot;&quot;. Fuentes himself cited Faulkner as one of the writers most important to him. Faulkner had great influence on Mario Vargas Llosa, particularly on his early novels &quot;The Time of the Hero&quot;, &quot;The Green House&quot; and &quot;Conversation in The Cathedral&quot;. Vargas Llosa has claimed that during his student years he learned more from Yoknapatawpha than from classes. Jorge Luis Borges translated Faulkner&#x27;s &quot;The Wild Palms&quot; into Spanish&quot;.&quot;

The works of William Faulkner are a clear influence on the French novelist Claude Simon, and the Portuguese novelist António Lobo Antunes. Cormac McCarthy has been described as a &quot;disciple of Faulkner&quot;.

In &quot;The Elements of Style&quot;, E. B. White cites Faulkner: &quot;If the experiences of Walter Mitty, of Dick Diver, of Rabbit Angstrom have seemed for the moment real to countless readers, if in reading Faulkner we have almost the sense of inhabiting Yoknapatawpha County during the decline of the South, it is because the details used are definite, the terms concrete.&quot; Later, Faulkner&#x27;s style is contrasted with that of Hemingway.

After his death, Estelle and their daughter, Jill, lived at Rowan Oak until Estelle&#x27;s death in 1972. The property was sold to the University of Mississippi that same year. The house and furnishings are maintained much as they were in Faulkner&#x27;s day. Faulkner&#x27;s scribblings are preserved on the wall, including the day-by-day outline covering a week he wrote on the walls of his small study to help him keep track of the plot twists in his novel &quot;A Fable&quot;. Some of Faulkner&#x27;s Nobel Prize winnings went to establish the William Faulkner Foundation. It gave an Award for Notable First Novel; winners included John Knowles&#x27;s &quot;A Separate Peace&quot;, Thomas Pynchon&#x27;s &quot;V.&quot;, Cormac McCarthy&#x27;s &quot;The Orchard Keeper&quot;, Robert Coover&#x27;s &quot;The Origin of the Brunists&quot; and Frederick Exley&#x27;s &quot;A Fan&#x27;s Notes&quot;. Starting in 1981, this became the PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction, founded by, among others, Mary Lee Settle as an alternative to the National Book Award.

Some of Faulkner&#x27;s works have been adapted into films. They have received a polarized response, with many critics contending that Faulkner&#x27;s works are &quot;unfilmable&quot;. Faulkner&#x27;s final work, &quot;The Reivers&quot;, was adapted into a 1969 film starring Steve McQueen. Tommy Lee Jones&#x27;s neo-Western film &quot;The Three Burials of Melquiades Estada&quot; was partly based on Faulkner&#x27;s &quot;As I Lay Dying&quot;.

During the Nazi Occupation of France in World War II, the German occupiers banned American literature. A black-market of American books emerged, and reading works by Hemingway and Faulkner became an act of defiance. Faulkner remains especially popular in France, where a 2009 poll found him the second most popular writer (after only Marcel Proust). Contemporary Jean-Paul Sartre stated that &quot;for young people in France, Faulkner is a god&quot;, and Albert Camus made a stage adaptation of Faulkner&#x27;s &quot;Requiem for a Nun&quot;. In Jean-Luc Godard&#x27;s &quot;Breathless&quot;, Patricia (Jean Seberg) quotes &quot;The Wild Palms&quot;: &quot;Between grief and nothing, I will take grief.&quot;

He also won the U.S. National Book Award twice, for &quot;Collected Stories&quot; in 1951 and &quot;A Fable&quot; in 1955.

The United States Postal Service issued a 22-cent postage stamp in his honor on August 3, 1987. Faulkner had once served as Postmaster at the University of Mississippi, and in his letter of resignation in 1923 wrote:
As long as I live under the capitalistic system, I expect to have my life influenced by the demands of moneyed people. But I will be damned if I propose to be at the beck and call of every itinerant scoundrel who has two cents to invest in a postage stamp.

This, sir, is my resignation.

On October 10, 2019, a Mississippi Writers Trail historical marker was installed at Rowan Oak in Oxford, Mississippi honoring the contributions of William Faulkner to the American literary landscape.

===Collections===
The manuscripts of most of Faulkner&#x27;s works, correspondence, personal papers, and over 300 books from his working library reside at the Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library at the University of Virginia, where he spent much of his time in his final years. The library also houses some of the writer&#x27;s personal effects and the papers of major Faulkner associates and scholars, such as his biographer Joseph Blotner, bibliographer Linton Massey, and Random House editor Albert Erskine.

Southeast Missouri State University, where the Center for Faulkner Studies is located, also owns a generous collection of Faulkner materials, including first editions, manuscripts, letters, photographs, artwork, and many materials pertaining to Faulkner&#x27;s time in Hollywood. The university possesses many personal files and letters kept by Joseph Blotner, along with books and letters that once belonged to Malcolm Cowley. The university achieved the collection due to a generous donation by Louis Daniel Brodsky, a collector of Faulkner materials, in 1989.

Further significant Faulkner materials reside at the University of Mississippi, the Harry Ransom Center, and the New York Public Library.

The Random House records at Columbia University also include letters by and to Faulkner.

In 1966, the United States Military Academy dedicated a William Faulkner Room in its library.

==Selected list of works==

* &quot;The Sound and the Fury&quot; (1929)
* &quot;As I Lay Dying&quot; (1930)
* &quot;Sanctuary&quot; (1931)
* &quot;Light in August&quot; (1932)
* &quot;Absalom, Absalom!&quot; (1936)
* &quot;The Wild Palms&quot; (1939)
* &quot;The Hamlet&quot; (1940)
* &quot;Go Down, Moses&quot; (1942)
* &quot;Intruder in the Dust&quot; (1948)
* &quot;A Fable&quot; (1954)
* &quot;The Town&quot; (1957)
* &quot;The Mansion&quot; (1959)
* &quot;The Reivers&quot; (1962)

==Filmography==
* &quot;Flesh&quot; (1932)
* &quot;Today We Live&quot; (1933)
* &quot;The Story of Temple Drake&quot; (1933)
* &quot;Submarine Patrol&quot; (1938)
* &quot;Air Force&quot; (1943)
* &quot;To Have and Have Not&quot; (1944)
* &quot;The Big Sleep&quot; (1946)
* &quot;Land of the Pharaohs&quot; (1955)

==Notes and references==
===Notes===
===Citations and references===

&quot;Oppression and Its Effects on the Individual and Society in Faulkner&#x27;s &#x27;A Rose for Emily&#x27;&quot;, El-Ruha 5th International Conference on Social Sciences Proceedings Book, Eds. Fethi Demir&amp;Mehmet Recep Taş. . 2019. Tunisia. pp. 31–38. www.elruha.org.

===Works cited===
* 
* William Faulkner: &quot;Novels 1930–1935&quot; (Joseph Blotner and Noel Polk, ed.) (Library of America, 1985) 
* William Faulkner: &quot;Novels 1936–1940&quot; (Joseph Blotner and Noel Polk, eds.) (Library of America, 1990) 
* William Faulkner: &quot;Novels 1942–1954&quot; (Joseph Blotner and Noel Polk, eds.) (Library of America, 1994) 
* William Faulkner: &quot;Novels 1957–1962&quot; (Noel Polk, ed., with notes by Joseph Blotner) (Library of America, 1999) 
* William Faulkner: &quot;Novels 1926–1929&quot; (Joseph Blotner and Noel Polk, eds.) (Library of America, 2006) 
* &quot;The Portable Faulkner,&quot; ed. Malcolm Cowley (Viking Press, 1946). 
* Blotner, Joseph. &quot;Faulkner: A Biography&quot;. New York: Random House, 1984.
* Fowler, Doreen, Abadie, Ann. &quot;Faulkner and Popular Culture: Faulkner and Yoknapatawpha&quot;. Univ. Press of Mississippi, 1990, 
* Jaillant, Lise. &quot;&#x27;I&#x27;m Afraid I&#x27;ve Got Involved With a Nut&#x27;: New Faulkner Letters.&quot; Southern Literary Journal 47.1 (2014): 98–114. 
* Kerr, Elizabeth Margaret, and Kerr, Michael M. &quot;William Faulkner&#x27;s Yoknapatawpha: A Kind of Keystone in the Universe&quot;. Fordham Univ Press, 1985, 
* Liénard-Yeterian, Marie. &#x27;Faulkner et le cinéma&#x27;, Paris: Michel Houdiard Editeur, 2010.
* 
* Sensibar, Judith L. &quot;The Origins of Faulkner&#x27;s Art&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1984. 
* Sensibar, Judith L. &quot;Faulkner and Love: The Women Who Shaped His Art, A Biography&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008. 
* Sensibar, Judith L. &quot;Vision in Spring&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1984. .
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==

==External links==

;Digital collections
* 
* 

;Physical collections
* William Faulkner Papers at the University of Virginia
* William Faulkner Collection at the Harry Ransom Center
* William Faulkner Family Collection (MUM00125)

;Other links
* Digital Yoknapatawpha
* Faulkner at Virginia: An Audio Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38392" start="0" end="25" title="William Faulkner" label="William Cuthbert Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008948" start="109" end="137" title="William Faulkner bibliography" label="his novels and short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295828" start="159" end="179" title="Yoknapatawpha County" label="Yoknapatawpha County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="181" end="192" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q485383" start="209" end="225" title="Lafayette County, Mississippi" label="Lafayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="261" end="275" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q233762" start="327" end="346" title="American literature" label="American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176362" start="394" end="413" title="Southern United States literature" label="Southern literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779875" start="437" end="460" title="New Albany, Mississippi" label="New Albany, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q983822" start="476" end="495" title="Oxford, Mississippi" label="Oxford, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="504" end="515" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="531" end="555" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="623" end="648" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="702" end="713" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536034" start="752" end="770" title="Soldiers&amp;#x27; Pay" label="Soldiers&amp;#x27; Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851314" start="824" end="832" title="Sartoris" label="Sartoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q135515" start="919" end="941" title="The Sound and the Fury" label="The Sound and the Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544119" start="984" end="998" title="As I Lay Dying" label="As I Lay Dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823273" start="1040" end="1055" title="Light in August" label="Light in August"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181982" start="1069" end="1086" title="Absalom, Absalom!" label="Absalom, Absalom!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559408" start="1103" end="1117" title="The Wild Palms" label="The Wild Palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581" start="1175" end="1187" title="Howard Hawks" label="Howard Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q786996" start="1201" end="1221" title="To Have and Have Not (film)" label="To Have and Have Not"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137931" start="1232" end="1257" title="The Big Sleep (1946 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Big Sleep&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q180377" start="1272" end="1288" title="Raymond Chandler" label="Raymond Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649862" start="1296" end="1301" title="The Big Sleep" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="1333" end="1349" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q538390" start="1357" end="1362" title="To Have and Have Not" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458319" start="1482" end="1496" title="Malcolm Cowley" label="Malcolm Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410526" start="1562" end="1592" title="1949 Nobel Prize in Literature" label="1949 Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363072" start="1748" end="1755" title="A Fable" label="A Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233504" start="1779" end="1790" title="The Reivers" label="The Reivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q833633" start="1813" end="1839" title="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction" label="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q299965" start="1942" end="1955" title="Ralph Ellison" label="Ralph Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779875" start="2107" end="2130" title="New Albany, Mississippi" label="New Albany, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="2256" end="2289" title="Planter class" label="the old feudal cotton aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q983822" start="2385" end="2391" title="Oxford, Mississippi" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="2510" end="2535" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2750" end="2759" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="2774" end="2786" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="2994" end="2999" title="African Americans" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="3004" end="3009" title="White Americans" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="3016" end="3025" title="Americans" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006840" start="3276" end="3297" title="William Clark Falkner" label="William Clark Falkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525933" start="3530" end="3547" title="Mississippi House of Representatives" label="Mississippi House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865524" start="4015" end="4037" title="history of Mississippi" label="history of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715743" start="4424" end="4440" title="Cornell Franklin" label="Cornell Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182453" start="4611" end="4621" title="Phil Stone" label="Phil Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="4834" end="4838" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="5101" end="5112" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q233898" start="5471" end="5488" title="Sherwood Anderson" label="Sherwood Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q168728" start="5490" end="5502" title="Robert Frost" label="Robert Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="5508" end="5518" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="5800" end="5812" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="5884" end="5896" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Canadian RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="5968" end="5975" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="6051" end="6069" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="6862" end="6874" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512272" start="7071" end="7090" title="Sigma Alpha Epsilon" label="Sigma Alpha Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q234105" start="7907" end="7917" title="Lost Generation" label="generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="8040" end="8062" title="New Orleans, Louisiana" label="New Orleans, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="8075" end="8083" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q602939" start="8131" end="8145" title="French Quarter" label="French Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q619593" start="8323" end="8332" title="Victorian literature" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q971480" start="8336" end="8345" title="Literary modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q116886708" start="8353" end="8371" title="The Times-Picayune/The New Orleans Advocate" label="The Times-Picayune"/>
<link wikidata="Q233898" start="8461" end="8478" title="Sherwood Anderson" label="Sherwood Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536034" start="8518" end="8536" title="Soldiers&amp;#x27; Pay" label="Soldiers&amp;#x27; Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="8667" end="8683" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="8688" end="8707" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326411" start="8837" end="8847" title="Mosquitoes (novel)" label="Mosquitoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q167538" start="8970" end="8989" title="St. Louis Cathedral (New Orleans)" label="St. Louis Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591941" start="9241" end="9258" title="Flags in the Dust" label="Flags in the Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910098" start="9556" end="9576" title="Boni &amp;amp; Liveright" label="Boni &amp;amp; Liveright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851314" start="9758" end="9766" title="Sartoris" label="Sartoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301407" start="10016" end="10027" title="Douglas Day" label="Douglas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q135515" start="10714" end="10736" title="The Sound and the Fury" label="The Sound and the Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715743" start="11666" end="11682" title="Cornell Franklin" label="Cornell Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544119" start="11822" end="11836" title="As I Lay Dying" label="As I Lay Dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096847" start="11885" end="11922" title="University of Mississippi Power House" label="University of Mississippi Power House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371803" start="12166" end="12175" title="Rowan Oak" label="Rowan Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212765" start="12232" end="12241" title="Sanctuary (Faulkner novel)" label="Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302345" start="12341" end="12366" title="The Saturday Evening Post" label="The Saturday Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="12664" end="12675" title="MGM Studios" label="MGM Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q493378" start="13133" end="13156" title="Culver City, California" label="Culver City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311864" start="13412" end="13433" title="Mickey Mouse (film series)" label="Mickey Mouse cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047410" start="13476" end="13499" title="Walt Disney Animation Studios" label="Walt Disney Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q166425" start="13548" end="13561" title="Today We Live" label="Today We Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="13853" end="13869" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q538390" start="13889" end="13909" title="To Have and Have Not" label="To Have and Have Not"/>
<link wikidata="Q786996" start="13921" end="13925" title="To Have and Have Not (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q104000" start="13949" end="13962" title="Lauren Bacall" label="Lauren Bacall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="13967" end="13982" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Humphrey Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137931" start="14035" end="14048" title="The Big Sleep (1946 film)" label="The Big Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="14256" end="14288" title="Babylonian captivity" label="imprisoned in a cultural Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581" start="14457" end="14469" title="Howard Hawks" label="Howard Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011037" start="14587" end="14600" title="William Hawks" label="William Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="14625" end="14634" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522373" start="14850" end="14871" title="Garden of Allah Hotel" label="Garden of Allah Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559342" start="14903" end="14918" title="The Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel" label="Roosevelt Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943139" start="14927" end="14950" title="Musso &amp;amp; Frank Grill" label="Musso &amp;amp; Frank Grill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263187" start="15096" end="15107" title="script supervisor" label="script girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="15194" end="15217" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892373" start="15263" end="15276" title="United States civil defense" label="civil defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q178927" start="15385" end="15402" title="Writer&amp;#x27;s block" label="creative slowdown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15479" end="15494" title="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier#History" label="Unknown Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="15504" end="15521" title="Passion of Jesus" label="Passion of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363072" start="15562" end="15569" title="A Fable" label="A Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861303" start="15703" end="15714" title="Milton Lott" label="Milton Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745825" start="15728" end="15741" title="The Last Hunt (novel)" label="The Last Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410526" start="16206" end="16236" title="1949 Nobel Prize in Literature" label="1949 Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="16414" end="16430" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="16455" end="16464" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429141" start="16575" end="16591" title="Thorsten Jonsson" label="Thorsten Jonsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126918" start="16635" end="16649" title="Dagens Nyheter" label="Dagens Nyheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075589" start="17996" end="18023" title="William Faulkner Foundation" label="William Faulkner Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="18069" end="18106" title="Legion of Honour" label="Chevalier de la Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="18136" end="18142" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="18201" end="18223" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="18227" end="18242" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233504" start="18360" end="18371" title="The Reivers" label="The Reivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="18528" end="18535" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q261327" start="18743" end="18753" title="thrombosis" label="thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q892509" start="18854" end="18874" title="Byhalia, Mississippi" label="Byhalia, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q135515" start="19241" end="19263" title="The Sound and the Fury" label="The Sound and the Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544119" start="19284" end="19298" title="As I Lay Dying" label="As I Lay Dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823273" start="19319" end="19334" title="Light in August" label="Light in August"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181982" start="19359" end="19376" title="Absalom, Absalom!" label="Absalom, Absalom!"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="19424" end="19437" title="short story" label="short stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783327" start="19492" end="19500" title="These 13" label="These 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="19572" end="19584" title="anthology" label="anthologized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648111" start="19611" end="19627" title="A Rose for Emily" label="A Rose for Emily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304469" start="19641" end="19651" title="Red Leaves" label="Red Leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711173" start="19665" end="19681" title="That Evening Sun" label="That Evening Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309555" start="19699" end="19712" title="Dry September" label="Dry September"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295828" start="19767" end="19787" title="Yoknapatawpha County" label="Yoknapatawpha County"/>
<link wikidata="Q983822" start="19889" end="19908" title="Oxford, Mississippi" label="Oxford, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223464" start="20181" end="20191" title="The Hamlet" label="The Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213813" start="20205" end="20213" title="The Town (Faulkner novel)" label="The Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222389" start="20230" end="20241" title="The Mansion (novel)" label="The Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213313" start="20275" end="20289" title="Snopes trilogy" label="Snopes trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648111" start="20540" end="20556" title="A Rose for Emily" label="A Rose for Emily"/>
<link wikidata="Q4498670" start="20970" end="20990" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Gambit" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225396" start="21249" end="21256" title="diction" label="diction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300111" start="21261" end="21268" title="Cadence (poetry)" label="cadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="21289" end="21299" title="Minimalism" label="minimalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="21335" end="21351" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284176" start="21383" end="21406" title="Stream of consciousness (narrative mode)" label="stream of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q276709" start="21498" end="21504" title="Southern Gothic" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21508" end="21517" title="Grotesque#In literature" label="grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21757" end="21775" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988628" start="22017" end="22033" title="The Paris Review" label="The Paris Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171542" start="22518" end="22528" title="Jean Stein" label="Jean Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="22915" end="22928" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="22930" end="22937" title="Charles Dickens" label="Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="22939" end="22945" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="22947" end="22956" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="22964" end="22975" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="23028" end="23036" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9711" start="23038" end="23044" title="Honoré de Balzac" label="Balzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="23127" end="23138" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="23140" end="23147" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="23149" end="23160" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="23169" end="23177" title="Herman Melville" label="Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975" start="23210" end="23217" title="Christopher Marlowe" label="Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q455618" start="23219" end="23226" title="Thomas Campion" label="Campion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="23228" end="23234" title="Ben Jonson" label="Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q553554" start="23236" end="23243" title="Robert Herrick (poet)" label="Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q140412" start="23245" end="23250" title="John Donne" label="Donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="23252" end="23257" title="John Keats" label="Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="23263" end="23270" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="23303" end="23314" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="23319" end="23330" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="23426" end="23433" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q573988" start="23473" end="23486" title="Leopold Bloom" label="Leopold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="23508" end="23516" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="23842" end="23850" title="Einstein" label="Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q135515" start="24172" end="24194" title="The Sound and the Fury" label="The Sound and the Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820294" start="24212" end="24236" title="Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow" label="Macbeth&amp;#x27;s soliloquy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544119" start="24446" end="24460" title="As I Lay Dying" label="As I Lay Dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="24478" end="24483" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="24497" end="24504" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="24534" end="24543" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065524" start="24766" end="24780" title="Go Down, Moses (book)" label="Go Down, Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533406" start="24798" end="24824" title="Go Down Moses" label="African American spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="25131" end="25144" title="desegregation" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="25161" end="25182" title="civil rights activist" label="civil rights activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q273210" start="25278" end="25291" title="James Baldwin" label="James Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q299965" start="25345" end="25358" title="Ralph Ellison" label="Ralph Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q742302" start="25489" end="25500" title="New Criticism" label="New Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915226" start="25549" end="25563" title="Cleanth Brooks" label="Cleanth Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q971480" start="25886" end="25895" title="Literary modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570398" start="25904" end="25924" title="Southern Renaissance" label="Southern Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="25946" end="25958" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="26011" end="26018" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176362" start="26271" end="26290" title="Southern United States literature" label="Southern literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q234579" start="26292" end="26314" title="Flannery O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Flannery O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q259364" start="26683" end="26695" title="Eudora Welty" label="Eudora Welty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158985" start="26732" end="26745" title="Valerie Miles" label="Valerie Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147454" start="26776" end="26798" title="Latin American literature" label="Latin American fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878" start="26849" end="26871" title="Gabriel García Márquez" label="Gabriel García Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q934381" start="26873" end="26880" title="Macondo" label="Macondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873" start="26886" end="26904" title="Juan Carlos Onetti" label="Juan Carlos Onetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q154691" start="26992" end="27006" title="Carlos Fuentes" label="Carlos Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030203" start="27020" end="27045" title="The Death of Artemio Cruz" label="The Death of Artemio Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544119" start="27089" end="27103" title="As I Lay Dying" label="As I Lay Dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q39803" start="27225" end="27243" title="Mario Vargas Llosa" label="Mario Vargas Llosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q763199" start="27284" end="27304" title="The Time of the Hero" label="The Time of the Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q463698" start="27318" end="27333" title="The Green House" label="The Green House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519372" start="27350" end="27379" title="Conversation in The Cathedral" label="Conversation in The Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="27496" end="27513" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559408" start="27547" end="27561" title="The Wild Palms" label="The Wild Palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q131549" start="27670" end="27682" title="Claude Simon" label="Claude Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q333849" start="27712" end="27732" title="António Lobo Antunes" label="António Lobo Antunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q272610" start="27734" end="27749" title="Cormac McCarthy" label="Cormac McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010059" start="27818" end="27839" title="The Elements of Style" label="The Elements of Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q361617" start="27847" end="27858" title="E. B. White" label="E. B. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823907" start="27903" end="27915" title="Walter Mitty" label="Walter Mitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q247372" start="27920" end="27930" title="Tender Is the Night" label="Dick Diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q178791" start="27935" end="27950" title="Rabbit Angstrom" label="Rabbit Angstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="28248" end="28257" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="28395" end="28420" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363072" start="28726" end="28733" title="A Fable" label="A Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075589" start="28808" end="28835" title="William Faulkner Foundation" label="William Faulkner Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q983113" start="28896" end="28908" title="John Knowles" label="John Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659417" start="28922" end="28938" title="A Separate Peace" label="A Separate Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q35155" start="28946" end="28960" title="Thomas Pynchon" label="Thomas Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191071" start="28974" end="28976" title="V." label="V."/>
<link wikidata="Q272610" start="28984" end="28999" title="Cormac McCarthy" label="Cormac McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645692" start="29013" end="29031" title="The Orchard Keeper" label="The Orchard Keeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282338" start="29039" end="29052" title="Robert Coover" label="Robert Coover"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155323" start="29066" end="29092" title="The Origin of the Brunists" label="The Origin of the Brunists"/>
<link wikidata="Q124633" start="29103" end="29118" title="Frederick Exley" label="Frederick Exley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819737" start="29132" end="29150" title="A Fan&amp;#x27;s Notes" label="A Fan&amp;#x27;s Notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188661" start="29192" end="29222" title="PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction" label="PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780075" start="29250" end="29265" title="Mary Lee Settle" label="Mary Lee Settle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193731" start="29570" end="29579" title="The Reivers (film)" label="1969 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q159347" start="29589" end="29602" title="Steve McQueen" label="Steve McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170587" start="29604" end="29619" title="Tommy Lee Jones" label="Tommy Lee Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q954949" start="29650" end="29688" title="The Three Burials of Melquiades Estrada" label="The Three Burials of Melquiades Estada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544119" start="29737" end="29751" title="As I Lay Dying" label="As I Lay Dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="29771" end="29796" title="German military administration in occupied France during World War II" label="Nazi Occupation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="30094" end="30107" title="Marcel Proust" label="Marcel Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="30123" end="30139" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="30215" end="30227" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313370" start="30277" end="30294" title="Requiem for a Nun" label="Requiem for a Nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q53001" start="30305" end="30320" title="Jean-Luc Godard" label="Jean-Luc Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q86427" start="30334" end="30344" title="Breathless (1960 film)" label="Breathless"/>
<link wikidata="Q230681" start="30362" end="30373" title="Jean Seberg" label="Jean Seberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="30490" end="30509" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363072" start="30569" end="30576" title="A Fable" label="A Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="30597" end="30625" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785926" start="31122" end="31147" title="Mississippi Writers Trail" label="Mississippi Writers Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371803" start="31183" end="31192" title="Rowan Oak" label="Rowan Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179080" start="31459" end="31511" title="Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library" label="Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="31519" end="31541" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31743" end="31757" title="Joseph Blotner" label="Joseph Blotner"/>
<link wikidata="Q635118" start="31829" end="31864" title="Southeast Missouri State University" label="Southeast Missouri State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059638" start="31876" end="31903" title="Center for Faulkner Studies" label="Center for Faulkner Studies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32174" end="32188" title="Joseph Blotner" label="Joseph Blotner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="32446" end="32471" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="32477" end="32496" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="32506" end="32529" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="32635" end="32665" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q135515" start="32753" end="32775" title="The Sound and the Fury" label="The Sound and the Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544119" start="32797" end="32811" title="As I Lay Dying" label="As I Lay Dying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212765" start="32833" end="32842" title="Sanctuary (Faulkner novel)" label="Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823273" start="32864" end="32879" title="Light in August" label="Light in August"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181982" start="32901" end="32918" title="Absalom, Absalom!" label="Absalom, Absalom!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559408" start="32940" end="32954" title="If I Forget Thee, Jerusalem" label="The Wild Palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223464" start="32976" end="32986" title="The Hamlet" label="The Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065524" start="33008" end="33022" title="Go Down, Moses (short story collection)" label="Go Down, Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204276" start="33044" end="33064" title="Intruder in the Dust" label="Intruder in the Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363072" start="33086" end="33093" title="A Fable" label="A Fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213813" start="33115" end="33123" title="The Town (Faulkner novel)" label="The Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222389" start="33145" end="33156" title="The Mansion (novel)" label="The Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233504" start="33178" end="33189" title="The Reivers" label="The Reivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q466327" start="33228" end="33233" title="Flesh (1932 film)" label="Flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q166425" start="33255" end="33268" title="Today We Live" label="Today We Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q784066" start="33290" end="33315" title="The Story of Temple Drake" label="The Story of Temple Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977159" start="33337" end="33353" title="Submarine Patrol" label="Submarine Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425082" start="33375" end="33384" title="Air Force (film)" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q786996" start="33406" end="33426" title="To Have and Have Not (film)" label="To Have and Have Not"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137931" start="33448" end="33461" title="The Big Sleep (1946 film)" label="The Big Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690061" start="33483" end="33503" title="Land of the Pharaohs" label="Land of the Pharaohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428855" start="33970" end="33988" title="Library of America" label="Library of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428855" start="34084" end="34102" title="Library of America" label="Library of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428855" start="34198" end="34216" title="Library of America" label="Library of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428855" start="34322" end="34340" title="Library of America" label="Library of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428855" start="34436" end="34454" title="Library of America" label="Library of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="34596" end="34604" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="34606" end="34618" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="35672" end="35694" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="35732" end="35751" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33719" wikidata="Q221411" url="?curid=33719" title="Wim Kok">
<text>Willem Kok (; 29 September 1938 – 20 October 2018) was a Dutch politician and trade union leader who served as Prime Minister of the Netherlands from 22 August 1994 until 22 July 2002. He was a member of the Labour Party (PvdA).

Kok studied business administration at the Nyenrode Business School obtaining a Bachelor of Business Administration degree and worked as a trade union leader for the Dutch Confederation of Trade Unions from 1961 until 1976, serving as its chairman from 1972. In 1976, it merged to form the Federation of Dutch Trade Unions, with Kok serving as its first chairman until 1986. In the 1986 general election, Kok was elected to the House of Representatives, taking office on 3 June 1986. Shortly after the election, incumbent leader of the Labour Party Joop den Uyl announced he was stepping down and endorsed Kok as his successor taking office on 21 July 1986. For the 1989 general election, Kok served as lead candidate, after which he struck a coalition agreement with incumbent Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers of the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), forming the third Lubbers cabinet. Kok became deputy prime minister and minister of finance, taking office on 7 November 1989.

For the 1994 general election, Kok served as lead candidate again and following a cabinet formation, formed the first Kok cabinet, taking office as Prime Minister of the Netherlands on 22 August 1994. For the 1998 general election Kok served as lead candidate once more, and after another successful cabinet formation, formed the second Kok cabinet, continuing as prime minister for a second term. In December 2001, Kok announced he was stepping down as party leader and that he would not stand for the 2002 general election or serve another term as prime minister. Kok left office following the installation of the first Balkenende cabinet on 22 July 2002.

Kok retired from active politics at 63 and became active in the private and public sectors as a corporate and non-profit director, served on several and councils on behalf of the government, and continued to be active as a lobbyist for the European Union, advocating further European integration. Kok was known for his abilities as a manager and negotiator. During his premiership, his cabinets were responsible for several major social reforms, such as the legalization of same-sex marriage and euthanasia, and further reducing the deficit. Kok was granted the honorary title of Minister of State on 11 April 2003 and continued to comment on political affairs as a statesman until his death at the age of 80. He holds the distinction of leading the first purple coalitions as prime minister and is consistently ranked both by scholars and the public as one of the best prime ministers after World War II.

==Early life==
Willem Kok was born on 29 September 1938, in Bergambacht in the Dutch province of South Holland, the son of Willem Kok (29 March 1910 – 10 January 1981) a carpenter, and Neeltje de Jager (17 October 1913 – 5 May 2005). He was a Calvinist and had one younger brother who was born in 1945.

After completing his studies in business at the Nyenrode Business Universiteit, he started his career in 1961 at the socialist Dutch Confederation of Trade Unions (NVV), where he was chairman from 1973 until 1982. In 1982, the NVV merged with the Dutch Catholic Trade Union Federation (NKV) to form the Federation of Dutch Trade Unions (FNV), of which he served as chair until 1986. In this position, he helped negotiate the Wassenaar Agreement.

==Political career==

===Parliamentary leader and Minister of Finance===


Kok was elected to the House of Representatives on 3 June 1986, after the 1986 general election. Soon after the election Joop den Uyl, the leader of the Labour Party and the party&#x27;s parliamentary leader in the House of Representatives, announced that he was stepping down after serving twenty years as party leader. Kok was elected to succeed him and became party and parliamentary leader of the Labour Party in the House of Representatives on 21 July 1986, serving as opposition leader during the parliamentary period of the second Lubbers cabinet.

Kok lead his party in the 1989 general election. The Labour Party lost three seats, but the following cabinet formation resulted in a coalition agreement with the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) which formed the third Lubbers cabinet. Kok entered government for the first time and became both Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands and Minister of Finance, serving from 7 November 1989 until 22 August 1994.

=== Prime Minister of the Netherlands ===

==== First term (1994–1998) ====
In the 1994 general election, the Labour Party lost twelve seats, but the CDA with new leader Elco Brinkman lost twenty seats, making the Labour Party the largest party in the House of Representatives. After an arduous cabinet formation with the conservative liberal People&#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) and the social liberal Democrats 66 (D66), a deal was struck that resulted in the first Kok cabinet, with Kok as prime minister. It was considered groundbreaking in Dutch politics as this was the first Cabinet of the Netherlands since 1908 without a Christian democratic party.

The main aim of the first Kok cabinet was to create employment. The Dutch economy had been in a deep recession for years. The market was allowed more influence in the economy. This led to a policy of tax reduction, economizing, and trying to keep people out of social care by supporting employment; large infrastructure projects were set in motion. Another aim was to put an end to the enormous debt of the Dutch government. The Treaty of Amsterdam was signed during this cabinet. The Srebrenica massacre occurred under the responsibility of this government, which eventually led to the fall of the second Kok cabinet.

Kok&#x27;s first term also saw various cuts and changes to education and welfare. Regarding education, spending on education, culture and sciences was cut by 1,772 million guilders. In addition, according to one study, “A law concerning the modernization of the universities administrative structure replaced the democratized structure of the 1970s with a more autocratic system, inspired by the management style of business concerns.” Although primary education received some extra money, which made it possible to introduce computers and decrease the average number of pupils in 4 years, the latter resulted in a shortage of classrooms and teachers. Before 1996, the government provided a study allowance to people with a low income. That year, the Study Costs Allowance Act was introduced, under which the number of standard amounts decreased and hard income limits were introduced. According to one study, “It soon became apparent that the WTS gave rise to a lot distressing situations. These situations mainly related to the hard income limits that led to a major drop in income. In addition, the income limit of the WTS was independent of the number of children per family.” In the 1998 coalition agreement however, “these hard limits were corrected and more money was made available to more people.” Regarding welfare, amendments were made to the General Child Benefit Act in 1995, under which benefit was increased with age only for the first child, while from 1996 child benefit only became payable for children up until the age of 18, while previously child benefit was paid up until the age of 24 under certain circumstances. Social Assistance was revised in 1995, with a tightening of both eligibility and entitlement rules. A special supplement for pensioners was abolished, the eligibility criteria were tightened, certain cash benefits to children and widows were reduced, unemployment eligibility criteria were tightened, and benefits were cut in the disability pension scheme. A linking law was adopted, which made it possible to link data sets from the population register, social security, and the aliens police
(where all aliens must register). The goal of this was to oppose illegal residence by excluding illegal aliens from collective provisions such as social security benefits. In 1996 compulsory sick pay was entirely privatized, and wage continuation as a percentage of usual wages went down from 75 to 70%, although duration was extended to 52 weeks. With the review of a rent subsidy scheme, residents of non-self-contained accommodation were no longer entitled to rent subsidy in 1997. As noted by one study, “For people with a minimum social benefit and children, purchasing power decreased in the first three years of the cabinet&#x27;s term of office. During the whole cabinet period their purchasing power increased with a meagre two-tenths of a per cent per annum, due to an increase oftwo per cent in the election year (cpb 1998: 22,168–177).” Under pressure from the churches and other groupings, however, “the cabinet placed the problem of poverty on the policy agenda.” Some support was given to financially vulnerable groups, with compensations in the individual rent subsidy for households with children and an income at the level of the social minimum, measures for those elderly with only a general old age pension or a small additional pension, and a higher extra allowance for the first child. In addition, before the elections of 1998 “the decreased purchasing power was repaired with 850 million guilders, mainly for people on social benefit.”

Despite its cuts and changes to welfare and education, a number of progressive measures were introduced during the Kok cabinet&#x27;s time in office. In 1994 a reform was passed including part-time workers in the occupational pension schemes. In terms of residential care, a personal budget was introduced in 1995 to meet various individual needs; offering a choice “between care in kind, or cash payments that could also be used to purchasing services from private and market sector.” Employment protection was also maintained while past plans to reduce it were “shelved,” income tax for the lower paid was cut, and 40,000 jobs in the public sector for the long-term unemployed were created. From 1995, “elderly people with an income in the first tax bracket have a tax benefit. Due to the elderly person&#x27;s deduction, the net AOW pension is higher.” In 1997, a separate tax deduction for single elderly persons was introduced on 1 January 1997. According to one study, “For this group of elderly people with only an AOW pension, this measure provides an additional income benefit of approximately 1 percent (approximately NLG 160 on an annual basis).” The personal contribution scheme of a Disability Facilities Act (Wvg) was also considerably relaxed as of 1 April 1996. According to one report “The personal contribution for a wheelchair has been cancelled and for the other facilities in kind it remains limited to f 100.” 

Under a circular from the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment dated 6 June 1996 (BZ/UK/96/2613), municipalities “have been given the option of allocating municipal income support benefits categorically (the effect of this circular has been extended by the letter of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment of 30 May 2000, no. BZ/IW/00/34933A).” An amendment to the General Assistance Act (Abw) &#x27;in connection with the prevention and combating of poverty and social exclusion&#x27; (Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 193 of 2 May 1997) “has ensured that from 1 July 1997 municipalities can also provide categorical special assistance in addition to individual special assistance.” The government also attempted to support child care through the Stimulation of Child Care Act (1996), which made childcare provisions “a shared responsibility between the government, the employer and the working parent.” From 1996, municipalities “have been able to appeal to a new subsidy option to provide childcare to single parents on social assistance, who are following schooling or who accept part-time or full-time work.” In 1996 some 525 municipalities applied for this subsidy. As of 1 January 1997, municipalities and water boards &quot;have more extensive opportunity to grant a waiver.&quot;

In 1997, more flexibility introduced into the parental leave scheme, with employees able to request to spread leave over more than 26 weeks or take up more hours per week. That same year the rent subsidy was changed, with subject subsidies for tenants becoming more explicitly aimed at support for lower-income groups. Also in 1997, coverage of the AWBZ (a separate mandatory insurance scheme for long-term care set up in 1968) was extended to residential care for the elderly. From 1997 the TOG act on ‘allowance for cost of maintenance of multiple and severely physically handicapped children’ “offers a financial support to parents who look after their severely handicapped children (3 till 18 years) at their home.” In January 1998, national Disability Insurance was abolished, but a new scheme called Wajong was introduced. In addition, An Act of 24 April 1997 provided for “a new insurance to protect self-employed workers and their spouses in case of long-term disability.” An Act of 11 September 1997 provided for “new regulations that concern persons who are under the age of 65, suffer from physical or mental disabilities and can therefore only work full-time in jobs which are especially suited for them.” It also provided that each community (&quot;gemeente&quot;) “has the responsibility to provide as many employment opportunities as possible to persons who are considered able to work only in jobs tailored to their needs or capacities.” From July 1997 onwards, “the residents of care homes no longer pay individually for the viewing and listening fee.” The Temporary Income Provision Former In-land Navigation Entrepreneurs Act of 1997 sought “to rectify a lack of income support for entrepreneurs who have become incapable of continuing their work for reasons of old-age or disability. The income assistance and benefit provisions become effective as of 1 January 1999.”
From April 1998, onwards, persons aged 65 and above received a higher social assistance benefit than other persons entitled to social assistance, known as the elderly person norm. An Act of 23 April 1998 established new rules with regard to the (re)integration of the disabled, such as renumeration, the promotion of equal opportunities, the provision of facilities, reintegration benefits, allowances for occupationally disabled WAZ insured persons, income supplements for occupationally disabled self-employed persons, wage supplements, and starter loans.

In the 1998 general election, the Labour party gained eight seats; the coalition retained its majority, and cabinet formation resulted in a continuation of policies with the second Kok cabinet. 

==== Second term (1998–2002) ====
The second cabinet was the successor of the first cabinet was formed from the same coalition of PvdA, VVD and D66. It was also known as the &quot;second purple cabinet&quot; called such because it contained both the social democratic PvdA (red) and the liberal VVD (blue). The aim of the cabinet was to continue the policy of cabinet Kok I, which was concerned with economizing, tax reduction, and making an end to unemployment. Kok was the prime minister, while Annemarie Jorritsma served as the deputy prime minister for the VVD, and Els Borst for D66. The cabinet had both left-wing and right-wing political parties as a part of it. There was no strong opposition in the House of Representatives. This did not mean that Kok did not face any problems. In May 1999, D66 stepped out of the coalition when proposed legislation on referendums, entered by this party, was blocked; through negotiations the crisis was solved and the cabinet stayed together. Moreover, allegations of expenses abuse were made against Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations Bram Peper from the time he was mayor of Rotterdam. On 13 March 2000 Peper resigned as minister, according to himself to no longer bring problems to the public government, and to be better able to defend himself. On the other hand, Kok&#x27;s second term is known for legalizing same-sex marriage and euthanasia. A number of other reforms were also realised. A reform of bankruptcy was carried out, with the Bankruptcy Act providing a debt rescheduling scheme for natural persons as of 1 December 1998. In January 1999 the Flexibility and Security Act took effect, which made “fixed employment more flexible and increased the security of flexible employees.” On 1 November 1999, a new law on working conditions took effect, which created scope “for a more prominent role of works councils in the field of working conditions.” A system of penalties was also introduced under which the Labour Inspectorate may fine any employer “who has not drawn up a risk inventory and assessment covering risks to pregnant women and those who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding, who does not provide the women concerned with information about the potential risks, or who does not offer alternative work if necessary.” In 1999 a scheme was introduced called WWIK (Law for Work and Income Provision of Artists), under which poor artists “who would otherwise need social benefits can for a maximum of four years receive the WWIK benefits while still being allowed to earn some money in the arts and without an obligation to apply for other jobs.” The Adaptation of Working Hours Act gave employees “the right to request the shortening or lengthening of their working hours.” One of the aims of the law was to promote the combination of work and care duties for both men and women. A Student Finance Act was introduced in 2000 with the intention of making it financially possible for everyone in the Netherlands to study. Under this Act, “as a student you may be entitled to a loan or gift from the government.” 

Under the Working Hours Act of 2000 part-time workers were granted an explicit right to equal treatment in all areas negotiated by the social partners, such as second tier pensions, holiday pay, subsidized care provision, training and education, basic social security, and wages. From 2001 onwards counselling, training, and job offers were provided for all jobseekers after being unemployed for 6 months. On 1 January 2002 a new Work and Care Act came into force. This legislation brought together various existing and new leave provisions and sought to facilitate the reconciliation of work and family responsibilities. In addition to the amendment of existing regulations, such as those governing maternity and parental leave, new provisions covered the right to adjust working hours if personal circumstances require; two days of paid paternity leave; four weeks&#x27; leave for couples who adopt a child; and two days of paid leave per year for urgent personal reasons, along with 10 days of paid leave a year to care for family members. In 2001, a Labor Income Tax Credit (similar to the Earned Income Tax Credit in the United States) was introduced, providing tax relief to earners of labor income as a means of incentivizing employment. An extra tax credit for households with children was also introduced, along with the general tax credit (the successor to the tax-free allowance), and the young disabled person&#x27;s tax credit for employees receiving a Wajong benefit. In addition, according to one study the percentage of the population living in poverty fell during Kok&#x27;s second term in office.

On 15 December 2001, Kok announced he would retire from national politics after the elections of May 2002. He stood down as leader of the Labour Party that same day, in favour of Ad Melkert. Melkert did not appeal to the voter. Moreover, the &quot;polder model&quot; went out of fashion in early 2002, which saw the rise of Pim Fortuyn, a political newcomer.

On 16 April 2002, close to the natural end of term for the cabinet, prime minister Kok wished to resign early after being harshly criticised in a government-commissioned report by the NIOD Institute for War, Holocaust and Genocide Studies regarding the fall of Srebrenica in 1995 and the other ministers had no choice but to follow him. The second Kok cabinet remained in place as a caretaker cabinet, which had to cope with the murder of Fortuyn, and the CDA with leader Jan Peter Balkenende winning the elections. The caretaker cabinet stepped down on 22 July 2002, when the first Balkenende cabinet was installed.

===Legacy===
Kok was highly praised for his Third Way and polder model philosophies and for the success of leading his Purple Coalitions. During his premiership, his cabinets were responsible for implementing several social reforms, legalizing same-sex marriage and euthanasia, stimulating the economy resulting in more employment and privatization and further reducing the deficit. As a result of this, and because of his skills as manager and negotiator, Kok was praised by his fellow European leaders.

==After politics==
After his premiership, Kok retired from active politics at the age of sixty-three and became a lobbyist for the European Union and presided over several &quot;high-level groups&quot;. He also occupied numerous seats on supervisory boards in the business and industry world (ING Group, Koninklijke TNT Post, Royal Dutch Shell, KLM, Stork B.V., International Commission on Missing Persons, International Crisis Group, Anne Frank Foundation and served as president of the Club of Madrid from 2009 until December 2013). On 11 April 2003, he was granted the honorary title of Minister of State.

===Lisbon Strategy===
Between April and November 2004, Kok headed up a review of the Lisbon Strategy and presented a report containing suggestions on how to give new impetus to the Lisbon process. The European Commission used this report to declare that the social and environmental parts are no longer a priority and declared a return to the Lisbon Agenda under economic terms only. Kok lobbied for the Lisbon Strategy of the European Commission and was appointed to the Honorary Board of the European Association of History Educators.

Between 2006 and 2007, Kok served as member of the Amato Group, a group of high-level European politicians unofficially working on rewriting the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe into what became known as the Treaty of Lisbon following its rejection by French and Dutch voters.

==Personal life==
In 1965, after four years of dating, Kok married Margrietha Lummechiena &quot;Rita&quot; Roukema (born 3 November 1939). He adopted her two children from a previous marriage, daughter Carla (born 1959) and son André (born 1961 and died March 30, 2022), who was mentally disabled, and together they had a third child, son Marcel (born 1966).

==Death==
Kok died on 20 October 2018 in Amsterdam, aged 80.

==Decorations and appointments==
=== Appointments ===
*: Minister of State with style of Excellency (11 April 2003)

=== Honours ===
*: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Orange-Nassau (10 December 2002)
*: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic (19 October 2001)
*: Commander Grand Cross of the Order of the Three Stars (15 November 2004)

==Honorary degrees==
==References==
==External links==
;Official
* W. (Wim) Kok Parlement &amp; Politiek
* Kabinet-Kok I Rijksoverheid
* Kabinet-Kok II Rijksoverheid
;Other
* Collectie Interviews Wim Kok at the International Institute of Social History

 
 
 

 


 

 

 


 

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221411" start="0" end="10" title="Wim Kok" label="Willem Kok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058109" start="111" end="144" title="Prime Minister of the Netherlands" label="Prime Minister of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q275441" start="208" end="220" title="Labour Party (Netherlands)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043282" start="242" end="265" title="business administration" label="business administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516779" start="273" end="297" title="Nyenrode Business University" label="Nyenrode Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q798129" start="310" end="345" title="Bachelor of Business Administration" label="Bachelor of Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894919" start="396" end="431" title="Dutch Confederation of Trade Unions" label="Dutch Confederation of Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q355292" start="520" end="552" title="Federation of Dutch Trade Unions" label="Federation of Dutch Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607395" start="612" end="633" title="1986 Dutch general election" label="1986 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q233262" start="658" end="682" title="House of Representatives (Netherlands)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043086" start="752" end="778" title="Leader of the Labour Party (Netherlands)" label="leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q318320" start="779" end="791" title="Joop den Uyl" label="Joop den Uyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477649" start="896" end="917" title="1989 Dutch general election" label="1989 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417559" start="933" end="947" title="lead candidate" label="lead candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159840" start="1023" end="1035" title="Ruud Lubbers" label="Ruud Lubbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q273749" start="1043" end="1070" title="Christian Democratic Appeal" label="Christian Democratic Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143050" start="1090" end="1111" title="third Lubbers cabinet" label="third Lubbers cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430481" start="1124" end="1145" title="Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands" label="deputy prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198275" start="1150" end="1169" title="List of Ministers of Finance of the Netherlands" label="minister of finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477700" start="1214" end="1235" title="1994 Dutch general election" label="1994 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143143" start="1318" end="1335" title="first Kok cabinet" label="first Kok cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058109" start="1354" end="1387" title="Prime Minister of the Netherlands" label="Prime Minister of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q600588" start="1415" end="1436" title="1998 Dutch general election" label="1998 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143058" start="1536" end="1554" title="second Kok cabinet" label="second Kok cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344349" start="1709" end="1730" title="2002 Dutch general election" label="2002 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549819" start="1822" end="1846" title="first Balkenende cabinet" label="first Balkenende cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="1929" end="1936" title="Private sector" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="1941" end="1954" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2105" end="2119" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="2140" end="2160" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17463" start="2339" end="2356" title="Same-sex marriage in the Netherlands" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q592003" start="2361" end="2371" title="Euthanasia in the Netherlands" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317814" start="2398" end="2405" title="Government budget balance" label="deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535372" start="2445" end="2462" title="Minister of State (Netherlands)" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366765" start="2621" end="2638" title="Purple (government)" label="purple coalitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149370" start="2677" end="2683" title="Historical rankings of prime ministers of the Netherlands" label="ranked"/>
<link wikidata="Q653025" start="2832" end="2843" title="Bergambacht" label="Bergambacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q134390" start="2851" end="2865" title="Provinces of the Netherlands" label="Dutch province"/>
<link wikidata="Q694" start="2869" end="2882" title="South Holland" label="South Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143635" start="3108" end="3116" title="business school" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516779" start="3124" end="3154" title="Nyenrode Business Universiteit" label="Nyenrode Business Universiteit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894919" start="3203" end="3238" title="Dutch Confederation of Trade Unions" label="Dutch Confederation of Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13882258" start="3323" end="3360" title="Dutch Catholic Trade Union Federation" label="Dutch Catholic Trade Union Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q355292" start="3379" end="3411" title="Federation of Dutch Trade Unions" label="Federation of Dutch Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082969" start="3501" end="3520" title="Wassenaar Agreement" label="Wassenaar Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q233262" start="3621" end="3645" title="House of Representatives (Netherlands)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607395" start="3672" end="3693" title="1986 Dutch general election" label="1986 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q318320" start="3719" end="3731" title="Joop den Uyl" label="Joop den Uyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043086" start="3737" end="3763" title="Leader of the Labour Party (Netherlands)" label="leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q928764" start="3785" end="3805" title="parliamentary leader" label="parliamentary leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q620110" start="4072" end="4089" title="Leader of the Opposition" label="opposition leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142884" start="4129" end="4151" title="second Lubbers cabinet" label="second Lubbers cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477649" start="4180" end="4201" title="1989 Dutch general election" label="1989 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q273749" start="4317" end="4344" title="Christian Democratic Appeal" label="Christian Democratic Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143050" start="4368" end="4389" title="third Lubbers cabinet" label="third Lubbers cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430481" start="4449" end="4489" title="Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands" label="Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037511" start="4494" end="4513" title="Ministry of Finance (Netherlands)" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477700" start="4650" end="4671" title="1994 Dutch general election" label="1994 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147680" start="4737" end="4750" title="Elco Brinkman" label="Elco Brinkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q617609" start="4889" end="4909" title="conservative liberalism" label="conservative liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q239333" start="4910" end="4955" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="4970" end="4984" title="social liberalism" label="social liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q747910" start="4985" end="4997" title="Democrats 66" label="Democrats 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143143" start="5044" end="5061" title="first Kok cabinet" label="first Kok cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479200" start="5164" end="5190" title="Cabinet of the Netherlands" label="Cabinet of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="5212" end="5232" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193739" start="5670" end="5689" title="Treaty of Amsterdam" label="Treaty of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q170334" start="5726" end="5745" title="Srebrenica massacre" label="Srebrenica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q600588" start="14640" end="14661" title="1998 Dutch general election" label="1998 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143058" start="14807" end="14825" title="second Kok cabinet" label="second Kok cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q447079" start="15326" end="15345" title="Annemarie Jorritsma" label="Annemarie Jorritsma"/>
<link wikidata="Q274029" start="15399" end="15408" title="Els Borst" label="Els Borst"/>
<link wikidata="Q25044704" start="15692" end="15703" title="Referendums in the Netherlands" label="referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491421" start="15875" end="15921" title="Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations" label="Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q466862" start="15922" end="15932" title="Bram Peper" label="Bram Peper"/>
<link wikidata="Q17463" start="16201" end="16218" title="Same-sex marriage in the Netherlands" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q592003" start="16223" end="16233" title="Euthanasia in the Netherlands" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036463" start="19022" end="19046" title="Earned Income Tax Credit" label="Earned Income Tax Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q345536" start="19723" end="19733" title="Ad Melkert" label="Ad Melkert"/>
<link wikidata="Q290453" start="19792" end="19804" title="polder model" label="polder model"/>
<link wikidata="Q311697" start="19868" end="19879" title="Pim Fortuyn" label="Pim Fortuyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q474823" start="20088" end="20142" title="NIOD Institute for War, Holocaust and Genocide Studies" label="NIOD Institute for War, Holocaust and Genocide Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q133386" start="20376" end="20396" title="Jan Peter Balkenende" label="Jan Peter Balkenende"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549819" start="20481" end="20505" title="first Balkenende cabinet" label="first Balkenende cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q494792" start="20566" end="20575" title="Third Way" label="Third Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366765" start="20641" end="20658" title="Purple (government)" label="Purple Coalitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17463" start="20766" end="20783" title="Same-sex marriage in the Netherlands" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q592003" start="20788" end="20798" title="Euthanasia in the Netherlands" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q676699" start="20816" end="20823" title="Economy of the Netherlands" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="20857" end="20870" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317814" start="20896" end="20903" title="Government budget balance" label="deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="21142" end="21150" title="lobbyist" label="lobbyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="21159" end="21173" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q645708" start="21321" end="21330" title="ING Group" label="ING Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130466" start="21332" end="21352" title="Koninklijke TNT Post" label="Koninklijke TNT Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="21354" end="21371" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Royal Dutch Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q181912" start="21373" end="21376" title="KLM" label="KLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339416" start="21378" end="21388" title="Stork B.V." label="Stork B.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q676812" start="21390" end="21433" title="International Commission on Missing Persons" label="International Commission on Missing Persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072857" start="21435" end="21461" title="International Crisis Group" label="International Crisis Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4452658" start="21463" end="21484" title="Anne Frank Foundation" label="Anne Frank Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426861" start="21516" end="21530" title="Club of Madrid" label="Club of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535372" start="21618" end="21635" title="Minister of State (Netherlands)" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q963114" start="21723" end="21738" title="Lisbon Strategy" label="Lisbon Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="21839" end="21858" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q327464" start="22132" end="22173" title="European Association of History Educators" label="European Association of History Educators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024850" start="22227" end="22238" title="Amato Group" label="Amato Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="22321" end="22366" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="22397" end="22413" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276449" start="22441" end="22447" title="2005 French European Constitution referendum" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170531" start="22452" end="22457" title="2005 Dutch European Constitution referendum" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535372" start="22946" end="22963" title="Minister of State (Netherlands)" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067610" start="22978" end="22988" title="Excellency" label="Excellency"/>
<link wikidata="Q139425" start="23051" end="23073" title="Order of Orange-Nassau" label="Order of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="23122" end="23152" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q913910" start="23203" end="23227" title="Order of the Three Stars" label="Order of the Three Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667757" start="23459" end="23500" title="International Institute of Social History" label="International Institute of Social History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33721" wikidata="Q1129252" url="?curid=33721" title="Weakly interacting massive particle">
<text>Weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) are hypothetical particles that are one of the proposed candidates for dark matter.

There exists no formal definition of a WIMP, but broadly, it is an elementary particle which interacts via gravity and any other force (or forces) which is as weak as or weaker than the weak nuclear force, but also non-vanishing in strength. Many WIMP candidates are expected to have been produced thermally in the early Universe, similarly to the particles of the Standard Model according to Big Bang cosmology, and usually will constitute cold dark matter. Obtaining the correct abundance of dark matter today via thermal production requires a self-annihilation cross section of formula_1, which is roughly what is expected for a new particle in the 100 GeV mass range that interacts via the electroweak force.

Experimental efforts to detect WIMPs include the search for products of WIMP annihilation, including gamma rays, neutrinos and cosmic rays in nearby galaxies and galaxy clusters; direct detection experiments designed to measure the collision of WIMPs with nuclei in the laboratory, as well as attempts to directly produce WIMPs in colliders, such as the Large Hadron Collider at CERN.

Because supersymmetric extensions of the Standard Model of particle physics readily predict a new particle with these properties, this apparent coincidence is known as the &quot;WIMP miracle&quot;, and a stable supersymmetric partner has long been a prime WIMP candidate. However, in the early 2010s, results from direct-detection experiments and the lack of evidence for supersymmetry at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) experiment have cast doubt on the simplest WIMP hypothesis.

==Theoretical framework and properties==
WIMP-like particles are predicted by R-parity-conserving supersymmetry, a type of extension to the Standard Model of particle physics, although none of the large number of new particles in supersymmetry have been observed. WIMP-like particles are also predicted by universal extra dimension and little Higgs theories.

The main theoretical characteristics of a WIMP are:
*Interactions only through the weak nuclear force and gravity, or possibly other interactions with cross-sections no higher than the weak scale;
*Large mass compared to standard particles (WIMPs with sub-GeV masses may be considered to be light dark matter).

Because of their lack of electromagnetic interaction with normal matter, WIMPs would be invisible through normal electromagnetic observations. Because of their large mass, they would be relatively slow moving and therefore &quot;cold&quot;. Their relatively low velocities would be insufficient to overcome the mutual gravitational attraction, and as a result, WIMPs would tend to clump together. WIMPs are considered one of the main candidates for cold dark matter, the others being massive compact halo objects (MACHOs) and axions. These names were deliberately chosen for contrast, with MACHOs named later than WIMPs. In contrast to WIMPs, there are no known stable particles within the Standard Model of particle physics that have the properties of MACHOs. The particles that have little interaction with normal matter, such as neutrinos, are very light, and hence would be fast moving, or &quot;hot&quot;.

==As dark matter==

A decade after the dark matter problem was established in the 1970s, WIMPs were suggested as a potential solution to the issue. Although the existence of WIMPs in nature is still hypothetical, it would resolve a number of astrophysical and cosmological problems related to dark matter. There is consensus today among astronomers that most of the mass in the Universe is indeed dark. Simulations of a universe full of cold dark matter produce galaxy distributions that are roughly similar to what is observed. By contrast, hot dark matter would smear out the large-scale structure of galaxies and thus is not considered a viable cosmological model.

WIMPs fit the model of a relic dark matter particle from the early Universe, when all particles were in a state of thermal equilibrium. For sufficiently high temperatures, such as those existing in the early Universe, the dark matter particle and its antiparticle would have been both forming from and annihilating into lighter particles. As the Universe expanded and cooled, the average thermal energy of these lighter particles decreased and eventually became insufficient to form a dark matter particle-antiparticle pair. The annihilation of the dark matter particle-antiparticle pairs, however, would have continued, and the number density of dark matter particles would have begun to decrease exponentially. Eventually, however, the number density would become so low that the dark matter particle and antiparticle interaction would cease, and the number of dark matter particles would remain (roughly) constant as the Universe continued to expand. Particles with a larger interaction cross section would continue to annihilate for a longer period of time, and thus would have a smaller number density when the annihilation interaction ceases. Based on the current estimated abundance of dark matter in the Universe, if the dark matter particle is such a relic particle, the interaction cross section governing the particle-antiparticle annihilation can be no larger than the cross section for the weak interaction. If this model is correct, the dark matter particle would have the properties of the WIMP.

==Indirect detection==

Because WIMPs may only interact through gravitational and weak forces, they would be extremely difficult to detect. However, there are many experiments underway to attempt to detect WIMPs both directly and indirectly. &quot;Indirect detection&quot; refers to the observation of annihilation or decay products of WIMPs far away from Earth. Indirect detection efforts typically focus on locations where WIMP dark matter is thought to accumulate the most: in the centers of galaxies and galaxy clusters, as well as in the smaller satellite galaxies of the Milky Way. These are particularly useful since they tend to contain very little baryonic matter, reducing the expected background from standard astrophysical processes. Typical indirect searches look for excess gamma rays, which are predicted both as final-state products of annihilation, or are produced as charged particles interact with ambient radiation via inverse Compton scattering. The spectrum and intensity of a gamma ray signal depends on the annihilation products, and must be computed on a model-by-model basis. Experiments that have placed bounds on WIMP annihilation, via the non-observation of an annihilation signal, include the Fermi-LAT gamma ray telescope and the VERITAS ground-based gamma ray observatory. Although the annihilation of WIMPs into Standard Model particles also predicts the production of high-energy neutrinos, their interaction rate is thought to be too low to reliably detect a dark matter signal at present. Future observations from the IceCube observatory in Antarctica may be able to differentiate WIMP-produced neutrinos from standard astrophysical neutrinos; however, by 2014, only 37 cosmological neutrinos had been observed, making such a distinction impossible.

Another type of indirect WIMP signal could come from the Sun. Halo WIMPs may, as they pass through the Sun, interact with solar protons, helium nuclei as well as heavier elements. If a WIMP loses enough energy in such an interaction to fall below the local escape velocity, it would theoretically not have enough energy to escape the gravitational pull of the Sun and would remain gravitationally bound. As more and more WIMPs thermalize inside the Sun, they would begin to annihilate with each other, theoretically forming a variety of particles, including high-energy neutrinos. These neutrinos may then travel to the Earth to be detected in one of the many neutrino telescopes, such as the Super-Kamiokande detector in Japan. The number of neutrino events detected per day at these detectors depends on the properties of the WIMP, as well as on the mass of the Higgs boson. Similar experiments are underway to attempt to detect neutrinos from WIMP annihilations within the Earth and from within the galactic center.

==Direct detection==

&quot;Direct detection&quot; refers to the observation of the effects of a WIMP-nucleus collision as the dark matter passes through a detector in an Earth laboratory. While most WIMP models indicate that a large enough number of WIMPs must be captured in large celestial bodies for indirect detection experiments to succeed, it remains possible that these models are either incorrect or only explain part of the dark matter phenomenon. Thus, even with the multiple experiments dedicated to providing indirect evidence for the existence of cold dark matter, direct detection measurements are also necessary to solidify the theory of WIMPs.

Although most WIMPs encountering the Sun or the Earth are expected to pass through without any effect, it is hoped that a large number of dark matter WIMPs crossing a sufficiently large detector will interact often enough to be seen—at least a few events per year. The general strategy of current attempts to detect WIMPs is to find very sensitive systems that can be scaled to large volumes. This follows the lessons learned from the history of the discovery, and (by now routine) detection, of the neutrino.

===Experimental techniques===

Cryogenic crystal detectors – A technique used by the Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) detector at the Soudan Mine relies on multiple very cold germanium and silicon crystals. The crystals (each about the size of a hockey puck) are cooled to about 50 mK. A layer of metal (aluminium and tungsten) at the surfaces is used to detect a WIMP passing through the crystal. This design hopes to detect vibrations in the crystal matrix generated by an atom being &quot;kicked&quot; by a WIMP. The tungsten transition edge sensors (TES) are held at the critical temperature so they are in the superconducting state. Large crystal vibrations will generate heat in the metal and are detectable because of a change in resistance. CRESST, CoGeNT, and EDELWEISS run similar setups.

Noble gas scintillators – Another way of detecting atoms &quot;knocked about&quot; by a WIMP is to use scintillating material, so that light pulses are generated by the moving atom and detected, often with PMTs. Experiments such as DEAP at SNOLAB and DarkSide at the LNGS instrument a very large target mass of liquid argon for sensitive WIMP searches. ZEPLIN, and XENON used xenon to exclude WIMPs at higher sensitivity, with the most stringent limits to date provided by the XENON1T detector, utilizing 3.5 tons of liquid xenon. Even larger multi-ton liquid xenon detectors have been approved for construction from the XENON, LUX-ZEPLIN and PandaX collaborations.

Crystal scintillators – Instead of a liquid noble gas, an in principle simpler approach is the use of a scintillating crystal such as NaI(Tl). This approach is taken by DAMA/LIBRA, an experiment that observed an annular modulation of the signal consistent with WIMP detection (see &quot;&quot;). Several experiments are attempting to replicate those results, including ANAIS, COSINUS and DM-Ice, which is codeploying NaI crystals with the IceCube detector at the South Pole. KIMS is approaching the same problem using CsI(Tl) as a scintillator.

Bubble chambers – The PICASSO (Project In Canada to Search for Supersymmetric Objects) experiment is a direct dark matter search experiment that is located at SNOLAB in Canada. It uses bubble detectors with Freon as the active mass. PICASSO is predominantly sensitive to spin-dependent interactions of WIMPs with the fluorine atoms in the Freon. COUPP, a similar experiment using trifluoroiodomethane(CF3I), published limits for mass above 20 GeV in 2011. The two experiments merged into PICO collaboration in 2012.

A bubble detector is a radiation sensitive device that uses small droplets of superheated liquid that are suspended in a gel matrix. It uses the principle of a bubble chamber but, since only the small droplets can undergo a phase transition at a time, the detector can stay active for much longer periods. When enough energy is deposited in a droplet by ionizing radiation, the superheated droplet becomes a gas bubble. The bubble development is accompanied by an acoustic shock wave that is picked up by piezo-electric sensors. The main advantage of the bubble detector technique is that the detector is almost insensitive to background radiation. The detector sensitivity can be adjusted by changing the temperature, typically operated between 15 °C and 55 °C. There is another similar experiment using this technique in Europe called SIMPLE.

PICASSO reports results (November 2009) for spin-dependent WIMP interactions on 19F, for masses of 24 Gev new stringent limits have been obtained on the spin-dependent cross section of 13.9 pb (90% CL). The obtained limits restrict recent interpretations of the DAMA/LIBRA annual modulation effect in terms of spin dependent interactions.

PICO is an expansion of the concept planned in 2015.

Other types of detectors – Time projection chambers (TPCs) filled with low pressure gases are being studied for WIMP detection. The Directional Recoil Identification From Tracks (DRIFT) collaboration is attempting to utilize the predicted directionality of the WIMP signal. DRIFT uses a carbon disulfide target, that allows WIMP recoils to travel several millimetres, leaving a track of charged particles. This charged track is drifted to an MWPC readout plane that allows it to be reconstructed in three dimensions and determine the origin direction. DMTPC is a similar experiment with CF4 gas.

The DAMIC (DArk Matter In CCDs) and SENSEI (Sub Electron Noise Skipper CCD Experimental Instrument) collaborations employ the use of scientific Charge Coupled Devices (CCDs) to detect light Dark Matter. The CCDs act as both the detector target and the readout instrumentation. WIMP interactions with the bulk of the CCD can induce the creation of electron-hole pairs, which are then collected and readout by the CCDs. In order to decrease the noise and achieve detection of single electrons, the experiments make use of a type of CCD known as the Skipper CCD, which allows for averaging over repeated measurements of the same collected charge.

===Recent limits===

There are currently no confirmed detections of dark matter from direct detection experiments, with the strongest exclusion limits coming from the LUX and SuperCDMS experiments, as shown in figure 2.
With 370 kilograms of xenon LUX is more sensitive than XENON or CDMS. First results from October 2013 report that no signals were seen, appearing to refute results obtained from less sensitive instruments. and this was confirmed after the final data run ended in May 2016.

Historically there have been four anomalous sets of data from different direct detection experiments, two of which have now been explained with backgrounds (CoGeNT and CRESST-II), and two which remain unexplained (DAMA/LIBRA and CDMS-Si). In February 2010, researchers at CDMS announced that they had observed two events that may have been caused by WIMP-nucleus collisions.

CoGeNT, a smaller detector using a single germanium puck, designed to sense WIMPs with smaller masses, reported hundreds of detection events in 56 days. They observed an annual modulation in the event rate that could indicate light dark matter. However a dark matter origin for the CoGeNT events has been refuted by more recent analyses, in favour of an explanation in terms of a background from surface events.

Annual modulation is one of the predicted signatures of a WIMP signal, and on this basis the DAMA collaboration has claimed a positive detection. Other groups, however, have not confirmed this result. The CDMS data made public in May 2004 exclude the entire DAMA signal region given certain standard assumptions about the properties of the WIMPs and the dark matter halo, and this has been followed by many other experiments (see Figure 2).

The COSINE-100 collaboration (a merging of KIMS and DM-Ice groups) published their results on replicating the DAMA/LIBRA signal in December 2018 in journal Nature; their conclusion was that &quot;this result rules out WIMP–nucleon interactions as the cause of the annual modulation observed by the DAMA collaboration&quot;. In 2021 new results from COSINE-100 and ANAIS-112 both failed to replicate the DAMA/LIBRA signal and in August 2022 COSINE-100 applied an analysis method similar to one used by DAMA/LIBRA and found a similar annual modulation suggesting the signal could be just a statistical artifact supporting a hypothesis first put forward in 2020.

===The future of direct detection===
The 2020s should see the emergence of several multi-tonne mass direct detection experiments, which will probe WIMP-nucleus cross sections orders of magnitude smaller than the current state-of-the-art sensitivity. Examples of such next-generation experiments are LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) and XENONnT, which are multi-tonne liquid xenon experiments, followed by DARWIN, another proposed liquid xenon direct detection experiment of 50–100 tonnes.

Such multi-tonne experiments will also face a new background in the form of neutrinos, which will limit their ability to probe the WIMP parameter space beyond a certain point, known as the neutrino floor. However, although its name may imply a hard limit, the neutrino floor represents the region of parameter space beyond which experimental sensitivity can only improve at best as the square root of exposure (the product of detector mass and running time). For WIMP masses below 10 GeV the dominant source of neutrino background is from the Sun, while for higher masses the background contains contributions from atmospheric neutrinos and the diffuse supernova neutrino background.

In December 2021, results from PandaX have found no signal in their data, with a lowest excluded cross section of at 40 GeV with 90% confidence level. 

In July 2023 the XENONnT and LZ experiment published the first results of their searches for WIMPs, the first excluding cross sections above at 28 GeV with 90% confidence level and the second excluding cross sections above at 36 GeV with 90% confidence level.

==See also==
* 
* Feebly interacting particle (FIP)
* 
* 
* Weakly interacting sub-eV / slender / slight particle (WISP)
;Theoretical candidates
*
*

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==
*Particle Data Group review article on WIMP search (S. Eidelman et al. (Particle Data Group), Physical Letters B 592, 1 (2004) Appendix : OMITTED FROM SUMMARY TABLE).
*Timothy J. Sumner, Experimental Searches for Dark Matter in Living Reviews in Relativity, Vol 5, 2002.
*Portraits of darkness, New Scientist, August 31, 2013. Preview only.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1129252" start="0" end="36" title="Weakly interacting massive particle" label="Weakly interacting massive particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129252" start="38" end="43" title="Weakly interacting massive particle" label="WIMPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="116" end="127" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="197" end="216" title="elementary particle" label="elementary particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="237" end="244" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11418" start="316" end="334" title="weak nuclear force" label="weak nuclear force"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="523" end="531" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153477" start="571" end="587" title="cold dark matter" label="cold dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="646" end="664" title="thermal production" label="thermal production"/>
<link wikidata="Q188721" start="681" end="693" title="annihilation" label="annihilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128025" start="694" end="707" title="Cross section (physics)" label="cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="786" end="789" title="GeV" label="GeV"/>
<link wikidata="Q466416" start="824" end="841" title="electroweak force" label="electroweak force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="945" end="954" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="957" end="965" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="971" end="981" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="1100" end="1106" title="Atomic nucleus" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="1198" end="1219" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="1223" end="1227" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="1238" end="1252" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129252" start="1408" end="1420" title="Weakly interacting massive particle" label="WIMP miracle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1544" end="1560" title="Dark matter#Direct detection" label="direct-detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="1623" end="1644" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q866456" start="1790" end="1798" title="R-parity" label="R-parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="1810" end="1823" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="1852" end="1866" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894127" start="2018" end="2043" title="universal extra dimension" label="universal extra dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q10348465" start="2048" end="2060" title="little Higgs" label="little Higgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11418" start="2155" end="2173" title="weak nuclear force" label="weak nuclear force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="2178" end="2185" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128025" start="2223" end="2237" title="Cross section (physics)" label="cross-sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="2328" end="2331" title="Electron volt" label="GeV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546165" start="2363" end="2380" title="light dark matter" label="light dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153477" start="2833" end="2849" title="cold dark matter" label="cold dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457669" start="2868" end="2896" title="massive compact halo objects" label="massive compact halo objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q792548" start="2910" end="2916" title="axions" label="axions"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="3074" end="3088" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="3216" end="3224" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364203" start="3838" end="3853" title="hot dark matter" label="hot dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175122" start="4080" end="4099" title="thermal equilibrium" label="thermal equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495" start="6028" end="6046" title="Satellite galaxy" label="satellite galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="6265" end="6275" title="gamma rays" label="gamma rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424022" start="6416" end="6442" title="inverse Compton scattering" label="inverse Compton scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q726648" start="6700" end="6705" title="Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope" label="Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569514" start="7031" end="7038" title="IceCube" label="IceCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q166530" start="7521" end="7536" title="escape velocity" label="escape velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188721" start="7738" end="7748" title="annihilation" label="annihilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="7834" end="7842" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q647227" start="7957" end="7973" title="Super-Kamiokande" label="Super-Kamiokande"/>
<link wikidata="Q402" start="8128" end="8139" title="Higgs boson" label="Higgs boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512411" start="9542" end="9570" title="Cryogenic Dark Matter Search" label="Cryogenic Dark Matter Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519540" start="9594" end="9605" title="Soudan Mine" label="Soudan Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="9742" end="9744" title="Kelvin" label="mK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834409" start="9989" end="10012" title="transition edge sensors" label="transition edge sensors"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="10075" end="10090" title="superconducting" label="superconducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="10197" end="10207" title="electrical resistance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024276" start="10209" end="10215" title="Cryogenic Rare Event Search with Superconducting Thermometers" label="CRESST"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303880" start="10217" end="10223" title="CoGeNT" label="CoGeNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274325" start="10229" end="10238" title="EDELWEISS" label="EDELWEISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q910990" start="10363" end="10376" title="scintillator" label="scintillating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204760" start="10492" end="10496" title="DEAP" label="DEAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391872" start="10500" end="10506" title="SNOLAB" label="SNOLAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223101" start="10511" end="10519" title="DarkSide (dark matter experiment)" label="DarkSide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799482" start="10527" end="10531" title="Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso" label="LNGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063028" start="10613" end="10619" title="ZEPLIN" label="ZEPLIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q767042" start="10625" end="10630" title="XENON Dark Matter Search Experiment" label="XENON"/>
<link wikidata="Q767042" start="10881" end="10886" title="XENON" label="XENON"/>
<link wikidata="Q19291430" start="10888" end="10898" title="LUX-ZEPLIN" label="LUX-ZEPLIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q18318674" start="10903" end="10909" title="PandaX" label="PandaX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700277" start="11096" end="11106" title="DAMA/LIBRA" label="DAMA/LIBRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955267" start="11296" end="11301" title="ANAIS" label="ANAIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q130553510" start="11303" end="11310" title="Cryogenic_Observatory_for_Signatures_Seen_in_Next-Generation_Underground_Searches" label="COSINUS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11315" end="11321" title="DM-Ice" label="DM-Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569514" start="11366" end="11373" title="IceCube Neutrino Observatory" label="IceCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102124" start="11402" end="11406" title="Korea Invisible Mass Search" label="KIMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217498" start="11495" end="11502" title="PICASSO" label="PICASSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391872" start="11632" end="11638" title="SNOLAB" label="SNOLAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858303" start="11680" end="11685" title="Freon" label="Freon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192970" start="12150" end="12164" title="bubble chamber" label="bubble chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="12214" end="12230" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535336" start="13257" end="13280" title="Time projection chamber" label="Time projection chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280443" start="13362" end="13407" title="Directional Recoil Identification From Tracks" label="Directional Recoil Identification From Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q243354" start="13517" end="13533" title="carbon disulfide" label="carbon disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255409" start="13672" end="13676" title="MWPC" label="MWPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="13971" end="13993" title="Charge-coupled device" label="Charge Coupled Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489102" start="14639" end="14642" title="Large Underground Xenon experiment" label="LUX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512411" start="14647" end="14656" title="Cryogenic Dark Matter Search" label="SuperCDMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303880" start="15123" end="15129" title="CoGeNT" label="CoGeNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700277" start="15180" end="15190" title="DAMA/LIBRA" label="DAMA/LIBRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512411" start="15195" end="15202" title="Cryogenic Dark Matter Search" label="CDMS-Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303880" start="15342" end="15348" title="CoGeNT" label="CoGeNT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16201" end="16211" title="Korea Invisible Mass Search#COSINE" label="COSINE-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955267" start="16561" end="16570" title="ANAIS-112" label="ANAIS-112"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216633" start="17874" end="17877" title="Solar neutrino" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17946" end="17966" title="Neutrino#Atmospheric" label="atmospheric neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457007" start="17976" end="18013" title="diffuse supernova neutrino background" label="diffuse supernova neutrino background"/>
<link wikidata="Q18318674" start="18047" end="18053" title="PandaX" label="PandaX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18186" end="18193" title="XENON#XENONnT" label="XENONnT"/>
<link wikidata="Q19291430" start="18198" end="18211" title="LZ experiment" label="LZ experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q108427253" start="18448" end="18475" title="Feebly Interacting Particles" label="Feebly interacting particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q106129188" start="18490" end="18543" title="WISP (particle physics)" label="Weakly interacting sub-eV / slender / slight particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807542" start="18807" end="18824" title="Timothy J. Sumner" label="Timothy J. Sumner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33725" wikidata="Q1423355" url="?curid=33725" title="Weregild">
<text>Weregild (also spelled wergild, wergeld (in archaic/historical usage of English), weregeld, etc.), also known as man price (blood money), was a precept in some historical legal codes whereby a monetary value was established for a person&#x27;s life, to be paid as a fine or as compensatory damages to the person&#x27;s family if that person was killed or injured by another.

== Etymology and terminology ==
The compound noun weregild means &quot;remuneration for a man&quot;, from Proto-Germanic &quot;man, human&quot; and &quot;retaliation, remuneration&quot;. In the south Germanic area, this is the most common term used to mean &quot;payment for killing a man&quot; (Old High German , Langobardic , Old English ), whereas in the North Germanic area, the more common term is Old Norse , with the same meaning. Wolfgang Haubrichs argues that wergild is &quot;undoubtably a West Germanic word&quot; which spread throughout the various Germanic-speaking peoples, but which in the north was replaced with since the meaning of the element &quot;wer-&quot; had been forgotten; comparable replacement words such as (&quot;repayment&quot;) are known from the south.

Several alternative terms are also found, such as (&quot;man&quot;) and (&quot;violation of a man&quot;) in the Lex Salica, and the short from in Old English. Both of these terms appear to derive from a word meaning the subject harmed taking on the meaning of the payment for that harm.

== Overview ==
A weregild or wergeld was a defined value placed on every man graded according to rank, used as a basis of a fine or compensation for murder, disablement, injury, and certain other serious crimes against that person. It was assessed from the guilty party, payable as restitution to the victim&#x27;s family.

The weregild was codified, for example, under Frankish Salic Code.

Weregild payment was an important legal mechanism in early Germanic society; the other common form of legal reparation at this time was blood revenge. The payment was typically made to the family or to the clan. Similar to the way a payment was made to family, it was also a family&#x27;s or kin group&#x27;s responsibility to ensure the payment for the wrong committed, especially if the offender is unable to cover the cost of the offense himself.

No distinction was made between murder and manslaughter until these distinctions were instituted by the re-introduction of Roman law in the 12th century.

Payment of the weregild was gradually replaced with capital punishment due to Christianization, starting around the 9th century, and almost entirely by the 12th century when weregild began to cease as a practice throughout the Holy Roman Empire.

Weregild from &quot;Norðleoda Laga&quot;:
==Origins==
Wergild first appears in the European historical record in 500 AD in the &quot;Lex Burgundionum&quot;, but the concept of paying blood-money is found widely in many pre-modern societies. Scholars debate if wergild was a traditional Germanic legal concept, or if it developed from a Roman predecessor. Christophe Gamby argued in 2013 that the entire institution was essentially derived from Roman law, whereas Harald Siems and Ralph Mathisen both rejected this concept in 2021, arguing that nothing comparable existed in Roman Law. However, Siems and Mathisen both argue that Roman law still influenced the definitions of crimes and possibly legal procedures in the &quot;barbarian law codes&quot; that first contain wergild.

== Amount ==

The size of the weregild was largely conditional upon the social rank of the victim. There used to be something of a &quot;basis&quot; fee for a standard &quot;free man&quot; that could then be multiplied according to the social rank of the victim and the circumstances of the crime. The weregild for women relative to that of men of equal rank varied: among the Saxons half that of men.

In the Migration period, the standard weregild for a freeman appears to have been 200 solidi (shillings), an amount reflected as the basic fee due for the death of a &quot;churl&quot; (or &quot;ceorl&quot;) both in later Anglo-Saxon and continental law codes.

In the 8th century, the &quot;Lex Alamannorum&quot; sets the weregild for a duke or archbishop at three times the basic value (600 shillings), while the killing of a low ranking cleric was fined with 300, raised to 400 if the cleric was attacked while he was reading mass.

During the reign of Charlemagne, his &quot;missi dominici&quot; required three times the regular weregild should they be killed whilst on a mission from the king.

In 9th century Mercian law a regular freeman (churl) was worth 200 shillings (&quot;twyhyndeman&quot;), and a nobleman was worth 1,200 (&quot;twelfhyndeman&quot;), a division established enough that two centuries later a charter of King Cnut&#x27;s would simply refer to &quot;all his people - the twelve-hundreders and the two-hundreders&quot;. The law code even mentions the weregild for a king, at 30,000 thrymsas, composed of 15,000 for the man, paid to the royal family, and 15,000 for the kingship, paid to the people. An archbishop or nobleman is likewise valued at 15,000 thrymsas. The weregild for a Welshman was 120 shillings if he owned at least one hide of land and was able to pay the king&#x27;s tribute. If he has only 1 hide and cannot pay the tribute, his wergild was 80 shillings and then 70 if he was landless yet free.

Thralls and slaves legally commanded no weregild, but it was commonplace to make a nominal payment in the case of a thrall and the value of the slave in such a case. Technically this amount cannot be called a weregild, because it was more akin to a reimbursement to the owner for lost or damaged property.

==In literature==
===Medieval===
A classic example of a dispute over the weregild of a slave is contained in Iceland&#x27;s &quot;Egil&#x27;s Saga&quot;.

In the Völsunga saga or Saga of the Volsungs, the Æsir (Odin, Loki and Hœnir) are asked to pay weregild for killing Otr, son of Hreidmar. Otr is a &quot;great fisherman&quot; and resembles an otter. He is &#x27;eating a salmon and half dozing&#x27; on the river banks of Andvari&#x27;s Falls when Loki kills him by throwing a stone at him. Later that evening, the Æsir visit Hreidmar&#x27;s house where they are seized and imposed with a fine. Their fine consists of &quot;filling the [Otr] skin with gold and covering the outside with red gold.&quot; Loki is sent to get the gold and he manages to trick the dwarf Andvari into giving him the gold as well as a cursed ring: &quot;The dwarf went into the rock and said that the gold ring would be the death of whoever owned it, and the same applied to all the gold.&quot;

In the &quot;Story of Grettir the Strong&quot;, chapter 27, &quot;The Suit for the Slaying of Thorgils Makson&quot;, Thorgeir conveys to court Thorgils Arison&#x27;s offer of weregild as atonement for killing Thorgils Makson.

In the Old English epic poem &quot;Beowulf&quot;, lines 156–158 Grendel refuses to settle his killings with payment or recompense, and at lines 456–472, Hroðgar recalls the story of how Ecgþeow (Beowulf&#x27;s father) once came to him for help, for he had slain Heaðolaf, a man from another tribe called the Wulfings, and either could not pay the wergild or they refused to accept it. Hroðgar had married Wealhþeow, who probably belonged to the Wulfing tribe, and was able to use his kinship ties to persuade the Wulfings to accept the wergild and end the feud. Hroðgar sees Beowulf&#x27;s offer as a son&#x27;s gratitude for what Hroðgar had done for Beowulf&#x27;s father.

===Modern===
In the novel &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; by J. R. R. Tolkien, the journal of Isildur reveals that he justified taking the One Ring as a weregild for the deaths of his father (Elendil) and brother (Anárion) in battle. This fact is mentioned by Elrond during the council in chapter II: ‘Alas! yes,’ said Elrond (…) But Isildur would not listen to our counsel. “This I will have as weregild for my father, and my brother,” he said. Appendix A of &quot;The Return of the King&quot; also mentions a rich weregild of gold sent by Túrin II, Steward of Gondor, to King Folcwine of Rohan, after the death of his twin sons, Folcred and Fastred, in battle in Ithilien.

In Jim Butcher&#x27;s Dresden Files novel &quot;Skin Game&quot;, Harry Dresden offers John Marcone a cashbox of diamonds as &quot;weregild&quot; for an employee murdered by Deirdre. Dresden says &quot;That&#x27;s for your dead employee&#x27;s family. Take care of them with it. And leave my people out of it. It ends here.&quot;

In Rick Riordan&#x27;s novel &quot;The Hammer of Thor&quot;, Hearthstone, an elf, must pay a wergild for his brother Andiron&#x27;s death when they were children. Hearthstone, the older brother, was distracted and playing with rocks when a Brunnmigi emerged from a well and killed Andiron. Since Hearthstone was deaf, he did not notice until it was too late. Hearthstone was forced by their father to skin the large beast by himself, which was turned into a rug and placed on the floor of his room. To pay his wergild, he had to cover every single hair with gold earned from his father, generally by doing chores. Every meal and any free time, among other things, cost Hearthstone earned gold. This task was not accomplished until years later, and his father, Alderman, was reluctant to consider the debt paid, but finally conceded that Hearthstone was released from the debt.

==See also==
* Anglo-Saxon law

International:
* Diyya, Islamic
* Éraic, Irish
* Galanas, Welsh
* Główszczyzna, Polish

General:
* Value of life
* Wrongful death

== References ==
==Sources==
* Byock, Jesse L. (1990) &quot;Saga of the Volsungs&quot;. University of California Press. .
*
* Rabin, Andrew, &quot;The Political Writings of Archbishop Wulfstan of York&quot; (Manchester, 2015).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="0" end="8" title="Weregild" label="Weregild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="23" end="30" title="Weregild" label="wergild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="32" end="39" title="Weregild" label="wergeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="82" end="90" title="Weregild" label="weregeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="113" end="122" title="Weregild" label="man price"/>
<link wikidata="Q886568" start="124" end="135" title="Blood money (restitution)" label="blood money"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348615" start="266" end="270" title="Composition (fine)" label="fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="277" end="297" title="Damages" label="compensatory damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="482" end="496" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="779" end="788" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="876" end="889" title="West Germanic" label="West Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="1275" end="1285" title="Lex Salica" label="Lex Salica"/>
<link wikidata="Q818977" start="1733" end="1744" title="restitution" label="restitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="1821" end="1829" title="Francia" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="1830" end="1840" title="Salic Law" label="Salic Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="1902" end="1918" title="Germanic society" label="Germanic society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1979" end="1992" title="Feud#Blood feuds/vendetta" label="blood revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8436" start="2032" end="2038" title="family" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639236" start="2049" end="2053" title="sibb" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="2326" end="2332" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882220" start="2337" end="2349" title="manslaughter" label="manslaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="2417" end="2426" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061" start="2434" end="2446" title="12th century" label="12th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="2501" end="2519" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="2527" end="2543" title="Christianization" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083" start="2565" end="2576" title="9th century" label="9th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2676" end="2693" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q109537971" start="2716" end="2730" title="Norðleoda Laga" label="Norðleoda Laga"/>
<link wikidata="Q188350" start="2829" end="2845" title="Lex Burgundionum" label="Lex Burgundionum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078683" start="2982" end="3004" title="Germanic law" label="Germanic legal concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="3032" end="3049" title="Roman law" label="Roman predecessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="3548" end="3559" title="social rank" label="social rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="3853" end="3859" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="3886" end="3902" title="Migration period" label="Migration period"/>
<link wikidata="Q231455" start="3965" end="3971" title="Solidus (coin)" label="solidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="3973" end="3981" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739270" start="4051" end="4056" title="churl" label="churl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397990" start="4170" end="4185" title="Lex Alamannorum" label="Lex Alamannorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="4434" end="4445" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370258" start="4457" end="4471" title="missi dominici" label="missi dominici"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="4593" end="4599" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739270" start="4624" end="4629" title="churl" label="churl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4799" end="4806" title="Old English#Charter of Cnut" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="4810" end="4819" title="King Cnut" label="King Cnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429705" start="5158" end="5165" title="thrymsa" label="thrymsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="5204" end="5212" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q521994" start="5239" end="5243" title="Hide (unit)" label="hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342610" start="5418" end="5424" title="Thrall" label="Thrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="5430" end="5436" title="slaves" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q827943" start="5855" end="5871" title="Egil&amp;#x27;s Saga" label="Egil&amp;#x27;s Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q733340" start="5887" end="5900" title="Völsunga saga" label="Völsunga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="5930" end="5934" title="Æsir" label="Æsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="5936" end="5940" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="5942" end="5946" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q836029" start="5951" end="5956" title="Hœnir" label="Hœnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967084" start="5996" end="5999" title="Ótr" label="Otr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390232" start="6008" end="6016" title="Hreidmar" label="Hreidmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q913267" start="6715" end="6742" title="Grettis saga" label="Story of Grettir the Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="6936" end="6947" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="6948" end="6957" title="Epic poetry" label="epic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="6964" end="6971" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q29372" start="6993" end="7000" title="Grendel" label="Grendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353836" start="7082" end="7089" title="Hroðgar" label="Hroðgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q536019" start="7115" end="7122" title="Ecgþeow" label="Ecgþeow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021120" start="7237" end="7245" title="Wulfings" label="Wulfings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116944" start="7334" end="7343" title="Wealhþeow" label="Wealhþeow"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="7413" end="7420" title="kinship" label="kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="7637" end="7658" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="7668" end="7684" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q206324" start="7701" end="7708" title="Isildur" label="Isildur"/>
<link wikidata="Q19852" start="7746" end="7754" title="One Ring" label="One Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q719736" start="7799" end="7806" title="Elendil" label="Elendil"/>
<link wikidata="Q332581" start="8073" end="8095" title="The Return of the King" label="The Return of the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="8135" end="8139" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q213586" start="8158" end="8165" title="Stewards of Gondor" label="Steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q213586" start="8169" end="8175" title="Gondor" label="Gondor"/>
<link wikidata="Q220110" start="8197" end="8202" title="Rohan (Middle-earth)" label="Rohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213586" start="8272" end="8280" title="Ithilien" label="Ithilien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367995" start="8286" end="8297" title="Jim Butcher" label="Jim Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307373" start="8305" end="8318" title="The Dresden Files" label="Dresden Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105829" start="8331" end="8340" title="Skin Game (The Dresden Files)" label="Skin Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307373" start="8348" end="8361" title="Harry Dresden" label="Harry Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8369" end="8381" title="The Dresden Files characters#&amp;quot;Gentleman&amp;quot; Johnny Marcone" label="John Marcone"/>
<link wikidata="Q212727" start="8616" end="8628" title="Rick Riordan" label="Rick Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25921512" start="8648" end="8666" title="The Hammer of Thor" label="The Hammer of Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979103" start="8853" end="8862" title="Brunnmigi" label="Brunnmigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039571" start="9506" end="9521" title="Anglo-Saxon law" label="Anglo-Saxon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744172" start="9540" end="9545" title="Diyya" label="Diyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590924" start="9557" end="9562" title="Éraic" label="Éraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405273" start="9572" end="9579" title="Galanas" label="Galanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839359" start="9589" end="9601" title="Główszczyzna" label="Główszczyzna"/>
<link wikidata="Q582249" start="9622" end="9635" title="Value of life" label="Value of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038640" start="9638" end="9652" title="Wrongful death" label="Wrongful death"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33726" wikidata="Q181667" url="?curid=33726" title="Washington Irving">
<text>Washington Irving (April 3, 1783 – November 28, 1859) was an American short-story writer, essayist, biographer, historian, and diplomat of the early 19th century. He wrote the short stories &quot;Rip Van Winkle&quot; (1819) and &quot;The Legend of Sleepy Hollow&quot; (1820), both of which appear in his collection &quot;The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.&quot; His historical works include biographies of Oliver Goldsmith, Muhammad, and George Washington, as well as several histories of 15th-century Spain that deal with subjects such as the Alhambra, Christopher Columbus, and the Moors. Irving served as American ambassador to Spain in the 1840s.

Irving was born and raised in Manhattan to a merchant family. He made his literary debut in 1802 with a series of observational letters to the &quot;Morning Chronicle&quot;, written under the pseudonym Jonathan Oldstyle. He temporarily moved to England for the family business in 1815, where he achieved fame with the publication of &quot;The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.&quot; which was serialized from 1819 to 1820. He continued to publish regularly throughout his life, and he completed a five-volume biography of George Washington just eight months before his death at age 76 in Tarrytown, New York.

Irving was one of the first American writers to earn acclaim in Europe, and he encouraged other American authors such as Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Herman Melville, and Edgar Allan Poe. He was also admired by some British writers, including Lord Byron, Thomas Campbell, Charles Dickens, Mary Shelley, Francis Jeffrey, and Walter Scott. He advocated for writing as a legitimate profession and argued for stronger laws to protect American writers from copyright infringement.

==Biography==

===Early years===
Washington Irving&#x27;s parents were William Irving Sr., originally of Quholm, Shapinsay, Orkney, Scotland, and Sarah (née Saunders), originally of Falmouth, Cornwall, England. They married in 1761 while William was serving as a petty officer in the British Navy. They had eleven children, eight of whom survived to adulthood. Their first two sons died in infancy, both named William, as did their fourth child John. Their surviving children were William Jr. (1766), Ann (1770), Peter (1771), Catherine (1774), Ebenezer (1776), John Treat (1778), Sarah (1780), and Washington.

The Irving family settled in Manhattan, and were part of the city&#x27;s merchant class. Washington was born on April 3, 1783, the same week that New York City residents learned of the British ceasefire which ended the American Revolution. Irving&#x27;s mother named him after George Washington. Irving met his namesake at age 6 when George Washington came to New York just before his inauguration as President in 1789. The President blessed young Irving, an encounter that Irving had commemorated in a small watercolor painting which continues to hang in his home.

The Irvings lived at 131 William Street at the time of Washington&#x27;s birth, but they later moved across the street to 128 William Street. Several of Irving&#x27;s brothers became active New York merchants; they encouraged his literary aspirations, often supporting him financially as he pursued his writing career.

Irving was an uninterested student who preferred adventure stories and drama, and he regularly sneaked out of class in the evenings to attend the theater by the time he was 14. An outbreak of yellow fever in Manhattan in 1798 prompted his family to send him upriver, where he stayed with his friend James Kirke Paulding in Tarrytown, New York. It was in Tarrytown where he became familiar with the bucolic beauty of the region with its Dutch customs and local ghost stories. Though the town of Sleepy Hollow did not exist in Irving&#x27;s time (North Tarrytown changed its name to Sleepy Hollow in 1996), the area had been known as Slapershaven or &quot;Sleeper&#x27;s Haven&quot; by the Dutch. Irving made several other trips up the Hudson as a teenager, including an extended visit to Johnstown, New York, where he passed through the Catskill Mountains region, the setting for &quot;Rip Van Winkle&quot;. &quot;Of all the scenery of the Hudson&quot;, Irving wrote, &quot;the Kaatskill Mountains had the most witching effect on my boyish imagination&quot;.

Irving began writing letters to the New York &quot;Morning Chronicle&quot; in 1802 when he was 19, submitting commentaries on the city&#x27;s social and theater scene under the pseudonym Jonathan Oldstyle. The name evoked his Federalist leanings and was the first of many pseudonyms he employed throughout his career. The letters brought Irving some early fame and moderate notoriety. Aaron Burr was a co-publisher of the &quot;Chronicle&quot;, and was impressed enough to send clippings of the Oldstyle pieces to his daughter Theodosia. Charles Brockden Brown made a trip to New York to try to recruit Oldstyle for a literary magazine he was editing in Philadelphia.

Concerned for his health, Irving&#x27;s brothers financed an extended tour of Europe from 1804 to 1806. He bypassed most of the sites and locations considered essential for the social development of a young man, to the dismay of his brother William who wrote that he was pleased that his brother&#x27;s health was improving, but he did not like the choice to &quot;&quot;gallop through Italy&quot;… leaving Florence on your left and Venice on your right&quot;. Instead, Irving honed the social and conversational skills that eventually made him one of the world&#x27;s most in-demand guests. &quot;I endeavor to take things as they come with cheerfulness&quot;, Irving wrote, &quot;and when I cannot get a dinner to suit my taste, I endeavor to get a taste to suit my dinner&quot;. While visiting Rome in 1805, Irving struck up a friendship with painter Washington Allston and was almost persuaded into a career as a painter. &quot;My lot in life, however, was differently cast&quot;.

===First major writings===

Irving returned from Europe to study law with his legal mentor Judge Josiah Ogden Hoffman in New York City. By his own admission, he was not a good student and barely passed the bar examination in 1806. He began socializing with a group of literate young men whom he dubbed &quot;The Lads of Kilkenny&quot;, and he created the literary magazine &quot;Salmagundi&quot; in January 1807 with his brother William and his friend James Kirke Paulding, writing under various pseudonyms, such as William Wizard and Launcelot Langstaff. Irving lampooned New York culture and politics in a manner similar to the 20th century &quot;Mad&quot; magazine. &quot;Salmagundi&quot; was a moderate success, spreading Irving&#x27;s name and reputation beyond New York. He gave New York City the nickname &quot;Gotham&quot; in its 17th issue dated November 11, 1807, an Anglo-Saxon word meaning &quot;Goat&#x27;s Town&quot;.

Irving completed &quot;A History of New-York from the Beginning of the World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty, by Diedrich Knickerbocker&quot; (1809) while mourning the death of his 17-year-old fiancée Matilda Hoffman. It was his first major book and a satire on self-important local history and contemporary politics. Before its publication, Irving started a hoax by placing a series of missing person advertisements in the New York Evening Post seeking information on Diedrich Knickerbocker, a crusty Dutch historian who had allegedly gone missing from his hotel in New York City. As part of the ruse, he placed a notice from the hotel&#x27;s proprietor informing readers that, if Mr. Knickerbocker failed to return to the hotel to pay his bill, he would publish a manuscript that Knickerbocker had left behind.

Unsuspecting readers followed the story of Knickerbocker and his manuscript with interest, and some New York city officials were concerned enough about the missing historian to offer a reward for his safe return. Irving then published &quot;A History of New York&quot; on December 6, 1809, under the Knickerbocker pseudonym, with immediate critical and popular success. &quot;It took with the public&quot;, Irving remarked, &quot;and gave me celebrity, as an original work was something remarkable and uncommon in America&quot;. The name Diedrich Knickerbocker became a nickname for Manhattan residents in general and was adopted by the New York Knickerbockers basketball team.

After the success of &quot;A History of New York&quot;, Irving searched for a job and eventually became an editor of &quot;Analectic Magazine&quot;, where he wrote biographies of naval heroes such as James Lawrence and Oliver Hazard Perry. He was also among the first magazine editors to reprint Francis Scott Key&#x27;s poem &quot;Defense of Fort McHenry&quot;, which was immortalized as &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot;. Irving initially opposed the War of 1812 like many other merchants, but the British attack on Washington, D.C., in 1814 convinced him to enlist. He served on the staff of Daniel Tompkins, governor of New York and commander of the New York State Militia, but he saw no real action apart from a reconnaissance mission in the Great Lakes region. The war was disastrous for many American merchants, including Irving&#x27;s family, and he left for England in mid-1815 to salvage the family trading company. He remained in Europe for the next 17 years.

===Life in Europe===

====&quot;The Sketch Book&quot;====
Irving spent the next two years trying to bail out the family firm financially but eventually had to declare bankruptcy. With no job prospects, he continued writing throughout 1817 and 1818. In the summer of 1817, he visited Walter Scott, beginning a lifelong personal and professional friendship.

Irving composed the short story &quot;Rip Van Winkle&quot; overnight while staying with his sister Sarah and her husband, Henry van Wart, in Birmingham, England, a place that inspired other works as well. In October 1818, Irving&#x27;s brother William secured for Irving a post as chief clerk to the United States Navy and urged him to return home. Irving turned the offer down, opting to stay in England to pursue a writing career.

In the spring of 1819, Irving sent to his brother Ebenezer in New York a set of short prose pieces that he asked be published as &quot;The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.&quot; The first installment, containing &quot;Rip Van Winkle&quot;, was an enormous success, and the rest of the work was equally successful; it was issued in 1819–1820 in seven installments in New York and in two volumes in London (&quot;The Legend of Sleepy Hollow&quot; appeared in the sixth issue of the New York edition and the second volume of the London edition).

Like many successful authors of this era, Irving struggled against literary bootleggers. In England, some of his sketches were reprinted in periodicals without his permission, a legal practice as there was no international copyright law at the time. To prevent further piracy in Britain, Irving paid to have the first four American installments published as a single volume by John Miller in London.

Irving appealed to Walter Scott for help procuring a more reputable publisher for the remainder of the book. Scott referred Irving to his own publisher, London powerhouse John Murray, who agreed to take on &quot;The Sketch Book&quot;. From then on, Irving would publish concurrently in the United States and Britain to protect his copyright, with Murray as his English publisher of choice.

Irving&#x27;s reputation soared, and for the next two years, he led an active social life in Paris and Great Britain, where he was often feted as an anomaly of literature: an upstart American who dared to write English well.

====&quot;Bracebridge Hall&quot; and &quot;Tales of a Traveller&quot;====
With both Irving and publisher John Murray eager to follow up on the success of &quot;The Sketch Book&quot;, Irving spent much of 1821 traveling in Europe in search of new material, reading widely in Dutch and German folk tales. Hampered by writer&#x27;s block—and depressed by the death of his brother William—Irving worked slowly, finally delivering a completed manuscript to Murray in March 1822. The book, &quot;Bracebridge Hall, or The Humorists, A Medley&quot; (the location was based loosely on Aston Hall, occupied by members of the Bracebridge family, near his sister&#x27;s home in Birmingham) was published in June 1822.

The format of &quot;Bracebridge&quot; was similar to that of &quot;The Sketch Book&quot;, with Irving, as Crayon, narrating a series of more than 50 loosely connected short stories and essays. While some reviewers thought &quot;Bracebridge&quot; to be a lesser imitation of &quot;The Sketch Book&quot;, the book was well received by readers and critics. &quot;We have received so much pleasure from this book&quot;, wrote critic Francis Jeffrey in the &quot;Edinburgh Review&quot;, &quot;that we think ourselves bound in gratitude... to make a public acknowledgement of it&quot;. Irving was relieved at its reception, which did much to cement his reputation with European readers.

Still struggling with writer&#x27;s block, Irving traveled to Germany, settling in Dresden in the winter of 1822. Here he dazzled the royal family and attached himself to Amelia Foster, an American living in Dresden with her five children. The 39-year-old Irving was particularly attracted to Foster&#x27;s 18-year-old daughter Emily and vied in frustration for her hand. Emily finally refused his offer of marriage in the spring of 1823.

He returned to Paris and began collaborating with playwright John Howard Payne on translations of French plays for the English stage, with little success. He also learned through Payne that the novelist Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley was romantically interested in him, though Irving never pursued the relationship.

In August 1824, Irving published the collection of essays &quot;Tales of a Traveller&quot;—including the short story &quot;The Devil and Tom Walker&quot;—under his Geoffrey Crayon persona. &quot;I think there are in it some of the best things I have ever written&quot;, Irving told his sister. But while the book sold respectably, &quot;Traveller&quot; was dismissed by critics, who panned both &quot;Traveller&quot; and its author. &quot;The public have been led to expect better things&quot;, wrote the &quot;United States Literary Gazette&quot;, while the &quot;New-York Mirror&quot; pronounced Irving &quot;overrated&quot;. Hurt and depressed by the book&#x27;s reception, Irving retreated to Paris where he spent the next year worrying about finances and scribbling down ideas for projects that never materialized.

====Spanish books====
While in Paris, Irving received a letter from Alexander Hill Everett on January 30, 1826. Everett, recently the American Minister to Spain, urged Irving to join him in Madrid, noting that a number of manuscripts dealing with the Spanish conquest of the Americas had recently been made public. Irving left for Madrid and enthusiastically began scouring the Spanish archives for colorful material.

With full access to the American consul&#x27;s massive library of Spanish history, Irving began working on several books at once. The first offspring of this hard work, &quot;A History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus&quot;, was published in January 1828. The book was popular in the United States and in Europe and would have 175 editions published before the end of the century. It was also the first project of Irving&#x27;s to be published with his own name, instead of a pseudonym, on the title page. Irving was invited to stay at the palace of the Duke of Gor, who gave him unfettered access to his library containing many medieval manuscripts.&quot;A Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada&quot; was published a year later, followed by &quot;Voyages and Discoveries of the Companions of Columbus&quot; in 1831.

Irving&#x27;s writings on Columbus are a mixture of history and fiction, a genre now called romantic history. Irving based them on extensive research in the Spanish archives, but also added imaginative elements aimed at sharpening the story. The first of these works is the source of the durable myth that medieval Europeans believed the Earth was flat. According to the popular book, Columbus proved the Earth was round.

In 1829, Irving was elected to the American Philosophical Society. That same year, he moved into Granada&#x27;s ancient palace Alhambra, &quot;determined to linger here&quot;, he said, &quot;until I get some writings under way connected with the place&quot;. Before he could get any significant writing underway, however, he was notified of his appointment as Secretary to the American Legation in London. Worried he would disappoint friends and family if he refused the position, Irving left Spain for England in July 1829.

====Secretary to the American legation in London====
Arriving in London, Irving joined the staff of American Minister Louis McLane. McLane immediately assigned the daily secretary work to another man and tapped Irving to fill the role of aide-de-camp. The two worked over the next year to negotiate a trade agreement between the United States and the British West Indies, finally reaching a deal in August 1830. That same year, Irving was awarded a medal by the Royal Society of Literature, followed by an honorary doctorate of civil law from Oxford in 1831.

Following McLane&#x27;s recall to the United States in 1831 to serve as Secretary of Treasury, Irving stayed on as the legation&#x27;s chargé d&#x27;affaires until the arrival of Martin Van Buren, President Andrew Jackson&#x27;s nominee for British Minister. With Van Buren in place, Irving resigned his post to concentrate on writing, eventually completing &quot;Tales of the Alhambra&quot;, which would be published concurrently in the United States and England in 1832.

Irving was still in London when Van Buren received word that the United States Senate had refused to confirm him as the new Minister. Consoling Van Buren, Irving predicted that the Senate&#x27;s partisan move would backfire. &quot;I should not be surprised&quot;, Irving said, &quot;if this vote of the Senate goes far toward elevating him to the presidential chair&quot;.

===Return to the United States===

Irving arrived in New York on May 21, 1832, after 17 years abroad. That September, he accompanied Commissioner on Indian Affairs Henry Leavitt Ellsworth on a surveying mission, along with companions Charles La Trobe and Count Albert-Alexandre de Pourtales, and they traveled deep into Indian Territory (now the state of Oklahoma). At the completion of his western tour, Irving traveled through Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, where he became acquainted with politician and novelist John Pendleton Kennedy.

Irving was frustrated by bad investments, so he turned to writing to generate additional income, beginning with &quot;A Tour on the Prairies&quot; which related his recent travels on the frontier. The book was another popular success and also the first book written and published by Irving in the United States since &quot;A History of New York&quot; in 1809. In 1834, he was approached by fur magnate John Jacob Astor, who convinced him to write a history of his fur trading colony in Astoria, Oregon. Irving made quick work of Astor&#x27;s project, shipping the fawning biographical account &quot;Astoria&quot; in February 1836. In 1835, Irving, Astor, and a few others founded the Saint Nicholas Society in the City of New York.

During an extended stay at Astor&#x27;s home, Irving met explorer Benjamin Bonneville and was intrigued with his maps and stories of the territories beyond the Rocky Mountains. The two men met in Washington, D.C., several months later, and Bonneville sold his maps and rough notes to Irving for $1,000. Irving used these materials as the basis for his 1837 book &quot;The Adventures of Captain Bonneville&quot;. These three works made up Irving&#x27;s &quot;western&quot; series of books and were written partly as a response to criticism that his time in England and Spain had made him more European than American. Critics such as James Fenimore Cooper and Philip Freneau felt that he had turned his back on his American heritage in favor of English aristocracy. Irving&#x27;s western books were well received in the United States, particularly &quot;A Tour on the Prairies&quot;, though British critics accused him of &quot;book-making&quot;.
In 1835, Irving purchased a &quot;neglected cottage&quot; and its surrounding riverfront property in Tarrytown, New York, which he named Sunnyside in 1841. It required constant repair and renovation over the next 20 years, with costs continually escalating, so he reluctantly agreed to become a regular contributor to &quot;The Knickerbocker&quot; magazine in 1839, writing new essays and short stories under the Knickerbocker and Crayon pseudonyms. He was regularly approached by aspiring young authors for advice or endorsement, including Edgar Allan Poe, who sought Irving&#x27;s comments on &quot;William Wilson&quot; and &quot;The Fall of the House of Usher&quot;.

In 1837, a lady of Charleston, South Carolina brought to the attention of William Clancy, newly appointed bishop to Demerara, a passage in &quot;The Crayon Miscellany&quot;, and questioned whether it accurately reflected Catholic teaching or practice. The passage under &quot;Newstead Abbey&quot; read:One of the parchment scrolls thus discovered, throws rather an awkward light upon the kind of life led by the friars of Newstead. It is an indulgence granted to them for a certain number of months, in which a plenary pardon is assured in advance for all kinds of crimes, among which, several of the most gross and sensual are specifically mentioned, and the weaknesses of the flesh to which they were prone.

Clancy wrote to Irving, who &quot;promptly aided the investigation into the truth, and promised to correct in future editions the misrepresentation complained of&quot;. Clancy traveled to his new posting by way of England, and bearing a letter of introduction from Irving, stopped at Newstead Abbey and was able to view the document to which Irving had alluded. Upon inspection, Clancy discovered that it was, in fact, not an indulgence issued to the friars from any ecclesiastical authority, but a pardon given by the king to some parties suspected of having broken &quot;forest laws&quot;. Clancy requested the local pastor to forward his findings to Catholic periodicals in England, and upon publication, send a copy to Irving. Whether this was done is not clear as the disputed text remains in the 1849 edition.

Irving also championed America&#x27;s maturing literature, advocating stronger copyright laws to protect writers from the kind of piracy that had initially plagued &quot;The Sketch Book&quot;. Writing in the January 1840 issue of &quot;Knickerbocker&quot;, he openly endorsed copyright legislation pending in Congress. &quot;We have a young literature&quot;, he wrote, &quot;springing up and daily unfolding itself with wonderful energy and luxuriance, which … deserves all its fostering care&quot;. The legislation, however, did not pass at that time.

In 1841, Irving was elected to the National Academy of Design as an Honorary Academician. He also began a friendly correspondence with Charles Dickens and hosted Dickens and his wife at Sunnyside during Dickens&#x27;s American tour in 1842.

===Minister to Spain===
President John Tyler appointed Irving as Minister to Spain in February 1842, after an endorsement from Secretary of State Daniel Webster. Irving wrote, &quot;It will be a severe trial to absent myself for a time from my dear little Sunnyside, but I shall return to it better enabled to carry it on comfortably&quot;. He hoped that his position as Minister would allow him plenty of time to write, but Spain was in a state of political upheaval during most of his tenure, with a number of warring factions vying for control of the 12-year-old Queen Isabella II. Irving maintained good relations with the various generals and politicians, as control of Spain rotated through Espartero, Bravo, then Narváez. Espartero was then locked in a power struggle with the Spanish Cortes. Irving&#x27;s official reports on the ensuing civil war and revolution expressed his romantic fascination with the regent as young Queen Isabella&#x27;s knight protector, He wrote with an anti-republican, undiplomatic bias. Though Espartero, ousted in July 1843, remained a fallen hero in his eyes, Irving began to view Spanish affairs more realistically. However, the politics and warfare were exhausting, and Irving was both homesick and suffering from a crippling skin condition.

With the political situation relatively settled in Spain, Irving continued to closely monitor the development of the new government and the fate of Isabella. His official duties as Spanish Minister also involved negotiating American trade interests with Cuba and following the Spanish parliament&#x27;s debates over the slave trade. He was also pressed into service by Louis McLane, the American Minister to the Court of St. James&#x27;s in London, to assist in negotiating the Anglo-American disagreement over the Oregon border that newly elected president James K. Polk had vowed to resolve.

===Final years and death===

Irving returned from Spain in September 1846, took up residence at Sunnyside, and began work on an &quot;Author&#x27;s Revised Edition&quot; of his works for publisher George Palmer Putnam. For its publication, Irving had made a deal which guaranteed him 12 percent of the retail price of all copies sold, an agreement that was unprecedented at that time. As he revised his older works for Putnam, he continued to write regularly, publishing biographies of Oliver Goldsmith in 1849 and Islamic prophet Muhammad in 1850. In 1855, he produced &quot;Wolfert&#x27;s Roost&quot;, a collection of stories and essays that he had written for &quot;The Knickerbocker&quot; and other publications, and he began publishing a biography of his namesake George Washington which he expected to be his masterpiece. Five volumes of the biography were published between 1855 and 1859.

Irving traveled regularly to Mount Vernon and Washington, D.C., for his research, and struck up friendships with Presidents Millard Fillmore and Franklin Pierce. He was elected an Associate Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1855. He was hired as an executor of John Jacob Astor&#x27;s estate in 1848 and appointed by Astor&#x27;s will as first chairman of the Astor Library, a forerunner to the New York Public Library.

Irving continued to socialize and keep up with his correspondence well into his seventies, and his fame and popularity continued to soar. &quot;I don&#x27;t believe that any man, in any country, has ever had a more affectionate admiration for him than that given to you in America&quot;, wrote Senator William C. Preston in a letter to Irving. &quot;I believe that we have had but one man who is so much in the popular heart&quot;. By 1859, author Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. noted that Sunnyside had become &quot;next to Mount Vernon, the best known and most cherished of all the dwellings in our land&quot;.

Irving died of a heart attack in his bedroom at Sunnyside on November 28, 1859, age 76—only eight months after completing the final volume of his Washington biography. Legend has it that his last words were: &quot;Well, I must arrange my pillows for another night. When will this end?&quot; He was buried under a simple headstone at Sleepy Hollow cemetery on December 1, 1859. Irving and his grave were commemorated by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow in his 1876 poem &quot;In the Churchyard at Tarrytown&quot;, which concludes with:

==Legacy==

===Literary reputation===

Irving is largely credited as the first American Man of Letters and the first to earn his living solely by his pen. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow acknowledged Irving&#x27;s role in promoting American literature in December 1859: &quot;We feel a just pride in his renown as an author, not forgetting that, to his other claims upon our gratitude, he adds also that of having been the first to win for our country an honourable name and position in the History of Letters&quot;.

Irving perfected the American short story and was the first American writer to set his stories firmly in the United States, even as he poached from German or Dutch folklore. He is also generally credited as one of the first to write in the vernacular and without an obligation to presenting morals or being didactic in his short stories, writing stories simply to entertain rather than to enlighten. He also encouraged many would-be writers. As George William Curtis noted, there &quot;is not a young literary aspirant in the country, who, if he ever personally met Irving, did not hear from him the kindest words of sympathy, regard, and encouragement&quot;.

Edgar Allan Poe, on the other hand, felt that Irving should be given credit for being an innovator but that the writing itself was often unsophisticated. &quot;Irving is much over-rated&quot;, Poe wrote in 1838, &quot;and a nice distinction might be drawn between his just and his surreptitious and adventitious reputation—between what is due to the pioneer solely, and what to the writer&quot;. A critic for the &quot;New-York Mirror&quot; wrote: &quot;No man in the Republic of Letters has been more overrated than Mr. Washington Irving&quot;. Some critics claimed that Irving catered to British sensibilities, and one critic charged that he wrote &quot;&quot;of&quot; and &quot;for&quot; England, rather than his own country&quot;. For instance, American critic John Neal in his 1824–25 critical work &quot;American Writers&quot; dismissed Irving as a poor copy of Goldsmith.

Other critics were more supportive of Irving&#x27;s style. William Makepeace Thackeray was the first to refer to Irving as the &quot;ambassador whom the New World of Letters sent to the Old&quot;, a banner picked up by writers and critics throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. &quot;He is the first of the American humorists, as he is almost the first of the American writers&quot;, wrote critic H.R. Hawless in 1881, &quot;yet belonging to the New World, there is a quaint Old World flavor about him&quot;. Early critics often had difficulty separating Irving the man from Irving the writer. &quot;The life of Washington Irving was one of the brightest ever led by an author&quot;, wrote Richard Henry Stoddard, an early Irving biographer. Later critics, however, began to review his writings as all style with no substance. &quot;The man had no message&quot;, said critic Barrett Wendell.

As a historian, Irving&#x27;s reputation had fallen out of favor but then gained a resurgence. &quot;With the advent of &#x27;scientific&#x27; history in the generations that followed his, Irving&#x27;s historical writings lapsed into disregard and disrespect. To late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century historians, including John Franklin Jameson, G. P. Gooch, and others, these works were demiromances, worthy at best of veiled condescension. However, more recently several of Irving&#x27;s histories and biographies have again won praise for their reliability as well as the literary skill with which they were written. Specifically, &quot;A History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus&quot;; &quot;Astoria, or Anecdotes of an Enterprise beyond the Rocky Mountains&quot;; and &quot;Life of George Washington&quot; have earned the respect of scholars whose writings on those topics we consider authoritative in our generation: Samuel Eliot Morison, Bernard DeVoto, Douglas Southall Freeman&quot;.

===Impact on American culture===

Irving popularized the nickname &quot;Gotham&quot; for New York City, and he is credited with inventing the expression &quot;the almighty dollar&quot;. The surname of his fictional Dutch historian Diedrich Knickerbocker is generally associated with New York and New Yorkers, as found in New York&#x27;s professional basketball team The New York Knickerbockers.

One of Irving&#x27;s most lasting contributions to American culture is in the way that Americans celebrate Christmas. In his 1812 revisions to &quot;A History of New York&quot;, he inserted a dream sequence featuring St. Nicholas soaring over treetops in a flying wagon, an invention which others dressed up as Santa Claus. In his five Christmas stories in &quot;The Sketch Book&quot;, Irving portrayed an idealized celebration of old-fashioned Christmas customs at a quaint English manor which depicted English Christmas festivities that he experienced while staying in England, which had largely been abandoned. He used text from &quot;The Vindication of Christmas&quot; (London 1652) of old English Christmas traditions, and the book contributed to the revival and reinterpretation of the Christmas holiday in the United States.

Irving introduced the erroneous idea that Europeans believed the world to be flat prior to the discovery of the New World in his biography of Christopher Columbus, yet the flat-Earth myth has been taught in schools as fact to many generations of Americans. American painter John Quidor based many of his paintings on scenes from the works of Irving about Dutch New York, including such paintings as &quot;Ichabod Crane Flying from the Headless Horseman&quot; (1828), &quot;The Return of Rip Van Winkle&quot; (1849), and &quot;The Headless Horseman Pursuing Ichabod Crane&quot; (1858).

===Memorials===
The village of Dearman, New York, changed its name to &quot;Irvington&quot; in 1854 to honor Washington Irving, who was living in nearby Sunnyside, which is preserved as a museum. Influential residents of the village prevailed upon the Hudson River Railroad, which had reached the village by 1849, to change the name of the train station to &quot;Irvington&quot;, and the village incorporated as Irvington on April 16, 1872.

The town of Knickerbocker, Texas, was founded by two of Irving&#x27;s nephews, who named it in honor of their uncle&#x27;s literary pseudonym. The city of Irving, Texas, states that it is named for Washington Irving.

Irvington, New Jersey is also named after Irving. It was incorporated on March 27, 1874, from parts of Clinton Township (Clinton Township is now part of Newark, New Jersey since 1902).

Irving Street in San Francisco is named after him.

The Irving Park neighborhood in Chicago are named for him as well, though the original name of the subdivision was Irvington and then later Irving Park before annexation to Chicago. The major Chicago thoroughfare Illinois Route 19 is also named Irving Park Road.

Gibbons Memorial Park, located in Honesdale, Pennsylvania, is located on Irving Cliff, which was named after him.

The Irvington neighborhood in Indianapolis is also one of the many communities named after him.

Irving College (1838–1890) in Irving College, Tennessee, was named for Irving.

There is a statue of Irving in Granada, Spain.

The Village of North Tarrytown, New York, changed its name to Sleepy Hollow in 1996 to honor Washington Irving and capitalize on the popularity of the story &quot;The Legend Of Sleepy Hollow&quot;.

Washington Irving Memorial Park and Arboretum, located in Bixby, Oklahoma, is named in honor of Washington Irving and features an amphitheater stage with a replica façade of his Sunnyside home. The home includes a statue of Irving seated on the porch of the home. Among the tributes to Irving are memorials to the victims of the Oklahoma City Bombing and the World Trade Center attacks, with a steel beam from the towers on display. The park is also the site of local community events, including the annual Bixby BBQ and Blues festival.

==Works==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Aderman, Ralph M. ed. &quot;Critical essays on Washington Irving&quot; (1990) online
* Apap, Christopher, and Tracy Hoffman. &quot;Prospects for the Study of Washington Irving&quot;. &quot;Resources for American Literary Study&quot; 35 (2010): 3–27. online
* Bowden, Edwin T. &quot;Washington Irving bibliography&quot; (1989) online
* Brodwin, Stanley. &quot;The Old and New World romanticism of Washington Irving&quot; (1986) online
* Brooks, Van Wyck. &quot;The World Of Washington Irving&quot; (1944) online
* Burstein, Andrew. &quot;The Original Knickerbocker: The Life of Washington Irving&quot;. (Basic Books, 2007). 
* Burstein, Andrew, and Nancy Isenberg, eds. &quot;Rip Van Winkle’s Republic: Washington Irving in History and Memory&quot; (Louisiana State University Press, 2022) online review
* Bowers, Claude G. &quot;The Spanish Adventures of Washington Irving&quot;. (Riverside Press, 1940).
* Hedges, William L. &quot;Washington Irving: An American Study, 1802–1832&quot; (Johns Hopkins UP, 2019).
* Hellman, George S. &quot;Washington Irving, Esquire&quot;. (Alfred A. Knopf, 1925).
* Irvine, James M. &quot;The Genealogy of Washington Irving&quot; (Ashtead, 2019). ISBN 978-1-78955-477-9
* Jones, Brian Jay. &quot;Washington Irving: An American Original&quot;. (Arcade, 2008). 
* LeMenager, Stephanie. &quot;Trading Stories: Washington Irving and the Global West&quot;. &quot;American Literary History&quot; 15.4 (2003): 683–708. online
* McGann, Jerome. &quot;Washington Irving&quot;, A History of New York&quot;, and American History&quot;. &quot;Early American Literature&quot; 47.2 (2012): 349–376. online.
* Myers, Andrew B., ed. &quot;A Century of commentary on the works of Washington Irving, 1860–1974&quot; (1975) online
* Pollard, Finn. &quot;From beyond the grave and across the ocean: Washington Irving and the problem of being a questioning American, 1809–20&quot;. &quot;American Nineteenth Century History&quot; 8.1 (2007): 81–101. 
* Springer, Haskell S. &quot;Washington Irving: a reference guide&quot; (1976) online
* Williams, Stanley T. &quot;The Life of Washington Irving.&quot; 2 vols. (Oxford UP, 1935). vol 1 online; also vol 2 online

===Primary sources===
* Irving, Pierre M. &quot;Life and Letters of Washington Irving&quot;. 4 vols. (G.P. Putnam, 1862). Cited herein as PMI.
* Irving, Washington. &quot;The Complete Works of Washington Irving&quot;. (Rust, &quot;et al.&quot;, editors). 30 vols. (University of Wisconsin/Twayne, 1969–1986). Cited herein as &quot;Works&quot;.
* Irving, Washington. (1828) &quot;History of the Life of Christopher Columbus&quot;, 3 volumes, 1828, G. &amp; C. Carvill, publishers, New York, New York; as 4 volumes, 1828, John Murray, publisher, London; and as 4 volumes, 1828, Paris A. and W. Galignani, publishers, France.
* Irving, Washington. (1829) &quot;The Life and Voyage of Christopher Columbus&quot;, 1 volume, 1829, G. &amp; C. &amp; H. Carvill, publishers, New York, New York; an abridged version prepared by Irving of his 1828 work.
* Irving, Washington. &quot;Selected writings of Washington Irving&quot; (Modern Library edition, 1945) online

==External links==

* 
* 
* Washington Irving letters at Lehigh University&#x27;s I Remain: A Digital Archive of Letters, Manuscripts, and Ephemera
* Irving letter, 1854 , Mount Holyoke College Archives and Special Collections
* Washington Irving at Poets&#x27; Corner (theOtherPages.org/poems)
* , published 1859 in &quot;Once a Week&quot;
* Washington Irving Cultural Route in Spain
* Finding Aid for the Washington Irving Collection of Papers, 1805–1933, at the New York Public Library
* Guide to Timothy Hopkins&#x27; Washington Irving collection, 1683–1839 – five 5 volumes of letters at the Department of Special Collections and University Archives at Stanford University Libraries
* The Washington Irving Collection, Rare Book and Special Collection Division at the Library of Congress
* , Yale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q181667" start="0" end="17" title="Washington Irving" label="Washington Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129589" start="196" end="210" title="Rip Van Winkle" label="Rip Van Winkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q72309" start="234" end="261" title="The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" label="The Legend of Sleepy Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170393" start="321" end="362" title="The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent." label="The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent."/>
<link wikidata="Q236236" start="413" end="429" title="Oliver Goldsmith" label="Oliver Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="431" end="439" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="445" end="462" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q47476" start="551" end="559" title="Alhambra" label="Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="561" end="581" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="591" end="596" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="689" end="698" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821175" start="861" end="878" title="Letters of Jonathan Oldstyle, Gent." label="Jonathan Oldstyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020341" start="1251" end="1270" title="Tarrytown, New York" label="Tarrytown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="1394" end="1413" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q152513" start="1415" end="1441" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow" label="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="1443" end="1458" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="1464" end="1479" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="1536" end="1546" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361189" start="1548" end="1563" title="Thomas Campbell (poet)" label="Thomas Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="1565" end="1580" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="1582" end="1594" title="Mary Shelley" label="Mary Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881202" start="1596" end="1611" title="Francis Jeffrey" label="Francis Jeffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="1617" end="1629" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271620" start="1875" end="1881" title="Quholm" label="Quholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434255" start="1883" end="1892" title="Shapinsay" label="Shapinsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="1894" end="1900" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q478029" start="1952" end="1970" title="Falmouth, Cornwall" label="Falmouth, Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579408" start="2251" end="2262" title="William Irving (New York)" label="William Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1588059" start="2283" end="2288" title="Peter Irving" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2601" end="2620" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="3461" end="3473" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q372969" start="3568" end="3588" title="James Kirke Paulding" label="James Kirke Paulding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020341" start="3592" end="3611" title="Tarrytown, New York" label="Tarrytown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377991" start="4056" end="4075" title="Johnstown (city), New York" label="Johnstown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q630566" start="4105" end="4123" title="Catskill Mountains" label="Catskill Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129589" start="4154" end="4168" title="Rip Van Winkle" label="Rip Van Winkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821175" start="4515" end="4532" title="Letters of Jonathan Oldstyle, Gent." label="Jonathan Oldstyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="4554" end="4564" title="Federalist Party (United States)" label="Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179090" start="4713" end="4723" title="Aaron Burr" label="Aaron Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782174" start="4855" end="4864" title="Theodosia Burr Alston" label="Theodosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q468280" start="4866" end="4888" title="Charles Brockden Brown" label="Charles Brockden Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q468272" start="5851" end="5869" title="Washington Allston" label="Washington Allston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290585" start="6080" end="6100" title="Josiah Ogden Hoffman" label="Josiah Ogden Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q847347" start="6362" end="6372" title="Salmagundi (periodical)" label="Salmagundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="6626" end="6641" title="Mad (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Mad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920548" start="6939" end="7051" title="A History of New York" label="A History of New-York from the Beginning of the World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty, by Diedrich Knickerbocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="7340" end="7361" title="New York Evening Post" label="New York Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609555" start="7385" end="7407" title="Diedrich Knickerbocker" label="Diedrich Knickerbocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="8367" end="8390" title="New York Knicks" label="New York Knickerbockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409452" start="8532" end="8550" title="Analectic Magazine" label="Analectic Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680697" start="8609" end="8623" title="James Lawrence" label="James Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q580513" start="8628" end="8647" title="Oliver Hazard Perry" label="Oliver Hazard Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q320633" start="8705" end="8722" title="Francis Scott Key" label="Francis Scott Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438634" start="8752" end="8764" title="Fort McHenry" label="Fort McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="8804" end="8828" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="8865" end="8876" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q897786" start="8912" end="8946" title="Burning of Washington" label="British attack on Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q223545" start="9007" end="9022" title="Daniel Tompkins" label="Daniel Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="9667" end="9679" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730931" start="9863" end="9877" title="Henry van Wart" label="Henry van Wart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="9882" end="9901" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170393" start="10310" end="10351" title="The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent." label="The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent."/>
<link wikidata="Q4310130" start="11296" end="11307" title="John Murray (publisher, born 1778)" label="John Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953226" start="12226" end="12282" title="Bracebridge Hall" label="&amp;quot;Bracebridge Hall, or The Humorists, A Medley&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810979" start="12318" end="12328" title="Aston Hall" label="Aston Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="13214" end="13221" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401542" start="13632" end="13649" title="John Howard Payne" label="John Howard Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="13774" end="13801" title="Mary Shelley" label="Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679380" start="13949" end="13969" title="Tales of a Traveller" label="Tales of a Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155801" start="14008" end="14032" title="The Devil and Tom Walker" label="The Devil and Tom Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719138" start="14774" end="14796" title="Alexander Hill Everett" label="Alexander Hill Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657348" start="15300" end="15357" title="A History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus" label="A History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316074" start="15694" end="15705" title="Duke of Gor" label="Duke of Gor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131418247" start="15796" end="15834" title="A Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada" label="A Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272686" start="16282" end="16309" title="Myth of the flat Earth" label="believed the Earth was flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="16415" end="16445" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q551362" start="17024" end="17036" title="Louis McLane" label="Louis McLane"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="17257" end="17276" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="17645" end="17661" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="17673" end="17687" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210997" start="17830" end="17851" title="Tales of the Alhambra" label="Tales of the Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q738941" start="18478" end="18501" title="Henry Leavitt Ellsworth" label="Henry Leavitt Ellsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065260" start="18548" end="18564" title="Charles La Trobe" label="Charles La Trobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="18634" end="18650" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q938005" start="18832" end="18854" title="John Pendleton Kennedy" label="John Pendleton Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57423" start="19259" end="19275" title="John Jacob Astor" label="John Jacob Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="19343" end="19358" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811094" start="19456" end="19463" title="Astoria (book)" label="Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401956" start="19541" end="19587" title="Saint Nicholas Society in the City of New York" label="Saint Nicholas Society in the City of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896167" start="19656" end="19675" title="Benjamin Bonneville" label="Benjamin Bonneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="19750" end="19765" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353873" start="20248" end="20262" title="Philip Freneau" label="Philip Freneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q847862" start="20672" end="20681" title="Sunnyside (Tarrytown, New York)" label="Sunnyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q689515" start="20859" end="20876" title="The Knickerbocker" label="The Knickerbocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275853" start="21136" end="21150" title="William Wilson (short story)" label="William Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197735" start="21167" end="21197" title="The Fall of the House of Usher" label="The Fall of the House of Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="21225" end="21251" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006820" start="21280" end="21294" title="William Clancy" label="William Clancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185346" start="21322" end="21330" title="Demerara" label="Demerara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819331" start="22201" end="22215" title="Newstead Abbey" label="Newstead Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="22813" end="22822" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q502218" start="23323" end="23349" title="National Academy of Design" label="National Academy of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="23564" end="23574" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="23676" end="23690" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q183085" start="24096" end="24113" title="Isabella II of Spain" label="Queen Isabella II"/>
<link wikidata="Q434529" start="24227" end="24236" title="Baldomero Espartero" label="Espartero"/>
<link wikidata="Q185551" start="24250" end="24257" title="Ramón María Narváez y Campos, 1st Duke of Valencia" label="Narváez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596824" start="25226" end="25251" title="Court of St. James&amp;#x27;s" label="Court of St. James&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="25292" end="25342" title="Oregon boundary dispute" label="Anglo-American disagreement over the Oregon border"/>
<link wikidata="Q11891" start="25372" end="25385" title="James K. Polk" label="James K. Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101819" start="25606" end="25626" title="George Palmer Putnam" label="George Palmer Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q236236" start="25895" end="25911" title="Oliver Goldsmith" label="Oliver Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="25940" end="25948" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="26178" end="26195" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q731635" start="26335" end="26347" title="Mount Vernon" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12306" start="26430" end="26446" title="Millard Fillmore" label="Millard Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="26451" end="26466" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="26510" end="26547" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811069" start="26687" end="26700" title="Astor Library" label="Astor Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="26722" end="26745" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589403" start="27050" end="27068" title="William C. Preston" label="William C. Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="27196" end="27221" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q152513" start="27776" end="27802" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow" label="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4219688" start="28845" end="28866" title="George William Curtis" label="George William Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345564" start="29826" end="29835" title="John Neal" label="John Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130308535" start="29871" end="29887" title="American Writers" label="American Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="30000" end="30027" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Makepeace Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326411" start="30632" end="30654" title="Richard Henry Stoddard" label="Richard Henry Stoddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863449" start="30817" end="30832" title="Barrett Wendell" label="Barrett Wendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700116" start="31166" end="31187" title="J. Franklin Jameson" label="John Franklin Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q334187" start="31189" end="31200" title="George Peabody Gooch" label="G. P. Gooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q982883" start="31781" end="31801" title="Samuel Eliot Morison" label="Samuel Eliot Morison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638666" start="31803" end="31817" title="Bernard DeVoto" label="Bernard DeVoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q451929" start="31819" end="31843" title="Douglas Southall Freeman" label="Douglas Southall Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16290845" start="31924" end="31930" title="Nicknames of New York City" label="Gotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="32202" end="32212" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="32222" end="32245" title="New York Knicks" label="New York Knickerbockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="32465" end="32477" title="St. Nicholas" label="St. Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272686" start="33253" end="33268" title="Myth of the flat Earth" label="flat-Earth myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182324" start="33355" end="33366" title="John Quidor" label="John Quidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141380" start="33607" end="33651" title="The Headless Horseman Pursuing Ichabod Crane" label="The Headless Horseman Pursuing Ichabod Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640064" start="33743" end="33752" title="Irvington, New York" label="Irvington"/>
<link wikidata="Q847862" start="33820" end="33829" title="Sunnyside (Tarrytown, New York)" label="Sunnyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371464" start="33919" end="33940" title="Hudson River Railroad" label="Hudson River Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422039" start="34121" end="34141" title="Knickerbocker, Texas" label="Knickerbocker, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51690" start="34264" end="34277" title="Irving, Texas" label="Irving, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086276" start="34327" end="34348" title="Irvington, New Jersey" label="Irvington, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="34480" end="34498" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="34530" end="34543" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154615" start="34569" end="34580" title="Irving Park, Chicago" label="Irving Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067774" start="34778" end="34795" title="Illinois Route 19" label="Illinois Route 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893247" start="34829" end="34850" title="Honesdale Star Park" label="Gibbons Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184934" start="34863" end="34886" title="Honesdale, Pennsylvania" label="Honesdale, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688501" start="34948" end="34957" title="Irvington Historic District (Indianapolis)" label="Irvington"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073633" start="35071" end="35096" title="Irving College, Tennessee" label="Irving College, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971999" start="35368" end="35413" title="Washington Irving Memorial Park and Arboretum" label="Washington Irving Memorial Park and Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q941310" start="35426" end="35441" title="Bixby, Oklahoma" label="Bixby, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128733" start="36758" end="36774" title="Claude Bowers" label="Bowers, Claude G"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091757" start="39408" end="39419" title="Once a Week (magazine)" label="Once a Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="39550" end="39573" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="39858" end="39877" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33727" wikidata="Q1936368" url="?curid=33727" title="World cup">
<text>A world cup is a global sporting competition in which the participant entities – usually international teams or individuals representing their countries – compete for the title of world champion. The event most associated with the name is the FIFA World Cup for association football, which dates back to 1930. Since then there have been a number of sporting events labeled &quot;world cup&quot;, such as the ICC Men&#x27;s Cricket World Cup, the Rugby World Cup, Rugby League World Cup, and the Hockey World Cup.

A world cup is generally, though not always, considered the premier competition in its sport, with the victor attaining the highest honour in that sport and being able to lay claim to the title of their sport&#x27;s best. However, in some sports the Olympic title carries at least as much prestige, while other sports such as diving and artistic gymnastics differentiate between their premier competitions, such as World Championships and Olympic Games, and their &quot;World Cup&quot;, which is organized as a smaller scale but high-level showcase event with small elite fields.

==Differences between world cup and world championships==
Some sports governing bodies prefer the title &quot;world championship&quot; or a related term; some even organize both a world cup and a world championship with different rules. Usually, such competitions take one of two forms: a short periodic competition or a year-long series of meetings, but more frequently many sports have both a World Cup (usually consisting of multiple events in a season), and a world championship (usually a single event). Some examples are in the following table.

A periodic world cup or world championship usually takes the form of a knockout tournament (possibly with an initial group stage). This is held over a number of days or weeks, with the entrants eventually being whittled down to two, and the tournament culminating in a world cup final. The winner(s) take the title of World Champion(s) and hold it until the next time the event is held (usually one, two, or four years later). This format is most common in team sports. In individual sports however, holding the title can vary in terms of duration, as it is dependent on the timing of the next scheduled individual contest between the defending champion and a challenger.

==Season-long format==
A contrasting concept, popular in individual sports, is a year-long competition with several meetings over its course. In this format, victory at an individual meeting earns a number of points, and, usually, a number of positions below also score points inversely related to their position. Contestants accumulate a number of points over the course of the year (often &quot;season&quot;) and their cumulative total after all meetings have been concluded determines the World Champion or, simply, World Cup winner. The winner is then considered the champion until the next World Cup.

==See also==
* List of world sports championships, including those styled as &quot;World Cups&quot;
* World Cup (disambiguation)
* World Series (disambiguation)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1936368" start="2" end="11" title="World cup" label="world cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="24" end="29" title="sport" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344963" start="180" end="194" title="world champion" label="world champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="243" end="257" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="262" end="282" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="408" end="440" title="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s Cricket World Cup" label="ICC Men&amp;#x27;s Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="446" end="461" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639293" start="463" end="485" title="Rugby League World Cup" label="Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128219" start="495" end="511" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Hockey World Cup" label="Hockey World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="764" end="771" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q647057" start="840" end="846" title="FINA Diving World Cup" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000688" start="851" end="870" title="Artistic Gymnastics World Cup" label="artistic gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485448" start="1158" end="1181" title="sports governing body" label="sports governing bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344963" start="1205" end="1223" title="world championship" label="world championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841386" start="1490" end="1499" title="World Cup (disambiguation)" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344963" start="1559" end="1577" title="world championship" label="world championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1718" end="1737" title="Tournament#Knockout tournaments" label="knockout tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q216048" start="2104" end="2115" title="team sport" label="team sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q27020041" start="2717" end="2723" title="Season (sports)" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247650" start="2942" end="2976" title="List of world sports championships" label="List of world sports championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841386" start="3029" end="3055" title="World Cup (disambiguation)" label="World Cup (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q838834" start="3058" end="3087" title="World Series (disambiguation)" label="World Series (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33728" wikidata="Q35094" url="?curid=33728" title="List of national capitals">
<text>This is a list of national capitals, including capitals of territories and dependencies, non-sovereign states including associated states and entities whose sovereignty is disputed.

The capitals included on this list are those associated with states or territories listed by the international standard ISO 3166-1, or that are included in the list of states with limited recognition.

Sovereign states and observer states within the United Nations are shown in bold text.

== List ==

The column headings may cover the first row when the letter links are used.


== See also ==
* List of countries with multiple capitals
* List of purpose-built national capitals

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35094" start="10" end="35" title="List of national capitals" label="list of national capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="47" end="55" title="capital city" label="capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q183366" start="59" end="70" title="Territory (administrative division)" label="territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q161243" start="75" end="87" title="dependent territory" label="dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138279" start="120" end="136" title="associated state" label="associated state"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="157" end="168" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078001" start="172" end="180" title="territorial dispute" label="disputed"/>
<link wikidata="Q25275" start="303" end="313" title="ISO 3166-1" label="ISO 3166-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="343" end="382" title="list of states with limited recognition" label="list of states with limited recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="433" end="447" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221972" start="580" end="620" title="List of countries with multiple capitals" label="List of countries with multiple capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373335" start="623" end="662" title="List of purpose-built national capitals" label="List of purpose-built national capitals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33767" wikidata="Q174757" url="?curid=33767" title="WordPerfect">
<text>WordPerfect (WP) is a word processing application, now owned by Alludo, with a long history on multiple personal computer platforms. At the height of its popularity in the 1980s and early 1990s, it was the market leader of word processors, displacing the prior market leader WordStar.

It was originally developed under contract at Brigham Young University for use on a Data General minicomputer in the late 1970s. The authors retained the rights to the program, forming the Utah-based Satellite Software International (SSI) in 1979 to sell it; the program first came to market under the name SSI*WP in March 1980. It then moved to the MS-DOS operating system in 1982, by which time the name WordPerfect was in use, and several greatly updated versions quickly followed. The application&#x27;s feature list was considerably more advanced than its main competition WordStar. Satellite Software International changed its name to WordPerfect Corporation in 1985.

WordPerfect gained praise for its &quot;look of sparseness&quot; and clean display. It rapidly displaced most other systems, especially after the 4.2 release in 1986, and it became the standard in the DOS market by version 5.1 in 1989. Its early popularity was based partly on its availability for a wide variety of computers and operating systems, and also partly because of extensive, no-cost support, with &quot;hold jockeys&quot; entertaining users while waiting on the phone.

Its dominant position ended after a failed release for Microsoft Windows; the company blamed the failure on Microsoft for not initially sharing its Windows Application Programming Interface (API) specifications, causing the application to be slow. After WordPerfect received the Windows APIs, there was a long delay in reprogramming before introducing an improved version. Microsoft Word had been introduced at the same time as their first attempt, and &quot;Word&quot; took over the market because it was faster, and was promoted by aggressive bundling deals that ultimately produced Microsoft Office. WordPerfect was no longer a popular standard by the mid-1990s. WordPerfect Corporation was sold to Novell in 1994, which then sold the product to Corel in 1996. Corel (since rebranded as Alludo) has made regular releases to the product since then, often in the form of office suites under the WordPerfect name that include the Quattro Pro spreadsheet, the Presentations slides formatter, and other applications.

The common filename extension of WordPerfect document files is codice_1. Older versions of WordPerfect also used file extensions codice_2, codice_3, codice_4, codice_5, codice_6, and originally, no extension at all.

==WordPerfect for DOS==

In 1979, Brigham Young University graduate student Bruce Bastian and computer science professor Alan Ashton created word processing software for a Data General minicomputer system owned by the city of Orem, Utah. Bastian and Ashton retained ownership of the software that they created. They then founded Satellite Software International, Inc., to market the program to other Data General users. WordPerfect 1.0 represented a significant departure from the previous Wang standard for word processing.

The first version of WordPerfect for the IBM PC was released the day after Thanksgiving in 1982. It was sold as WordPerfect 2.20, continuing the version numbering from the Data General program. Over the next several months, three more minor releases arrived, mainly to correct bugs.

The developers had hoped to program WordPerfect in C, but at this early stage, there were no C compilers available for the IBM PC, and they had to program it in x86 assembly language. All versions of WordPerfect up to 5.0 were written in x86, and C was only adopted with WP 5.1, when it became necessary to convert it to non-IBM compatible computers. The use of straight assembly language and a high amount of direct screen access gave WordPerfect a significant performance advantage over WordStar, which used strictly DOS API functions for all screen and keyboard access, and was often very slow. In addition, WordStar, originally created for the CP/M operating system, in which subdirectories are not supported, was extremely slow in switching to support sub-directories in MS-DOS.

In 1983, WordPerfect 3.0 was released for DOS. This was updated to support DOS 2.x, sub-directories, and hard disks. It also expanded printer support, where WordPerfect 2.x only supported Epson and Diablo printers that were hard-coded into the main program. Adding support for additional printers this way was impractical, so the company introduced printer drivers, a file containing a list of control codes for each model of printer. Version 3.0 had support for fifty different printers, and this was expanded to one hundred within a year. WordPerfect also supplied an editor utility that allowed users to make their own printer drivers, or to modify the included ones. &quot;Antic&quot; magazine observed, that &quot;WordPerfect is almost unusable without its manual of over 600 pages!&quot; A version of WordPerfect 3.0 became the Editor program of WordPerfect Office.

WordPerfect 4.0 was released in 1984. WordPerfect 4.2, released in 1986, introduced automatic paragraph numbering, which was important to law offices, and automatic numbering and placement of footnotes and endnotes that were important both to law offices and academics. It became the first program to overtake the original market leader WordStar in a major application category on the DOS platform.

By 1987, Compute! magazine described WordPerfect as &quot;a standard in the MS-DOS world&quot; and &quot;a powerhouse program that includes almost everything&quot;. In November 1989, WordPerfect Corporation released the program&#x27;s most successful version, WordPerfect 5.1 for DOS, which was the first version to include pull-down menus to supplement the traditional function key combinations, support for tables, a spreadsheet-like feature, and full support for typesetting options, such as italic, redline, and strike-through. This version also included &quot;print preview&quot;, a graphical representation of the final printed output that became the foundation for WordPerfect 6.0&#x27;s graphic screen editing. WordPerfect 5.1+ for DOS was introduced to allow older DOS-based PCs to utilize the new WordPerfect 6 file format. This version could read and write WordPerfect 6 files, included several third-party screen and printing applications (previously sold separately), and provided several minor improvements.

WordPerfect Corporation acquired Reference Software International, makers of Grammatik, a highly popular grammar checker for DOS, in January 1993 for $19 million. RSI&#x27;s remaining employees were absorbed into WordPerfect in Orem, and the functionality of Grammatik and Reference Set (a spell checker that RSI also sold) were eventually integrated into WordPerfect. WordPerfect continued selling Grammatik as a standalone product for several years.

WordPerfect 6.0 for DOS, released in 1993, could switch between its traditional text-based mode and a graphical mode that showed the document as it would print out, known as WYSIWYG (what you see is
what you get). WordPerfect 5 had introduced a graphic view mode that displayed the layout of the document on a page using generic fonts, but the view mode was uneditable. The editing still needed to be done in text mode.

By the time WordPerfect 6.0 was released, the company had grown &quot;to command more than 60 percent of the word processing software market.&quot;

===Key characteristics===

The distinguishing features of WordPerfect include:
* extensive use of key combinations, especially on the MS-DOS platform, enabling quick access to features, once the meaning of the key combinations (like Ctrl–Shift–F6) had been memorized;
* its &quot;streaming code&quot; file format;
* its Reveal Codes feature; and
* its numbering of lines as the legal profession requires
* its macro/scripting capability, now provided through PerfectScript.

The ease of use of tools, like Mail Merge (combine form documents with data from any data source), &quot;Print as booklet&quot;, and tables (with spreadsheet capabilities and the possibility to generate graphs) are also notable.

The WordPerfect document format allows continuous extending of functionality without jeopardizing backward and forward compatibility. Despite the fact that the newer version is extremely rich in functionality, WordPerfect X5 documents are fully compatible with WordPerfect 6.0a documents in both directions. The older program simply ignores the &quot;unknown&quot; codes, while rendering the known features of the document. WordPerfect users were never forced to upgrade for compatibility reasons for more than two decades.

====Streaming code architecture====
A key to their design is its streaming code architecture that parallels the formatting features of HTML and Cascading Style Sheets. Documents are created much the same way that raw HTML pages are written, with text interspersed by tags (called &quot;codes&quot;) that trigger treatment of data until a corresponding closing tag is encountered, at which point the settings active to the point of the opening tag resume control. As with HTML, tags can be nested. Some data structures are treated as objects within the stream as with HTML&#x27;s treatment of graphic images, e.g., footnotes and styles, but the bulk of a WordPerfect document&#x27;s data and formatting codes appear as a single continuous stream. A difference between HTML tags and WordPerfect codes is that HTML codes can all be expressed as a string of plain text characters delimited by greater-than and less-than characters, e.g. codice_7, whereas WordPerfect formatting codes consist of hexadecimal values.

====Styles and style libraries====

The addition of styles and style libraries in WP 5.0 provided greatly increased power and flexibility in formatting documents, while maintaining the streaming-code architecture of earlier versions. Styles are a preset arrangement of settings having to do with things like fonts, spacings, tab stops, margins and other items having to do with text layout. Styles can be created by the user to shortcut the setup time when starting a new document, and they can be saved in the program&#x27;s style library. Prior to that, its only use of styles was the Opening Style, which contained the default settings for a document.

After the purchase of the desktop publishing program Ventura, Corel enhanced the WordPerfect styles editor and styles behavior with the majority of Ventura&#x27;s capabilities. This improved the usability and performance of graphic elements like text boxes, document styles, footer and header styles.

Since WordPerfect has been enriched with properties from the CorelDraw Graphics suite, graphic styles are editable. The Graphics Styles editor enables customizing the appearance of boxes, borders, lines and fills and store the customized design for reuse. The possibilities include patterns and color gradients for fills; corner, endpoint, pen-type and thickness for lines. Box styles can be used as container style, including a border, lines, fill, text and caption; each with its separate style. A text box style shows that WordPerfect cascades its styles.

Around the same time, Corel included WordPerfect, with its full functionality, in CorelDraw Graphics Suite as the text editor.

====Reveal codes====

Present since the earliest versions of WordPerfect, the Reveal Codes feature distinguishes it from other word processors; Microsoft Word&#x27;s equivalent is much less powerful. It displays and allows editing the codes, reduces retyping, and enables easy formatting changes. It is a second editing screen that can be toggled open and closed, and sized as desired.

The codes for formatting and locating text are displayed, interspersed with tags and the occasional objects, with the tags and objects represented by named tokens. This provides a more detailed view to troubleshoot problems than with styles-based word processors, and object tokens can be clicked with a pointing device to directly open the configuration editor for the particular object type, e.g. clicking on a style token brings up the style editor with the particular style type displayed. WordPerfect had this feature already in its DOS incarnations.

====Macro languages====
WordPerfect for DOS stood out for its macros, in which sequences of keystrokes, including function codes, were recorded as the user typed them. These macros could then be assigned to any key desired. This enabled any sequence of keystrokes to be recorded, saved, and recalled. Macros could examine system data, make decisions, be chained together, and operate recursively until a defined &quot;stop&quot; condition occurred. This capability provided a powerful way to rearrange data and formatting codes within a document where the same sequence of actions needed to be performed repetitively, e.g., for tabular data. But since keystrokes were recorded, changes in the function of certain keys as the program evolved would mean that macros from one DOS version of WordPerfect would not necessarily run correctly on another version. Editing of macros was difficult until the introduction of a macro editor in Shell, in which a separate file for each WordPerfect product with macros enabled the screen display of the function codes used in the macros for that product.

WordPerfect DOS macros, which assumed a text-based screen, with fixed locations on the screen, could not, or could not easily, be implemented with the Windows WYSIWYG screen and mouse. For example, &quot;go down four lines&quot; has a clear meaning on a DOS screen, but no definite meaning with a Windows screen. WordPerfect lacked a way to meaningfully record mouse movements.

A new and even more powerful interpreted token-based macro recording and scripting language came with both DOS and Windows 6.0 versions, and that became the basis of the language named PerfectScript in later versions. PerfectScript has remained the mainstay scripting language for WordPerfect users ever since. It dealt with functions rather than with keystrokes. There was no way to import DOS macros, and users who had created extensive macro libraries were forced to continue using WordPerfect 5.1, or to rewrite all the macros from scratch using the new programming language.

An important property of WordPerfect macros is that they are not embedded in a document. As a result, WordPerfect is not prone to macro viruses or malware, unlike MS Word. Despite the term &quot;macro&quot;, the language has hundreds of commands and functions and in fact creates full-fledged programs resident on and executed on the user&#x27;s computer. In WPDOS 6 the source code is generated using the same interface used to edit documents. A WordPerfect macro can create or modify a document or perform tasks like displaying results of a calculation such as taking a date input, adding a specific number of days and displaying the new date in a dialog box. Documents created or edited by a WordPerfect macro are no different from those produced by manual input; the macros simply improve efficiency or automate repetitive tasks and also enabled creating content-rich document types, which would hardly be feasible manually.

The PerfectScript macro language shows especial versatility in its ability to deploy every function that exists in the entire office suite, no matter whether that function was designed for WordPerfect, Quattro Pro or Presentations. The macro development wizard presents and explains all of these functions. The number of functions available through PerfectScript is unparalleled in the office market.

On top of the functions available in the main components of the office suite, PerfectScript also provides the user with tools to build dialogs and forms. Widgets like buttons, input fields, drop-down lists and labels are easily combined to build user-friendly interfaces for custom office applications.
An example: a Dutch housing company (VZOS, Den Haag, several thousands of apartments) had its mutation administration build with WordPerfect.

Beginning with WordPerfect Office 10, the suite also included the Microsoft Office Visual Basic macro language as an alternative, meant to improve compatibility of the suite with Microsoft Office documents.

Macros may be used to create data-entry programs which enter information directly into WordPerfect documents, saving the time and effort required to retype it.

===Support for European languages===

WordPerfect had support for European languages other than English.
The Language Resource File (WP.LRS) specified language formatting conventions.

In addition, WordPerfect Corporation did some aggressive marketing in Europe. In January 1993 they signed a three-year, $16 million deal to sponsor the WordPerfect cycling team in international competitions. The team was directed by the Dutchman Jan Raas. The move was intended to raise WordPerfect&#x27;s profile throughout Europe and especially in the Alpine countries of France, Switzerland, and Italy, and it was also thought that young bicycling enthusiasts fit the WordPerfect user profile in the United States. In the third year of the deal (1995), Novell took over the sponsorship, due to having acquired WordPerfect.

===Function keys===
Like its 1970s predecessor Emacs and mid-1980s competitor MultiMate, WordPerfect used almost every possible combination of function keys with Ctrl, Alt, and Shift modifiers, and the Ctrl-Alt, Shift-Alt, and Shift-Ctrl double modifiers, unlike early versions of WordStar, which used only Ctrl.

WordPerfect used F3 instead of F1 for &quot;Help&quot;, F1 instead of Esc for &quot;Cancel&quot;, and Esc for &quot;Repeat&quot; (though a configuration option in later versions allowed these functions to be rotated to locations that later became more standard).

The extensive number of key combinations are now one of WP&#x27;s most popular features among its regular &quot;power users&quot; such as legal secretaries, paralegals and attorneys.

===Printer drivers===
WordPerfect for DOS shipped with an impressive array of printer drivers—a feature that played an important role in its adoption—and also shipped with a printer driver editor called PTR, which features a flexible macro language and allows technically inclined users to customize and create printer drivers.

An interesting feature of version 5.0 for DOS was its Type-Through feature. It allowed a user with certain compatible printers to use WordPerfect as a conventional typewriter. This functionality was removed in version 5.1 for DOS.

===WordPerfect Library/Office utilities===
WordPerfect Corporation produced a variety of ancillary and spin-off products. WordPerfect Library, introduced in 1986 and later renamed WordPerfect Office (not to be confused with Corel&#x27;s Windows office suite of the same name), was a package of DOS network and stand-alone utility software for use with WordPerfect. The package included a DOS menu shell and file manager which could edit binary files as well as WordPerfect or Shell macros, calendar, and a general-purpose flat file database program that could be used as the data file for a merge in WordPerfect and as a contact manager.

After Novell acquired WordPerfect Corporation, it incorporated many of these utilities into Novell GroupWise.

====LetterPerfect====
In 1990, WordPerfect Corporation also offered LetterPerfect, which was a reduced-functionality version of WP-DOS 5.1 intended for use on less-capable hardware such as the laptops of the day, and as an entry-level product for students and home users; the name (but not the code) was purchased from a small Missouri company that had produced one of the first word processors for the Atari 8-bit computers. LP did not support tables, labels, sorting, equation editing or styles. It sold for about US$100 but did not catch on and was soon discontinued.

====DataPerfect====
Another program distributed through WordPerfect Corporation (and later through Novell) was DataPerfect for DOS, a fast and capable hierarchical database management system (DBMS) requiring as little as 300 KB of free DOS memory to run. It was written by Lew Bastian. In December 1995, Novell released DataPerfect as copyrighted freeware and allowed the original author to continue to update the program. Updates were developed until at least 2008.

DataPerfect supports up to 99 data files (&quot;panels&quot;) with each holding up to 16 million records of up to 125 fields and an unlimited number of variable-length memo fields which can store up to 64,000 characters each. Networked, DataPerfect supports up to simultaneous users.

====PlanPerfect====
Another program distributed through WordPerfect Corporation was PlanPerfect, a spreadsheet application. The first version with that name was reviewed in &quot;InfoWorld&quot; magazine in September 1987.

==WordPerfect for Windows==

===History===
WordPerfect was late in coming to market with a Windows version. WordPerfect 5.1 for Windows, introduced in 1991, had to be installed from DOS and was largely unpopular due to serious stability issues. The first mature version, WordPerfect 5.2 for Windows, was released in November 1992 and WordPerfect 6.0 for Windows was released in 1993. By the time WordPerfect 5.2 for Windows was introduced, Microsoft Word for Windows version 2 had been on the market for over a year and had received its third interim release, v2.0c.

WordPerfect&#x27;s function-key-centered user interface did not adapt well to the new paradigm of a mouse and pull-down menus, especially with many of WordPerfect&#x27;s standard key combinations overridden by incompatible keyboard shortcuts that Windows itself used; for example, Alt-F4 became &quot;Exit Program&quot;, as opposed to WordPerfect&#x27;s &quot;Block Text&quot;. The DOS version&#x27;s impressive arsenal of finely tuned printer drivers was also rendered obsolete by Windows&#x27; use of its own printer device drivers.

===WordPerfect Office Suite===

WordPerfect became part of an office suite when the company entered into a co-licensing agreement with Borland Software Corporation in 1993. The offerings were marketed as Borland Office, containing Windows versions of WordPerfect, Quattro Pro, Borland Paradox, and a LAN-based groupware package called WordPerfect Office. Originally based on the WordPerfect Library for DOS, the Novell / WordPerfect Office suite was integrated by &quot;middleware&quot;. The most important middleware suite, still active in current versions of WordPerfect Office, is called PerfectFit (developed by WordPerfect). The other &quot;middleware&quot; (developed by Novell) was called AppWare.

===Novell buys WordPerfect Company===

The WordPerfect product line was sold twice, first to Novell in June 1994, for $1.4 billion. Novell sold it (at a big loss) to Corel in January 1996. However, Novell kept the WordPerfect Office technology, incorporating it into its GroupWise messaging and collaboration product.

===Microsoft vs Novell===

Compounding WordPerfect&#x27;s troubles were issues associated with the release of the first 32-bit version, WordPerfect 7, intended for use on Windows 95. In the lawsuit &#x27;Novell v. Microsoft&#x27;, Novell argued that these problems were due to anti-competitive acts by Microsoft.

While WordPerfect 7 contained notable improvements over the 16-bit WordPerfect for Windows 3.1, it was released in May 1996, nine months after the introduction of Windows 95 and Microsoft Office 95 (including Word 95). The initial release suffered from notable stability problems. WordPerfect 7 also did not have a Microsoft &quot;Designed for Windows 95&quot; logo. This was important to some Windows 95 software purchasers as Microsoft set standards for application design, behavior, and interaction with the operating system. To make matters worse, the original release of WordPerfect 7 was incompatible with Windows NT, hindering its adoption in many professional environments. The &quot;NT Enabled&quot; version of WordPerfect 7, which Corel considered to be Service Pack 2, was not available until Q1-1997, over six months after the introduction of Windows NT 4.0, a year and a half after the introduction of Office 95 (which supported Windows NT out of the box), and shortly after the introduction of Office 97.

===Market share===
While WordPerfect dominated the DOS market, Microsoft shifted its attention toward a Windows version of Word; after Windows 3.0 was introduced, Word&#x27;s market share began to grow at an extraordinary rate. A Windows version of WordPerfect was not introduced until nearly two years after Windows 3.0, and was met with poor reviews. Word also benefited from being included in an integrated office suite package much sooner than WordPerfect. While WordPerfect had more than 50% of the worldwide word-processing market in 1995, by 2000 Word had up to 95%; it was so dominant that WordPerfect executives admitted that their software needed to be compatible with Word documents to survive.

===Application integration and middleware===
While Microsoft offered something that looked like a fully integrated office suite in Microsoft Office, a common complaint about early Windows versions of WordPerfect Office was that it looked like a collection of separate applications from different vendors cobbled together, with inconsistent user interfaces from one application to another.

In fact, enabling applications from various software developers to work together on every platform was part of the Novell strategy. Novell had acquired WordPerfect for Windows from WordPerfect Corporation, Paradox from Borland, and various peripheral utilities from other companies and had started to evangelize the Novell &quot;middleware&quot; – Appware – as a means for others to run their programs on every operating system. This &quot;middleware&quot; strategy would make software vendors and customers independent from operating system vendors, like Microsoft, thus posing a real threat.

Contrary to Microsoft with its MS Office however, starting with WordPerfect Office 9, Corel successfully integrated the components of WordPerfect Office almost seamlessly. PerfectScript and the middleware PerfectFit played the major role here. Elements of applications like CorelDraw and Ventura desktop publishing were also integrated and enriched the document format.

===Faithful customers===

Among the remaining avid users of WordPerfect were many law firms and government offices, which favored WordPerfect features such as macros, reveal codes, and the ability to access a large range of formatting options such as left-right block indent directly with key combinations rather than having to click through several layers of submenus as Microsoft Word often requires. Fast typists appreciated the ability to keep their hands on the keyboard, rather than reaching for the mouse as often as would be required if they were using Microsoft Word. WordPerfect users may also define any key or key combination to do what they want, such as typing phrases they often use or executing macros. The user interface stayed almost identical from WPWin 6 through at least WP X5 (2010) and file formats did not change, as incompatible new formats would require keeping both obsolete software versions and obsolete hardware around just to access old documents.

Corel catered to these markets, with, for example, a major sale to the United States Department of Justice in 2005. A related factor is that WordPerfect Corporation was particularly responsive to feature requests from the legal profession, incorporating many features particularly useful to that niche market; those features have been continued in subsequent versions, usually directly accessible with key combinations. WordPerfect still had a level of presence among such users into the 2020s. Similarly, as of 2024, the French judiciary continues to use WordPerfect, and continues to offer training for its use. 

===&quot;Novell v. Microsoft&quot; antitrust lawsuit===
In November 2004, Novell filed an antitrust lawsuit against Microsoft for alleged anti-competitive behavior (such as tying Word to sales of Windows and withdrawal of support for APIs) that Novell claims led to loss of WordPerfect market share. That lawsuit, after several delays, was dismissed in July 2012. Novell filed an appeal from the judgment in November 2012, but the Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed. Novell sought review in the US Supreme Court, but in 2014 that court declined to hear the case, ending the legal action almost a decade after it had begun.

===Corel buys WordPerfect from Novell===
Novell stated in November 1995 that it was putting its personal productivity product line up for sale. In January 1996 it announced that the sale of these products, primarily WordPerfect and Quattro Pro, would be made to Corel for $186 million, a large loss from what it had originally paid to acquire WordPerfect. Novell did hold onto a few pieces that it had acquired from WordPerfect, most importantly the GroupWise collaboration product. 

The sale to Corel, which was headquartered in Ottawa, Ontario, was completed in March 1996. The head of Corel, Michael Cowpland, initially expressed optimism that Corel WordPerfect could compete effectively against Microsoft Word among business users, somewhat akin to a Coke versus Pepsi battle. The optimism was wrong; many new computers came loaded with Word along with Windows. Corel lost over $230 million for 1997. 

In 1998, the WordPerfect development offices in Orem were closed, affecting over 500 employees. The software engineering for WordPerfect became centred in Corel&#x27;s home city of Ottawa.

===Corel WordPerfect===

Since its acquisition by Corel in 1996, WordPerfect for Windows was officially been known as Corel WordPerfect. 

On January 17, 2006, Corel announced WordPerfect X3. Corel is an original member of the OASIS Technical Committee on the OpenDocument Format, and Paul Langille, a senior Corel developer, is one of the original four authors of the OpenDocument specification.

In January 2006, subscribers to Corel&#x27;s electronic newsletter were informed that WordPerfect 13 was scheduled for release later in 2006. The subsequent release of X3 (identified as &quot;13&quot; internally and in registry entries) has been met with generally positive reviews, due to new features including a unique PDF import capability, metadata removal tools, integrated search and online resources and other features.

Version X3 was described by CNET in January 2006 as a &quot;winner&quot;, &quot;a feature-packed productivity suite that&#x27;s just as easy to use — and in many ways more innovative than — industry-goliath Microsoft Office 2003.&quot; CNET went on to describe X3 as &quot;a solid upgrade for long-time users&quot;, but that &quot;Die-hard Microsoft fans may want to wait to see what Redmond has up its sleeve with the radical changes expected within the upcoming Microsoft Office 12.&quot;

Although the released version of X3 at the time did not support the OOXML or OpenDocument formats, a beta was released that supported both.

Reports surfaced late in January 2006 that Apple&#x27;s iWork had leapfrogged WordPerfect Office as the leading alternative to Microsoft Office. This claim was soon debunked after industry analyst Joe Wilcox described JupiterResearch usage surveys that showed WordPerfect as the No. 2 office suite behind Microsoft Office in the consumer, small and medium businesses, and enterprise markets with a roughly 15 percent share in each market.

In April 2008, Corel released its WordPerfect Office X4 office suite containing the new X4 version of WordPerfect which includes support for PDF editing, OpenDocument and Office Open XML. However, X4 does not include support for editing PDF&#x27;s containing images in JPEG2000 format, a format used by Adobe Acrobat 9.

In March 2010, Corel released its WordPerfect Office X5 office suite, which contains the new X5 version of WordPerfect. This version includes improved support for PDF, Microsoft Office 2007, OpenDocument, and Office Open XML. The new release includes integration with Microsoft SharePoint and other web services geared towards government and business users.

In April 2012, Corel released its WordPerfect Office X6 office suite, which contains the new X6 version of WordPerfect. The new release adds multi-document/monitor support, new macros, Windows 8 preview support, and an eBook publisher.

In May 2021, Corel released its WordPerfect Office 2021 office suite, which superseded versions x7 through x9 and version 2020. New features include creating fillable PDFs, built in Bates numbering (since X7), saving to opendocument and ePub formats (since v2020), and saving and opening Microsoft Office openXML formats (which did not work in x9). In a review, &quot;PC Magazine&quot; said that &quot;WordPerfect Office is the one and only Windows office application suite that isn&#x27;t a workalike for Microsoft Office. ... WordPerfect [is] the only office app that gives you total control over every detail of the documents you produce.&quot; The review noted that WordPerfect still had a significant presence in the legal domain, &quot;where it&#x27;s the only app that offers both advanced legal-formatting features and a document management system that doesn&#x27;t rely on Microsoft&#x27;s networking software.&quot; However, the magazine noted that the WordPerfect Office 2021 user interface &quot;has an old-school look and feel that won&#x27;t attract many new users&quot;, that it does not support real-time collaboration workflows, and that the product only runs on Windows and not Macintosh or mobile platforms. 

== WordPerfect Suite and WordPerfect Office ==

WordPerfect Suite and WordPerfect Office is an office suite developed by Corel Corporation. It originates from Borland Software Corporation&#x27;s Borland Office, released in 1993 to compete against Microsoft Office and AppleWorks. Borland&#x27;s suite bundled three key applications: WordPerfect, Quattro Pro and Paradox. Borland then sold the suite to Novell in 1994, which led to the addition of Novell Presentations and the now-defunct InfoCentral. It was then sold to Corel in 1996.
===Corel WordPerfect Suite 7 and Office 7 Professional===
Corel WordPerfect Suite 7 featured version 7 of its core applications: WordPerfect, Quattro Pro and Presentations while Office 7 Professional included Paradox as well. Both versions of the suite also bundled CorelFLOW 3, Sidekick, Dashboard and Envoy 7. The suite for Windows was released in 1996 to retail.

===Corel WordPerfect Office 2000===

Corel WordPerfect Office 2000 featured version 9 of its core applications: WordPerfect, Quattro Pro, Presentations, Paradox and CorelCentral. All versions of the suite also bundle Trellix 2 and Microsoft Visual Basic for Applications. The suite for Windows was released on November 16, 1998, as a preview and on May 25, 1999, to retail. The Home and Student edition, as well as the Family Pack, omit the Presentations and Paradox software. Small Business edition was released on January 31, 2000, and omits Paradox.

Several variants of this suite exist. One of these is the Family Pack, sold in versions 2 and 3 at a reduced price. This version cannot be used in a commercial setting. Three variants of the suite were created to integrate voice recognition. The first, the Voice Powered Edition, includes Dragon Naturally Speaking 3 and was released in North America. The second, available at some international locations, included Philips newest generation of FreeSpeech. The third is WordPerfect Law Office 2000, released on December 20, 1999. It features NaturallySpeaking Standard 4 and bundles several programs designed for lawyers. Another notable variant is WordPerfect Office 2000 for Linux, released on March 10, 2000. Although it supports various Linux distributions, it was designed with Corel Linux in mind as a way to upgrade such systems, which bundled a free version of the WordPerfect word processor.

===Latest version===

The latest version is WordPerfect Office 2021, released May 2021. The suite is offered in three editions: Home and Student, Standard, and Professional, with only the last of these including Paradox.

===Quattro Pro===

Quattro Pro is a spreadsheet program that originally competed against the dominant Lotus 1-2-3 and now competes against LibreOffice Calc, Microsoft Excel, Google Sheets and Apple&#x27;s Numbers. Corel&#x27;s application is available only for the Windows platform.

===Presentations===

Presentations is a presentation program by Corel. Its main competitors include LibreOffice Impress, Microsoft PowerPoint, Google Slides, and Apple&#x27;s Keynote.

===WordPerfect Lightning===

WordPerfect Lightning is a note-taking application. Its main competitors are Evernote, Microsoft OneNote, Google Keep and Apple&#x27;s Notes.

===Other desktop applications===
Paradox is a relational database manager for Windows. Its main competitors are LibreOffice Base and Microsoft Access.

==&quot;Classic Mode&quot;==
Corel added &quot;Classic Mode&quot; in WordPerfect 11. Although this displays the &quot;classic&quot; cyan Courier text on medium blue background, it is not a true emulation of the DOS version. It does select the WPDOS 5.1 Keyboard. (The 6.1 Keyboard is available too.) The WPWin macro system, which remains unchanged, is quite different from that of WPDOS, and conversion is not easy. The menu remains the WPWin menu, and the available Toolbars are WPWin toolbars.

==Version history==
===Summary===
WordPerfect 9 and newer are bundled with the WordPerfect Office Suite and cannot be purchased separately.

In addition, versions of WordPerfect have also been available for Apricot, Tandy 2000, TI Professional, Victor 9000, and Zenith Z-100 systems.

Known versions for IBM System/370 include 4.2, released 1988.

Known versions for the DEC Rainbow 100 include version (?), released November 1983.

===Unix===

At one time or another, WordPerfect was available on around 30 flavors of Unix, including AT&amp;T, NCR, SCO Xenix, SCO OpenServer, UnixWare, Microport Unix, DEC Ultrix, Pyramid Tech Unix, Tru64, IBM AIX, Motorola System V/88, and HP-UX, SGI IRIX and Solaris.

In July 2022, Tavis Ormandy ported &quot;WordPerfect for Unix&quot; 7, to modern Linux distributions, as a fully functional deb package. While the program does not print to CUPS printers, it can print to a file.

===Macintosh===
Development of WordPerfect for Macintosh did not run parallel to versions for other operating systems, and used version numbers unconnected to contemporary releases for DOS and Windows. Version 2 was a total rewrite, adhering more closely to Apple&#x27;s UI guidelines. Version 3 took this further, making extensive use of the technologies Apple introduced in Systems 7.0–7.5, while remaining fast and capable of running well on older machines. Corel released version 3.5 in 1996, followed by the improved version 3.5e (for enhanced) in 1997. It was never updated beyond that, and the product was eventually discontinued. , Corel has reiterated that the company has no plans to further develop WordPerfect for Macintosh (such as creating a native Mac OS X version).

For several years, Corel allowed Mac users to download version 3.5e from their website free of charge, and some Mac users still use this version. The download is still available at the Mac IO group (successor to the Yahoo group) along with the necessary OS 8/9/Classic Updater that slows scroll speed and restores functionality to the Style and Window menus. Like other Mac OS applications of its age, it requires the Classic environment on PowerPC Macs. While Intel Macs do not support Classic, emulators such as SheepShaver, Basilisk II and vMac allow users to run WordPerfect on any Macintosh computer (or indeed any Linux computer). Users wishing to use a current release of WordPerfect can run the Windows version through Boot Camp or virtualization software, and through Darwine or CrossOver Mac with mixed results.

===Atari ST===
Like the Macintosh version, development of WordPerfect for the Atari ST did not run parallel to the DOS versions. However the Atari ST version number aligned with contemporary DOS releases. In 1987, WordPerfect Corp. released version 4.1. This was the only Atari version ever released, but numerous patches and updates ensured that the Atari version of WordPerfect ran on all Atari ST, Atari STe, TT, and Falcon computers.

WordPerfect ST differs from the DOS version most notably in speed and number of windows a user can open. On the Atari ST version, a user can open up to four windows (compared to DOS&#x27; two) and the application runs three to five times faster than the DOS version (depending on which update or patch is installed). This was possible because WordPerfect for the Atari ST was designed from the ground up and was optimized for the Motorola 68000 processor as well as Atari&#x27;s GEM (Graphics Environment Manager) operating system.

WordPerfect for the Atari ST retailed at US$395 with registered Atari user groups being offered the program at $155 along with a student version for US$99. The price of WordPerfect was significantly higher than most of the other Atari word processors available at the time. Atari Corporation published a version of Microsoft Write (the Atari version of Microsoft Word 1.05 for the Macintosh) for US$129.95 (almost 75% off the suggested retail price of WordPerfect), which did not help WordPerfect&#x27;s campaign to establish itself as the standard word processor on the Atari platform.

Like other versions, WordPerfect for the ST was not copy-protected. In 1988 WordPerfect threatened to abandon the Atari market after copies of the word processor were found on several pirate bulletin board systems. However, support from the Atari community convinced WordPerfect to reconsider and support for the Atari ST continued, but only a single developer was assigned to the project to fix bugs.

Covering the subject of WordPerfect&#x27;s commitment to the Atari ST market, ST-Log&#x27;s Ian Chadwick writes, &quot;WordPerfect Corp. squashed rumours that they would pull out of the Atari market, due to rampant piracy. WP was found on at least three pirate BBSs, but they are still making the effort to stay with us. That shows a serious commitment on their part. If you want them to remain part of this market, then show them the same amount of respect and don&#x27;t make or accept any pirate copies of their product.&quot;

Worldwide sales numbers of WordPerfect for Atari ST would eventually help relieve the concerns of the piracy situation with Atari ST User reporting, &quot;Talk here in the USA points to the fact that Word Perfect Corp. will continue to support the ST derivative of its WP package, currently at version 4.1 (functionally equivalent to MS-DOS version 4.2). There is even talk of further changes and an upgrade adding a few new features to the package. It seems that Word Perfect&#x27;s ST sales have been good enough, particularly in Europe, to warrant a continued commitment to the product.

WordPerfect would go on to fully support version 4.1 for the Atari ST with a number of bug fixes, patches, system compatibility updates with all Atari ST, STe, TT, and Falcon computers, including their renowned excellent customer support from 1987 - 1991.&quot;

A WordPerfect 5.1 version for the Atari ST was planned and in development but was later cancelled.

===Amiga===
In 1987, WordPerfect was ported to the Amiga 1000 and was upgraded through version 4.1 on the Amiga platform despite rumors of its discontinuation. The company&#x27;s efforts were not well supported by Amiga users and it did not sell well. Though it could be started from the Workbench or CLI, WordPerfect remained a fundamentally text-oriented program and retained its DOS command structure. Satellite Software received criticism for releasing a non-graphical word processor on a graphically oriented system.

In 1989, WordPerfect Corporation stopped all Amiga development, including work on a version of PlanPerfect, stating that it had lost $800,000 on the computer and could not afford to add Amiga-specific features. After customers stated that they would be satisfied with a DOS-like word processor the company resumed development of only the Amiga version of WordPerfect, but discontinued it in 1992.

===Linux===
In 1995, WordPerfect 6.0 was made available for Linux as part of Caldera&#x27;s internet office package. In late 1997, a newer version was made available for download, but had to be purchased to be activated.

In 1998 Corel released WordPerfect 8.0 for Linux. The full version was sold as a package. A cut-down version was made available for downloading.

Hoping to establish themselves in the nascent commercial Linux market, Corel also developed their own distribution of Linux. This included WordPerfect 8.1 for Linux. Although the Linux distribution was fairly well-received, the response to WordPerfect for Linux varied. Some Linux promoters appreciated the availability of a well-known, mainstream application for the operating system.

Once OpenOffice.org appeared in 1999, there was little demand for a proprietary, closed-source project like WordPerfect. On top of this, WordPerfect 9.0, which was released as part of the WordPerfect Office 2000 for Linux package, was not a native Linux application like WP 6–8, but derived from the Windows version using Corel&#x27;s own version of the Wine compatibility library, and hence had performance problems.

WordPerfect failed to gain a large user base, and as part of Corel&#x27;s change of strategic direction following a (non-voting) investment by Microsoft, WordPerfect for Linux was discontinued and their Linux distribution was sold to Xandros. In April 2004, Corel re-released WordPerfect 8.1 (the last Linux-native version) with some updates, as a &quot;proof of concept&quot; and to test the Linux market. , WordPerfect for Linux is not available for purchase.

As of 2023, WordPerfect for Linux (also known as xwp) can still be run on modern distros.

Linux applications may use the codice_8 library to convert WordPerfect documents.

===iOS===
A WordPerfect X7 app for iOS was released in 2014, but it was merely remote desktop software that connected to a Corel-hosted WordPerfect for Windows session. It was billed as a &quot;Limited Free Trial&quot; and was eventually discontinued by Corel.

==Unicode and Asian language editing==
WordPerfect lacks support for Unicode, which limits its usefulness in many markets outside North America and Western Europe. Despite pleas from long-time users, this feature has not yet been implemented.

For users in WordPerfect&#x27;s traditional markets, the inability to deal with complex character sets, such as Asian language scripts, can cause difficulty when working on documents containing those characters. However, later versions have provided better compliance with interface conventions, file compatibility, and even Word interface emulation.

However, WordPerfect X4 was reported to be able to import IPA character set, and copy and paste works as long as the pastes into WP are done via Paste Special &gt; Unicode command. Publishing to PDF from WordPerfect embeds the WP-phonetic font together with the Unicode-compatible font.

==Reception==

&quot;PC Magazine&quot; stated in March 1983 that &quot;&quot;WordPerfect&quot; is very impressive, a more than full-featured program with a few truly state-of-the-art goodies tucked into the package&quot;. It cited WordPerfect&#x27;s inclusion of mail merge, footnotes, and macros—all missing from WordStar—as well as &quot;virtually every ... feature that one ought to expect from a higher-priced program&quot; including find-and-replace, bold and underline display, and automatic paragraph reflow. &quot;Byte&quot; in December 1984 noted the application&#x27;s built-in print buffer, ability to show bold, underline, and centered text, and extensive math capabilities. It criticized the quality of the spell checker and difficult tab settings, but concluded that &quot;its powerful capabilities far outweigh the problems mentioned&quot;. &quot;Compute!&quot; in August 1985 called &quot;WordPerfect&quot; &quot;excellent&quot;. It especially praised the clean, uncluttered screen and fast spell checker. Noting the spell checker&#x27;s size and the company&#x27;s &quot;excellent track record of supporting its software&quot;, &quot;Antic&quot; in May 1988 concluded that &quot;If you want to own the most power-packed word processor available for the ST today, and can live with the relative complexity needed for harnessing this power, WordPerfect is what you&#x27;ve been waiting for.&quot;

==See also==
* Ability Office – repackaged and sold as Corel Home Office and Corel Office Suite by Corel, but using Ability and Microsoft&#x27;s file formats instead of WordPerfect Office file formats
* Comparison of word processors
* List of word processors
* Office Open XML software
* OpenDocument software
* List of office suites
* Comparison of office suites

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Corel WordPerfect Office Press kit: 12 Small Business Edition, X3, X4, X5, X6
* Corel WordPerfect Office X6 – Standard Edition
* Older Wordperfect manuals, pre-Borland and Corel
* Using WordPerfect on Linux – 2022

===Download sites===
* WordPerfect for DOS Updated—New printer drivers, updates, and added features for WordPerfect for DOS 5.1 and 6.x (with pages on WP on the Mac and Linux). All you need to know about WPDOS 5.1, 6.0, 6.1, and 6.2 on modern computers.
* http://www.gmccomb.com/wpdos/toc.htm – out-of-print book on WP macros and templates (free legal download)
* WordPerfect Shell 3.1 and 4.0 download
* WordPerfect Editor download</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="0" end="11" title="WordPerfect" label="WordPerfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="13" end="15" title="WordPerfect" label="WP"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="22" end="37" title="word processing" label="word processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q835702" start="64" end="70" title="Alludo" label="Alludo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435134" start="275" end="283" title="WordStar" label="WordStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="332" end="356" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172222" start="370" end="382" title="Data General" label="Data General"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="383" end="395" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="486" end="518" title="WordPerfect" label="Satellite Software International"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="520" end="523" title="WordPerfect" label="SSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="593" end="599" title="WordPerfect" label="SSI*WP"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="636" end="642" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435134" start="864" end="872" title="WordStar" label="WordStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="927" end="950" title="WordPerfect" label="WordPerfect Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1498" end="1515" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="1599" end="1632" title="Application Programming Interface" label="Application Programming Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="1816" end="1830" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="2028" end="2044" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q223407" start="2145" end="2151" title="Novell" label="Novell"/>
<link wikidata="Q835702" start="2233" end="2239" title="Alludo" label="Alludo"/>
<link wikidata="Q970734" start="2373" end="2384" title="Quattro Pro" label="Quattro Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132534" start="2402" end="2415" title="Corel Presentations" label="Presentations"/>
<link wikidata="Q186157" start="2470" end="2488" title="filename extension" label="filename extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="2710" end="2734" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977119" start="2752" end="2765" title="Bruce Bastian" label="Bruce Bastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q92713" start="2797" end="2808" title="Alan C. Ashton" label="Alan Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172222" start="2848" end="2860" title="Data General" label="Data General"/>
<link wikidata="Q52468" start="2902" end="2912" title="Orem, Utah" label="Orem, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3166" end="3170" title="Wang Laboratories#Word processors" label="Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="3243" end="3249" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="3537" end="3538" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="3581" end="3589" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q297868" start="3647" end="3668" title="x86 assembly language" label="x86 assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="3724" end="3727" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435134" start="3975" end="3983" title="WordStar" label="WordStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="4009" end="4012" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="4134" end="4138" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q201456" start="4166" end="4180" title="subdirectories" label="subdirectories"/>
<link wikidata="Q159614" start="4459" end="4464" title="Epson" label="Epson"/>
<link wikidata="Q604227" start="4620" end="4634" title="printer driver" label="printer driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435134" start="5481" end="5489" title="WordStar" label="WordStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="5529" end="5532" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q55948006" start="6600" end="6632" title="Reference Software International" label="Reference Software International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593693" start="6644" end="6653" title="Grammatik" label="Grammatik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257348" start="6672" end="6687" title="grammar checker" label="grammar checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q164274" start="6857" end="6870" title="spell checker" label="spell checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="7194" end="7201" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q25423" start="7688" end="7691" title="Function key" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="7724" end="7730" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q629579" start="8000" end="8005" title="Macro (computer science)" label="macro"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="8006" end="8015" title="scripting language" label="scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q14778305" start="8096" end="8106" title="Mail Merge" label="Mail Merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="8955" end="8959" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="8964" end="8986" title="Cascading Style Sheets" label="Cascading Style Sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="9811" end="9822" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="10514" end="10532" title="desktop publishing" label="desktop publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132555" start="10541" end="10548" title="Corel Ventura" label="Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q142371" start="10851" end="10860" title="CorelDraw" label="CorelDraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q629579" start="12484" end="12490" title="Macro (computer science)" label="macros"/>
<link wikidata="Q947369" start="14604" end="14617" title="macro virus (computing)" label="macro viruses"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001" start="14621" end="14628" title="malware" label="malware"/>
<link wikidata="Q15853013" start="16335" end="16347" title="Visual Basic" label="Visual Basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233" start="16958" end="16982" title="WordPerfect (cycling team)" label="WordPerfect cycling team"/>
<link wikidata="Q709889" start="17052" end="17060" title="Jan Raas" label="Jan Raas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="17160" end="17166" title="Alps" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189722" start="17480" end="17485" title="Emacs" label="Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934532" start="17511" end="17520" title="MultiMate" label="MultiMate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25423" start="17576" end="17588" title="function key" label="function key"/>
<link wikidata="Q423813" start="17595" end="17599" title="Control key" label="Ctrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q148742" start="17601" end="17604" title="Alt key" label="Alt"/>
<link wikidata="Q827156" start="17610" end="17615" title="Shift key" label="Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435134" start="17714" end="17722" title="WordStar" label="WordStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q391413" start="18123" end="18133" title="power user" label="power user"/>
<link wikidata="Q604227" start="18273" end="18287" title="printer driver" label="printer driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="18993" end="19000" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="19021" end="19030" title="WordPerfect Office" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="19050" end="19053" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q312466" start="19078" end="19094" title="utility software" label="utility software"/>
<link wikidata="Q732970" start="19163" end="19175" title="file manager" label="file manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373925" start="19278" end="19296" title="flat file database" label="flat file database"/>
<link wikidata="Q14778305" start="19347" end="19352" title="mail merge" label="merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164835" start="19377" end="19392" title="contact manager" label="contact manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q128926" start="19494" end="19503" title="GroupWise" label="GroupWise"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="19909" end="19930" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247856" start="22221" end="22233" title="office suite" label="office suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q210075" start="22294" end="22322" title="Borland" label="Borland Software Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q970734" start="22423" end="22434" title="Quattro Pro" label="Quattro Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779923" start="22436" end="22451" title="Borland Paradox" label="Borland Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q146768" start="22629" end="22639" title="middleware" label="middleware"/>
<link wikidata="Q223407" start="22958" end="22964" title="Novell" label="Novell"/>
<link wikidata="Q835702" start="23031" end="23036" title="Corel" label="Corel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128926" start="23136" end="23145" title="GroupWise" label="GroupWise"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="23304" end="23310" title="32-bit application" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="23355" end="23365" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="23558" end="23564" title="16-bit application" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q932465" start="23676" end="23695" title="Microsoft Office 95" label="Microsoft Office 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="23707" end="23714" title="Word for Windows" label="Word 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="24110" end="24120" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q488978" start="24353" end="24367" title="Windows NT 4.0" label="Windows NT 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="25356" end="25372" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="26663" end="26672" title="law firms" label="law firms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="27632" end="27667" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q671680" start="28083" end="28099" title="French judiciary" label="French judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="28685" end="28701" title="US Supreme Court" label="US Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q835702" start="29076" end="29081" title="Corel" label="Corel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128926" start="29264" end="29273" title="GroupWise" label="GroupWise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="29345" end="29360" title="Ottawa, Ontario" label="Ottawa, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776174" start="29410" end="29426" title="Michael Cowpland" label="Michael Cowpland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107563" start="29570" end="29594" title="Cola wars" label="Coke versus Pepsi battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q835702" start="29962" end="29967" title="Corel" label="Corel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455952" start="30139" end="30144" title="OASIS (organization)" label="OASIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q184473" start="30172" end="30184" title="OpenDocument" label="OpenDocument"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="30632" end="30635" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822481" start="30655" end="30676" title="metadata removal tool" label="metadata removal tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544247" start="30767" end="30771" title="CNET" label="CNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q279979" start="31299" end="31304" title="Office Open XML" label="OOXML"/>
<link wikidata="Q184473" start="31308" end="31320" title="OpenDocument" label="OpenDocument"/>
<link wikidata="Q306020" start="31428" end="31433" title="iWork" label="iWork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247856" start="31868" end="31880" title="office suite" label="office suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="31953" end="31956" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q184473" start="31966" end="31978" title="OpenDocument" label="OpenDocument"/>
<link wikidata="Q279979" start="31983" end="31998" title="Office Open XML" label="Office Open XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q207902" start="32115" end="32128" title="Adobe Acrobat" label="Adobe Acrobat"/>
<link wikidata="Q184473" start="32324" end="32336" title="OpenDocument" label="OpenDocument"/>
<link wikidata="Q279979" start="32342" end="32357" title="Office Open XML" label="Office Open XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046208" start="32911" end="32926" title="Bates numbering" label="Bates numbering"/>
<link wikidata="Q475488" start="32966" end="32970" title="EPUB" label="ePub"/>
<link wikidata="Q631830" start="33097" end="33108" title="PC Magazine" label="PC Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="33925" end="33934" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="33938" end="33944" title="mobile device" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247856" start="34053" end="34065" title="office suite" label="office suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q835702" start="34079" end="34096" title="Corel Corporation" label="Corel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210075" start="34117" end="34145" title="Borland" label="Borland Software Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="34205" end="34221" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q621196" start="34226" end="34236" title="AppleWorks" label="AppleWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q970734" start="34304" end="34315" title="Quattro Pro" label="Quattro Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779923" start="34320" end="34327" title="Paradox (database)" label="Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q223407" start="34360" end="34366" title="Novell" label="Novell"/>
<link wikidata="Q667566" start="35102" end="35131" title="Visual Basic for Applications" label="Visual Basic for Applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="35638" end="35655" title="Speech recognition" label="voice recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132520" start="36198" end="36209" title="Corel Linux" label="Corel Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q183197" start="36575" end="36586" title="spreadsheet" label="spreadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q653999" start="36641" end="36652" title="Lotus 1-2-3" label="Lotus 1-2-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774510" start="36678" end="36694" title="LibreOffice Calc" label="LibreOffice Calc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11272" start="36696" end="36711" title="Microsoft Excel" label="Microsoft Excel"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261310" start="36713" end="36726" title="Google Sheets" label="Google Sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="36731" end="36736" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056778" start="36744" end="36751" title="Numbers (spreadsheet)" label="Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115026" start="36863" end="36883" title="presentation program" label="presentation program"/>
<link wikidata="Q10135" start="36923" end="36942" title="LibreOffice Impress" label="LibreOffice Impress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11266" start="36944" end="36964" title="Microsoft PowerPoint" label="Microsoft PowerPoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q46272775" start="36966" end="36979" title="Google Slides" label="Google Slides"/>
<link wikidata="Q412510" start="36998" end="37005" title="Keynote (presentation software)" label="Keynote"/>
<link wikidata="Q430526" start="37114" end="37122" title="Evernote" label="Evernote"/>
<link wikidata="Q706480" start="37124" end="37141" title="Microsoft OneNote" label="Microsoft OneNote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7854718" start="37143" end="37154" title="Google Keep" label="Google Keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="37159" end="37164" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653740" start="37172" end="37177" title="Notes (Apple)" label="Notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779923" start="37213" end="37220" title="Paradox (database)" label="Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="37226" end="37245" title="relational database" label="relational database"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810618" start="37292" end="37308" title="LibreOffice Base" label="LibreOffice Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q80689" start="37313" end="37329" title="Microsoft Access" label="Microsoft Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q515301" start="37469" end="37476" title="Courier (typeface)" label="Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858969" start="38036" end="38043" title="Apricot Computers" label="Apricot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682524" start="38045" end="38055" title="Tandy 2000" label="Tandy 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348464" start="38057" end="38072" title="TI Professional" label="TI Professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q304208" start="38074" end="38085" title="Victor 9000" label="Victor 9000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053506" start="38091" end="38103" title="Zenith Z-100" label="Zenith Z-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="38133" end="38147" title="IBM System/370" label="IBM System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822750" start="38200" end="38211" title="DEC Rainbow" label="DEC Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="38348" end="38352" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="38364" end="38372" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="38374" end="38377" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q589680" start="38379" end="38388" title="SCO XENIX" label="SCO Xenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755887" start="38390" end="38404" title="SCO OpenServer" label="SCO OpenServer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148628" start="38406" end="38414" title="UnixWare" label="UnixWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088760" start="38416" end="38430" title="Microport (software)" label="Microport Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q542726" start="38432" end="38442" title="DEC Ultrix" label="DEC Ultrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047692" start="38444" end="38461" title="Pyramid Technology" label="Pyramid Tech Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q204214" start="38463" end="38468" title="Tru64" label="Tru64"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="38470" end="38477" title="IBM AIX" label="IBM AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q972581" start="38479" end="38499" title="Motorola System V/88" label="Motorola System V/88"/>
<link wikidata="Q847593" start="38505" end="38510" title="HP-UX" label="HP-UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q627611" start="38512" end="38520" title="SGI IRIX" label="SGI IRIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="38525" end="38532" title="Oracle Solaris" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q868171" start="38708" end="38721" title="CUPS" label="CUPS printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="39972" end="39979" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746001" start="40045" end="40056" title="SheepShaver" label="SheepShaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q810153" start="40058" end="40069" title="Basilisk II" label="Basilisk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q654655" start="40074" end="40078" title="vMac" label="vMac"/>
<link wikidata="Q402799" start="40258" end="40267" title="Boot Camp (software)" label="Boot Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q188558" start="40308" end="40315" title="Darwine" label="Darwine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071138" start="40319" end="40332" title="CrossOver Mac" label="CrossOver Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="40432" end="40440" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="40755" end="40764" title="Atari STe" label="Atari STe"/>
<link wikidata="Q740626" start="40766" end="40768" title="Atari TT" label="TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q753619" start="40774" end="40780" title="Atari Falcon" label="Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="41223" end="41237" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q849246" start="41277" end="41305" title="Graphics Environment Manager" label="Graphics Environment Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332546" start="41641" end="41656" title="Microsoft Write" label="Microsoft Write"/>
<link wikidata="Q15738686" start="41966" end="41980" title="copy protection" label="copy-protected"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="42105" end="42127" title="bulletin board systems" label="bulletin board systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600324" start="42395" end="42401" title="ST-Log" label="ST-Log"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812840" start="42972" end="42985" title="Atari ST User" label="Atari ST User"/>
<link wikidata="Q471089" start="43853" end="43863" title="Amiga 1000" label="Amiga 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="43908" end="43913" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q336405" start="44090" end="44099" title="Workbench (AmigaOS)" label="Workbench"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="44103" end="44106" title="Command-line interface" label="CLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="44783" end="44788" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019031" start="44800" end="44807" title="Caldera (company)" label="Caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132520" start="45189" end="45205" title="Corel Linux" label="own distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q511977" start="45483" end="45497" title="OpenOffice.org" label="OpenOffice.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q188558" start="45832" end="45836" title="Wine (software)" label="Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q596710" start="46131" end="46138" title="Xandros" label="Xandros"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="46441" end="46448" title="Linux distribution" label="distros"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="46569" end="46572" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="46865" end="46872" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q631830" start="47701" end="47712" title="PC Magazine" label="PC Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018709" start="48202" end="48206" title="Byte (magazine)" label="Byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156819" start="48268" end="48280" title="print buffer" label="print buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036474" start="48542" end="48550" title="Compute!" label="Compute!"/>
<link wikidata="Q321295" start="49108" end="49122" title="Ability Office" label="Ability Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q338854" start="49296" end="49325" title="Comparison of word processors" label="Comparison of word processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q985710" start="49328" end="49351" title="List of word processors" label="List of word processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639727" start="49354" end="49378" title="Office Open XML software" label="Office Open XML software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500606" start="49381" end="49402" title="OpenDocument software" label="OpenDocument software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631585" start="49405" end="49426" title="List of office suites" label="List of office suites"/>
<link wikidata="Q14273961" start="49429" end="49456" title="Comparison of office suites" label="Comparison of office suites"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33768" wikidata="Q1435134" url="?curid=33768" title="WordStar">
<text>WordStar is a discontinued word processor application for microcomputers. It was published by MicroPro International and originally written for the CP/M-80 operating system (OS), with later editions added for MS-DOS and other 16-bit PC OSes. Rob Barnaby was the sole author of the early versions of the program.

Starting with WordStar 4.0, the program was built on new code written principally by Peter Mierau. WordStar dominated the market in the early and mid-1980s, succeeding the market leader Electric Pencil.

WordStar was written with as few assumptions as possible about the operating system and machine hardware, allowing it to be easily ported across the many platforms that proliferated in the early 1980s. Because all of these versions had relatively similar commands and controls, users could move between platforms with equal ease. It was already popular when its inclusion with the Osborne 1 portable computer made the program the &quot;de facto&quot; standard for much of the small computer word-processing market.

As the market became dominated by the IBM PC and later Microsoft Windows, this same portable design made it difficult for the program to add new features, and affected its performance. In spite of its great popularity in the early 1980s, these problems allowed WordPerfect to take WordStar&#x27;s place as the most widely used word processor from 1985 on.

== History ==
===Founding===
Seymour I. Rubinstein was an employee of early microcomputer company IMSAI, where he negotiated software contracts with Digital Research and Microsoft. After leaving IMSAI, Rubinstein planned to start his own software company that would sell through the new network of retail computer stores. He founded MicroPro International Corporation in September 1978 and hired John Robbins Barnaby as programmer, who wrote a word processor, WordMaster, and a sorting program, SuperSort, in Intel 8080 assembly language. After Rubinstein obtained a report that discussed the abilities of contemporary standalone word processors from IBM, Xerox, and Wang Laboratories, Barnaby enhanced WordMaster with similar features and support for the CP/M operating system. MicroPro began selling the product, now renamed WordStar, in June 1979. Priced at and for the manual, by early 1980, MicroPro claimed in advertisements that 5,000 people had purchased WordStar in eight months.

===Early success===
WordStar was the first microcomputer word processor to offer mail merge and textual WYSIWYG. Besides word-wrapping (still a notable feature for early microcomputer programs), this last was most noticeably implemented as on-screen pagination during the editing session. Using the number of lines-per-page given by the user during program installation, WordStar would display a full line of dash characters onscreen showing where page breaks would occur during hardcopy printout. Many users found this very reassuring during editing, knowing beforehand where pages would end and begin, and where text would thus be interrupted across pages.

Barnaby left the company in March 1980, but due to WordStar&#x27;s sophistication, the company&#x27;s extensive sales and marketing efforts, and bundling deals with Osborne and other computer makers, MicroPro&#x27;s sales grew from in 1979 to million in fiscal year 1984, surpassing earlier market leader Electric Pencil. By May 1983 &quot;BYTE&quot; magazine called WordStar &quot;without a doubt the best-known and probably the most widely used personal computer word-processing program&quot;. The company released WordStar 3.3 in June 1983; the 650,000 cumulative copies of WordStar for the IBM PC and other computers sold by that fall was more than double that of the second most-popular word processor, and that year MicroPro had 10% of the personal computer software market. By 1984, the year it held an initial public offering, MicroPro was the world&#x27;s largest software company with 23% of the word processor market.

A manual that &quot;PC Magazine&quot; described as &quot;incredibly inadequate&quot; led many authors to publish replacements. One of them, &quot;Introduction to WordStar&quot;, was written by future Goldstein &amp; Blair founder and Whole Earth Software Catalog contributor Arthur Naiman, who hated the program and had a term inserted into his publishing contract that he not be required to use WordStar to write the book, using WRITE instead.

===MS-DOS===
WordStar 3.0, the first version for MS-DOS, appeared in April 1982. The DOS version was very similar to the original, and although the IBM PC had arrow keys and separate function keys, the traditional &quot;WordStar diamond&quot; and other Ctrl-key functions were retained, leading to rapid adoption by former CP/M users. WordStar&#x27;s ability to use a &quot;non-document&quot; mode to create text files without formatting made it popular among programmers for writing code. Like the CP/M versions, the DOS WordStar was not explicitly designed for IBM PCs, but rather for any x86 machine (as there were a number of non-IBM-compatible PCs that used 8086 or 80186 CPUs). As such, it used only DOS&#x27;s API calls and avoided any BIOS usage or direct hardware access. This carried with it an unfortunate performance penalty as everything had to be &quot;double&quot; processed (meaning that the DOS API functions would handle screen or keyboard I/O first and then pass them to the BIOS).

The first DOS version of WordStar, demoed by Jim Fox and executed by a team of Irish programmers in April 1982, was a port of the CP/M-86 version of WordStar, which in turn had been ported from the CP/M-80 version in September 1981. This had been started by Diane Hajicek and was completed by an Irish team of programmers under ISIS-II, probably using Intel&#x27;s source-to-source translator CONV86. Thus the main program executable was a .COM file which could only access 64 kB of memory. Users quickly learned they could make WordStar run dramatically faster by installing a RAM disk board, and copying the WordStar program files into it. WordStar would still access the &quot;disk&quot; repeatedly, but the far faster access of the RAM drive compared to a floppy disk yielded a substantial speed improvement. However, edited versions of a document were &quot;saved&quot; only to this RAM disk, and had to be copied to physical media before rebooting.

&quot;InfoWorld&quot; described WordStar as &quot;notorious for its complexity&quot;, but by 1983 it was the leading word processing system. Although competition appeared early (the first version of WordPerfect debuted in 1982 and Microsoft Word in 1983), WordStar was the dominant word processor on x86 machines until 1985. It was part of the software bundle that accompanied Kaypro computers.

At that time, the evolution from CP/M to MS-DOS, with an &quot;Alt&quot; key, had taken place. WordStar had until then never successfully exploited the MS-DOS keyboard, and that is one explanation for its demise.

By that point, MicroPro had dropped the generic MS-DOS support and WordStar 4.0 was exclusively for IBM compatibles, which differed from MS-DOS-compatible programs in terms of screen addressing. It was the first version of WordStar supporting directories—a feature nearly mandatory to be usable on machines with hard disks. Also introduced were simple macros (shorthand) and the install program was completely updated to include features like reprogramming function keys and an extensive printer support. During the second half of the 1980s, the fully modernized WordPerfect overtook it in sales.

WordStar 5 (released in 1989) added footnote and endnote capability and a fairly advanced Page preview function. Versions 5.5 and 6 had added features, and version 7 (released 1991) included a complete macro language as well as support for over 500 printers. It also featured style sheets and mouse support.

===Problems with piracy===

Columnist John Dvorak noted: &quot;WordStar may have been the most pirated software in the world, which in many ways accounted for its success. (Software companies don’t like to admit to this as a possibility.) Books for WordStar sold like hot cakes and the authors knew they were selling documentation for pirated copies of WordStar. The company itself should have just sold the documentation alone to increase sales. This was the wink-wink-nudge-nudge aspect of the industry at the time and everyone knew it. So when WordStar 2000 arrived with a copy protection scheme, everyone should have predicted its immediate demise.&quot;

Besides the ready availability of third-party books explaining WordStar in detail, the program&#x27;s extensive and configurable onscreen help facility (help text appeared in a resizable window at the top of the screen) made it easy to use an illegal copy.

===WordStar 2000===
At the time, the IBM Displaywriter System dominated the dedicated word processor market. IBM&#x27;s main competition was Wang Laboratories. Such machines were expensive and were generally accessed through terminals connected to central mainframe or midrange computers.

When IBM announced it was bringing DisplayWrite to the PC, MicroPro focused on creating a clone of it which they marketed, in 1984, as WordStar 2000. WordStar 2000 supported features such as disk directories, but lacked compatibility with the file formats of existing WordStar versions and also made numerous unpopular changes to the interface. Gradually competitors such as WordPerfect reduced MicroPro&#x27;s market share. MultiMate, in particular, used the same key sequences as Wang word processors, which made it popular with secretaries switching from those to PCs.

&quot;BYTE&quot; stated that WordStar 2000 had &quot;all the charm of an elephant on motorized skates&quot;, warning in 1986 that an IBM PC AT with hard drive was highly advisable to run the software, which it described as &quot;clumsy, overdesigned, and uninviting ... I can&#x27;t come up with a reason why I&#x27;d want to use it&quot;. WordStar 2000 had a user interface that was substantially different from the original WordStar, and the company did little to advertise this. However, its lasting legacy on the word processing industry was the introduction of three keyboard shortcuts that are still widely used, namely, Ctrl+B for boldfacing, Ctrl+I for &quot;italicizing&quot;, and Ctrl+U for underlining, text.

===NewStar===
WordStar became popular in large companies without MicroPro. The company, which did not have a corporate sales program until December 1983, developed a poor reputation among customers. &quot;PC Magazine&quot; wrote in 1983 that MicroPro&#x27;s &quot;motto often seems to be: &#x27;Ask Your Dealer&#x27;&quot;, and in 1985 that

By late 1984, the company admitted, according to the magazine, that WordStar&#x27;s reputation for power was fading, and by early 1985, its sales had decreased for four quarters while those of Multimate and Samna increased. Several MicroPro employees meanwhile formed rival company NewStar. In September 1983, it published WordStar clone NewWord, which offered several features the original lacked, such as a built-in spell checker and support for laser printers. Advertisements stated that &quot;Anyone with WordStar experience won&#x27;t even have to read NewWord&#x27;s manuals. WordStar text files work with NewWord&quot;. Despite competition from NewStar, Microsoft Word, WordPerfect, and dozens of other companies, which typically released new versions of their software every 12 to 18 months, MicroPro did not release new versions of WordStar beyond 3.3 during 1984 and 1985, in part because Rubinstein relinquished control of the company after a January 1984 heart attack. His replacements canceled the promising office suite Starburst, purchased a WordStar clone, and used it as the basis of WordStar 2000, released in December 1984. It received poor reviews—by April 1985 &quot;PC Magazine&quot; referred to WordStar 2000 as &quot;beleaguered&quot;—due to not being compatible with WordStar files and other disadvantages, and by selling at the same price as WordStar 3.3 confused customers. Company employees were divided between WordStar and WordStar 2000 factions, and fiscal year 1985 sales declined to million.

By 1984, NewWord had released a second version, and many WordStar users switched to it. A third version appeared in 1986; &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote that NewWord 3 &quot;provides the perfect excuse for WordStar users to switch software, as if WordStar users needed an excuse&quot;. In February 1985 MicroPro promised updates to WordStar 3.3, but none appeared until new management purchased NewWord and used it as the basis of WordStar 4.0 in 1987, four years after the previous version. Word (four versions from 1983 to 1987) and WordPerfect (five versions), however, had become the market leaders. More conflict between MicroPro&#x27;s two factions delayed WordStar 5.0 until late 1988, again hurting the program&#x27;s sales. After renaming itself after its flagship product in 1989, WordStar International merged with SoftKey in 1993.

===WordStar for Windows===
Like many other producers of successful DOS applications, WordStar International delayed before deciding to make a version for the commercially successful Windows 3.0. The company purchased Legacy, an existing Windows-based word processor, which was altered and released as WordStar for Windows in 1991. It was a well-reviewed product and included many features normally only found in more expensive desktop publishing packages. However, its delayed launch meant that Microsoft Word had already firmly established itself as the corporate standard during the two previous years.

===Abandonment===
WordStar is abandonware. It was last updated in December 1992.

===Notable users===
WordStar was the program of choice for conservative intellectual William F. Buckley, Jr., who used the software to write many works, including his last book. His son Christopher Buckley wrote of his father&#x27;s loyalty to WordStar, despite the increasing difficulty of installing it on newer computers. The elder Buckley said of WordStar, &quot;I&#x27;m told there are better programs, but I&#x27;m also told there are better alphabets&quot;.

Ralph Ellison also used WordStar.

Robert J. Sawyer, a Canadian science-fiction writer, continues to use WordStar 7.0 for DOS (the final release, last updated in 1992) to write his novels, All twenty-five of his novels were written with WordStar. As the app is now &quot;abandonware&quot;, and there was no proper archive of WordStar 7.0 for DOS available online, he decided to create one. He put together as complete a version of WordStar 7 as might exist. He bundled together over 1,000 pages of scanned manuals that came with WordStar, related utilities, his own README guidance, ready-to-run versions of DOSBox-X and VDosPlus, and WordStar 7 Rev. D and posted them on his website as the &quot;Complete WordStar 7.0 Archive&quot;.

, fantasy author George R. R. Martin used the MS-DOS version of WordStar 4.0.

Andy Breckman, the creator of &quot;Monk&quot;, is a devoted WordStar user.

Novelist Anne Rice was another faithful user of WordStar who struggled to have it installed on newer computers until it could no longer reasonably be done. She then grudgingly transitioned to Microsoft Word, whose design she felt was comparatively unintuitive and illogical. Rice noted &quot;WordStar was magnificent. I loved it. It was logical, beautiful, perfect,&quot; adding, &quot;Compared to it, MS Word which I use today is pure madness.&quot;

==Version list==
This is a list of the various WordStar versions released over the years for different machines.

*WordStar 1.0 for CP/M (1978)
*WordStar 2.0 for CP/M (1978)
*WordStar for TRS-80 LDOS (1979)
*WordStar for Epson Personal Computer (1980)
*WordStar for Osborne 1 Portable Computer (1981)
*WordStar 3.0 for CP/M and MS-DOS (1982)
*WordStar 3.3 for CP/M and MS-DOS (1983)
*WordStar for PCjr (1984)
*WordStar 2000 for MS-DOS (1985)
*WordStar 2000 for AT&amp;T UNIX (1985)
*WordStar Express for MS-DOS (1986)
*WordStar 2000 Release 2 for MS-DOS (1986)
*WordStar 2000 Plus Release 3.5 for MS-DOS (1987)
*WordStar 4 for CP/M and MS-DOS (1987)
*WordStar 5 for MS-DOS (1988)
*WordStar 6 for MS-DOS (1990)
*WordStar for Windows 1.0 (1991)
*WordStar for Windows 1.1 (1991)
*WordStar 7 for MS-DOS (1992)
*WordStar for Windows 1.5 (1992)
*WordStar for Windows 2.0 (1994)

== Interface ==
Prior to WordStar, word processors split text entry and formatting into separate functions; the latter was often not done until a document was about to be printed. WordStar was one of the first &quot;what you see is what you get&quot; word processors, showing accurate line breaks and page breaks on the computer screen. It was a major breakthrough to be able to see and modify where line breaks and page breaks would fall—even though, being a text-based program, WordStar couldn&#x27;t accurately display different typefaces such as bold and italic until version 5.0.

In a default installation on a 25-line screen, the top third of the screen contained a menu of commands and a status line; the lower two-thirds of the screen displayed the text of the user&#x27;s document. A user-configurable option to set the help level released this space for user text. The help system could be configured to display help a short time after the first key of a command sequence was entered. As users became more familiar with the command sequences, the help system could be set to provide less and less assistance until finally all on-screen menus and status information would be turned off.

The original computer terminals and microcomputers for which WordStar was developed, many running the CP/M operating system, did not have function keys or cursor control keys (arrow keys, Page Up/Page Down). WordStar used sequences of alphabetic keys combined with the &quot;Control&quot; key, which on keyboards of the time was conveniently next to the letter A in the position now usually occupied by the Caps Lock key. For touch typists, in addition, reaching the function and cursor keys generally requires them to take their fingers off the &quot;home keys&quot; with consequent loss of typing rhythm.

For example, the &quot;diamond&quot; of Ctrl-S/E/D/X (s=left, e=up, d=right, x=down) moved the cursors one character or line to the left, up, right, or down. Ctrl-A/F (to the outside of the &quot;diamond&quot;) moved the cursor a full word left/right, and Ctrl-R/C (just &quot;past&quot; the Ctrl keys for up and down) scrolled a full page up/down. Prefacing these keystrokes with Ctrl-Q generally expanded their action, moving the cursor to the end/beginning of the line, end/beginning of the document, etc. Ctrl-G would delete the character under the cursor. Ctrl-H would backspace and delete. Commands to enable bold or italics, printing, blocking text to copy or delete, saving or retrieving files from disk, etc. were typically a short sequence of keystrokes, such as Ctrl-P-B for bold, or Ctrl-K-S to save a file. Formatting codes would appear on screen, such as &quot;^B&quot; for bold, &quot;^Y&quot; for italics, and &quot;^S&quot; for underscoring.

Although many of these keystroke sequences were far from self-evident, they tended to lend themselves to mnemonic devices (e.g., Ctrl-Print-Bold, Ctrl-blocK-Save), and regular users quickly learned them through muscle memory, enabling them to rapidly navigate documents by touch, rather than memorizing &quot;Ctrl-S = cursor left.&quot;

Early versions of WordStar lacked features found in other word processors, such as the ability to automatically reformat paragraphs to fit the current margins as text was added or deleted; a command had to be issued to force reformatting. The subsequent WordStar 2000 (and later versions of WordStar for DOS) added automatic paragraph reformatting (and all versions of WordStar had commands to manually reformat a paragraph (^B) or the rest of the document (^QQ^B and, as a later synonym, ^QU)).

WordStar was rare among word processing programs in that it permitted the user to mark (highlight) a block of text (with ^KB and ^KK commands) and leave it marked in place, and then go to a different position in the document and later (even after considerable work on other things) copy the block (with ^KC) or move it to a new location (with ^KV). Many users found it much easier to manipulate blocks this way than with the Microsoft Word system of highlighting with a mouse and then being forced by Word&#x27;s select-then-do approach to immediately deal with the marked block, lest any typing replace it. The subsequent WordStar 2000 retained WordStar&#x27;s distinctive functionality for block manipulation. As part of the ^K sequence of shortcuts, it offered true bookmarks (^K1 to ^K9) allowing the editor to move about in large documents with ease.

Column Mode editing was probably unique to WordStar. As a basic text editor, the interface showed all characters to be the same width - hence 80 characters across an 80 column screen resolution. By switching on column mode editing a rectangle of text spanning several characters and several lines could be selected and manipulated. This was very handy for manipulating columns of numbers and non-standard files. Once selected, the feature could also be used to calculate the total of a column of numbers and place the result at the insertion point.

Formatting with WordStar was carried out before the text to be formatted—unlike many other word processors where the formatting of a paragraph is &#x27;buried&#x27; within the usually hidden paragraph marker at the end of the paragraph. This latter method leaves the user unclear where formatting starts. In normal editing, WordStar hides formatting markers but these are easily displayed with ^OD command. Formatting information is then displayed in the normal text area displacing the actual text. It nonetheless made it absolutely clear where formatting started and finished. Page and section formatting was handled differently by the addition of formatting lines. A formatting line was indicated by the line starting with a full stop. Some third-party WordStar books called formatting lines &quot;dot commands&quot;. A few examples: .lh (line height) .lm (left margin) .rm (right margin) - each of which was followed by a number. The number was assumed to be points (pt) but could be easily modified to inches or mm by the addition of &quot; or mm after the number. .lm and .rm were never equal as both values were from the left hand edge of the page. Setting .rm to 0 made text lines infinitely long. Margins could also be set either absolutely or relatively (by preceding the value with either - or +) when setting the value.

If any invalid formatting commands are encountered, when printing WordStar (version 3.3 at least) will ignore the line (all text until the next carriage return terminating the line). This could confuse novice users who unintentionally began a line with a decimal point (same as period or dot character) and WordStar would not print the line. For instance, a line reading: &quot;.05 percent text text text...&quot; would not appear in the printout though the document would continue on the printout without any error reported.

WordStar 2000 added few new commands, but completely rewrote the user interface, using simple English-language mnemonics (so the command to remove a word, which had been ^T in WordStar, became ^RW in WordStar 2000; the command to remove the text from the rest of the line to the right of the cursor changed from ^QY to ^RR). However, many in WordStar&#x27;s large installed user based were happy with the original WordStar interface, and did not consider the changes to be improvements. Although WordStar 2000 was meant as the successor to WordStar, it never gained substantial market share.

The original WordStar interface left a large legacy, and many of its control-key command are still available (optionally or as the default) in other programs, such as the modern cross-platform word processing software TextMaker and many text editors running under MS-DOS, Linux, and other UNIX variants. Some Borland products, including the popular Turbo Pascal compiler, and Borland Sidekick, used a subset of WordStar keyboard commands, the former in its IDE and the latter in the &quot;Notepad&quot; editors. The TEXT editor built into the firmware of the TRS-80 Model 100 portable computer supported a subset of the WordStar cursor movement commands (in addition to its own). Home word processing software like Write&amp;Set not only use the WordStar interface, but have been based on WordStar DOS file formats, allowing WordStar users who no longer have a copy of the application to easily open and edit their files. There are WordStar keyboard command emulators and keymappings, both freeware and shareware, for current versions of Microsoft Word. Popular modern word processing software WordPerfect can open or save to WordStar documents, enabling users to move back and forth.
== Add-ons and companion products ==

MailMerge was an add-on program (becoming integrated from WordStar 4 onwards) which facilitated the &quot;merge printing&quot; of bulk mailings, such as business letters to clients. Two files were required:
# a data file, being a list of recipients stored in a non-document, comma-delimited plain ASCII text file, typically named &quot;Clients.dat&quot; (although WordStar had no requirement for a specific file extension). Each subsequent line of text in the file would be dedicated to a particular client, with name and address details separated on the line dedicated to a client by commas, read left to right. For example: Mr., Michael, Smith, 7 Oakland Drive, ... WordStar would also access Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet files (*.wk1) for this data and if the data contained flags to start and stop WordStar processing the data then flags could be set so that certain &#x27;clients&#x27; are omitted from the output stream.
# a master document containing the text of the letter, using standard paragraphs (a.k.a. boilerplate text) as required. These would be mixed and matched as needed, and where appropriate, paragraphs could be inserted through external reference to subordinate documents.

The writer would insert placeholders delimited by ampersands into the master document, e.g., &amp;TITLE&amp;, &amp;INITIAL&amp;, &amp;SURNAME&amp;, &amp;ADDRESS1&amp;. In each copy of the letter the placeholders would be replaced with strings read from the DAT file. Mass mailings could thereby be prepared with each letter copy &quot;individually&quot; addressed.

Other add-on programs included SpellStar, a spell checker program, later incorporated as a direct part of the WordStar program; and DataStar, a program whose purpose was specifically to expedite creating of the data files used for merge printing. These were revolutionary features for personal computer users during the early-to-mid-1980s. A companion spreadsheet, CalcStar, was also produced using a somewhat WordStar-like interface; collectively, WordStar (word processing), DataStar/ReportStar (database management, a.k.a. InfoStar), and CalcStar (spreadsheet) comprised StarBurst, the first-ever office suite of personal computer programs.

As a product enhancement, in the late 1980s WordStar 5 came bundled with PC-Outline, a popular DOS outliner then available from Brown Bag Software, Inc. in California. PC-Outline text had to be exported to a WordStar-format file, as the programs were not developed to be internally compatible.

==Bidirectional text==
Around 1978, Elbit Systems in Israel developed a CP/M-capable microcomputer named the DS2100. CP/M machines were readily available and Elbit needed something to differentiate their product from others. An agreement was made with MicroPro to develop a version of WordStar that supported both English and Hebrew input. The concept was revolutionary, as Hebrew is written right-to-left and all word processors of the time assumed left-to-right. WordStar, as developed by Elbit, was the first word processor that offered bidirectional input and mixed alphabets.

Elbit acquired rights to the source code and a development team in Elbit, Haifa, worked on the project. For several years Hebrew-English WordStar was the &quot;de facto&quot; WYSIWYG word processor leader until, inevitably, it was ousted by newer competitors.

== File types ==
WordStar identified files as either &quot;document&quot; or &quot;nondocument,&quot; which led to some confusion among users. &quot;Document&quot; referred to WordStar word processing files containing embedded word processing and formatting commands. &quot;Nondocument&quot; files were pure ASCII text files containing no embedded formatting commands. Using WordStar in &quot;Nondocument Mode&quot; was essentially the same as using a traditional text editor. WordStar 5 introduced a document-mode &quot;print preview&quot; feature, allowing the user to inspect a WYSIWYG version of text, complete with inserted graphics, as it would appear on the printed page.

=== Filename extensions ===
* DOS WordStar files by default have no extension; some users adopted their own conventions, such as the letters WS followed by the version number (for example, WS3), or just plain WS. Backup files were automatically saved as BAKs.
* &quot;WordStar for Windows&quot; files use the extension WSD
* &quot;WordStar for Windows&quot; templates use the extension WST
* &quot;WordStar for Windows&quot; macros use the extension WMC
* &quot;WordStar for Windows&quot; temporary files use the extension !WS
* &quot;WordStar 2000&quot; for DOS and UNIX PC do not have a fixed extension but DOC and WS2 were common

== Installation ==
Installation of early versions of WordStar, especially for CP/M, was very different from the approach of modern programs. While later editions had more-or-less comprehensive installation programs that allowed selection of printers and terminals from a menu, in the very early releases, each of the escape sequences required for the terminal and printer had to be identified in the hardware documentation, then hand-entered (in hex) into reserved locations in the program memory image. This was a fairly typical limitation of all CP/M programs of the time, since there was no mechanism to hide the complexities of the underlying hardware from the application program. To use the program with a different printer required re-installation of the program. Occasionally short machine-language programs had to be entered in a patch area in WordStar, to provide particular screen effects or cope with particular printers. Researching, testing, and proving out such installations was a time-consuming and knowledge-intensive process, making WordStar installation and customization a staple discussion of CP/M users&#x27; groups during that time.

DOS versions of WordStar at least had standardized the screen display, but still had to be customized for different printers.

== Running on modern platforms ==
WordStar version 3.x used the MS-DOS File control block (FCB) interface, an early data structure for file input/output which was based closely on CP/M&#x27;s file input/output functions. The provision of the FCB interface was intended to simplify the porting of (assembly language) programs from CP/M to the new MS-DOS. When MS-DOS adopted the Unix-like file interface of file handles, FCBs became a legacy interface supported for backward compatibility. Because FCB compatibility has not been maintained, WordStar 3.x will not function properly on modern versions of Windows. In particular, WordStar 3.x cannot save files.

One workaround is to use the DOSEMU emulator on Linux, which correctly implements the FCB interface; the DOSBox emulator does not, even on Linux. WordStar 4.0 does not have this problem because it uses the newer MS-DOS interface for input/output. OS/2 can run WordStar in a DOS session. Another option is using the FreeDOS operating system.

Another option is to run the CP/M versions of WordStar using a CP/M emulator, such as &quot;CPMEmu&quot; for Linux and the Raspberry Pi, or &quot;CP/M for OS X&quot; for macOS.

In October 2014, WordStar support was added to vDos, a derivative of DOSBox optimized for business applications; vDos allows WordStar 4.0 and above to run under 32- and 64-bit versions of Microsoft Windows from XP through 10.
In 2024, Robert J. Sawyer released archives of WordStar capable of running on all modern platforms.

== Emulation ==

Although no current version of WordStar is available for modern operating systems, some former WordStar users still prefer WordStar&#x27;s interface, especially the cursor diamond commands described earlier in this article. These users say that less hand movement is necessary to issue commands, and hence that writing under this interface is more efficient. The user accesses the nearby Ctrl key and then a letter or combination of letters, thus keeping his hands on or close to the home row instead of moving them away from it to reach for a specialty key or a mouse.

To accommodate these users, WordStar emulation programs were created. One such program is CtrlPlus by Yoji Hagiya, which remaps the standard PC keyboard, making many WordStar commands available in most Windows programs. CtrlPlus switches the Control and Caps Lock keys so that the Ctrl key is back where it was on older keyboards, next to the A key. It also gives functionality to the chief cursor diamond commands mentioned in this article.

Another WordStar emulation utility is &#x27;WordStar Command Emulator for Microsoft Word&#x27;, also known as &#x27;WordStar for Word,&#x27; by Mike Petrie. Designed to work in conjunction with CtrlPlus, the Command Emulator adds many more WordStar commands to MS Word than CtrlPlus by itself, and also changes Word 97-XP&#x27;s menus to be more like those of WordStar 7.0 for DOS, the last DOS version of WordStar. For example, Ctrl+K? was WordStar&#x27;s word count command and Ctrl+QL was its spell check command. Hitting these commands in the WordStar Emulator within Word runs Word&#x27;s equivalent commands. WordStar for Word also adds WordStar&#x27;s block commands, namely Ctrl+KB to mark the beginning of a block, Ctrl+KK to mark the end, and Ctrl+KV to move it. Alternatively, Ctrl+KC could be used to copy the block. WordStar for Word works on all versions of Word from Word 97 through 2010.

The WordStar Command Emulator is written in Microsoft Visual Basic for Applications (VBA), a macro programming language based on Visual Basic built into Microsoft Word to allow for a high level of customization. Most Word add-ins are written in this language.

GNU Emacs used to come with a library &#x27;wordstar-mode.el&#x27; that provides WordStar emulation, but it&#x27;s been declared obsolete as of version 24.5. A macro set for vi that provides WordStar emulation is available.

The cross-platform JOE editor is a very WordStar-like alternative. When invoked as codice_1, Joe emulates many WordStar keybindings. JOE lacks formatting options and essentially only operates in non-document mode, but formatted documents can be authored in HTML/CSS, Markdown or another markup language.

== Legacy ==
NewStar produced NewWord for Amstrad PCW 8256, PCW 8512 in the mid-1980s, running CP/M on 3-inch floppy disks. NewWord also was available for MS-DOS and in a native version for Concurrent CP/M. It was very similar to WordStar. LapStar was a cut-down clone for the TRS-80 Model 100 portable computer.

Since 2013 a partial WordStar clone has been in the process of being developed under the name of WordTsar. In addition German software author Martin Vieregg has sold the Write&amp;Set package, a shareware GUI based WordStar clone for Microsoft Windows and OS/2–eComStation since the latter half of the 1990s, and for Linux and OS X as well.

== See also ==
* List of word processors

== References ==
== External links ==

* WordStar Resource Site — featuring a full (as far as is known) history of WordStar
* Microsoft Help &amp; Support — Microsoft&#x27;s Office File Converter Pack installs additional text converters and graphics (image) filters. You can import/export WordStar files after installing it.
* Petrie, Michael. A Potted History of WordStar, September 9, 2006.
* WordStar documents archived at The BITSAVERS.ORG Documents Library, , September 10, 2014.
* Wordstar Command Reference 
* Robert J. Sawyer. Complete WordStar 7.0 Archive, August 12, 2024.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1435134" start="0" end="8" title="WordStar" label="WordStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="27" end="41" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="58" end="71" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47165460" start="94" end="116" title="MicroPro International" label="MicroPro International"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="148" end="152" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="156" end="172" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="209" end="215" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="226" end="235" title="16-bit computing" label="16-bit PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325910" start="499" end="514" title="Electric Pencil" label="Electric Pencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129603" start="898" end="907" title="Osborne 1" label="Osborne 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="953" end="961" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="1071" end="1077" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1088" end="1105" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="1294" end="1305" title="WordPerfect" label="WordPerfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459187" start="1419" end="1440" title="Seymour I. Rubinstein" label="Seymour I. Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447416" start="1488" end="1493" title="IMSAI" label="IMSAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q185608" start="1539" end="1555" title="Digital Research" label="Digital Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1560" end="1569" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q47165460" start="1723" end="1757" title="MicroPro International" label="MicroPro International Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="1834" end="1848" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q324610" start="1899" end="1909" title="Intel 8080" label="Intel 8080"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="1910" end="1927" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="2041" end="2044" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q152433" start="2046" end="2051" title="Xerox" label="Xerox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206799" start="2057" end="2074" title="Wang Laboratories" label="Wang Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="2146" end="2150" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q14778305" start="2461" end="2471" title="mail merge" label="mail merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="2484" end="2491" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455678" start="3205" end="3212" title="Osborne Computer Corporation" label="Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="3294" end="3305" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325910" start="3345" end="3360" title="Electric Pencil" label="Electric Pencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018709" start="3380" end="3384" title="Byte (magazine)" label="BYTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="3634" end="3640" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="3850" end="3873" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q631830" start="3990" end="4001" title="PC Magazine" label="PC Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580345" start="4170" end="4191" title="Goldstein &amp;amp; Blair" label="Goldstein &amp;amp; Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997524" start="4204" end="4232" title="Whole Earth Software Catalog" label="Whole Earth Software Catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="4465" end="4471" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="5536" end="5540" title="Porting" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706791" start="5548" end="5555" title="CP/M-86" label="CP/M-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="5616" end="5623" title="CP/M-80" label="CP/M-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973993" start="5746" end="5753" title="Intel ISIS-II" label="ISIS-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="5770" end="5775" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990416" start="5783" end="5810" title="source-to-source translator" label="source-to-source translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990416" start="5811" end="5817" title="CONV86" label="CONV86"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076974" start="5996" end="6004" title="RAM disk" label="RAM disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="6573" end="6584" title="WordPerfect" label="WordPerfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="6605" end="6619" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q914171" start="6751" end="6757" title="Kaypro" label="Kaypro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224391" start="7929" end="7940" title="John Dvorak" label="John Dvorak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968825" start="8846" end="8870" title="IBM Displaywriter System" label="IBM Displaywriter System"/>
<link wikidata="Q60596704" start="8885" end="8909" title="dedicated word processor" label="dedicated word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206799" start="8950" end="8967" title="Wang Laboratories" label="Wang Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229180" start="9134" end="9146" title="DisplayWrite" label="DisplayWrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="9474" end="9485" title="WordPerfect" label="WordPerfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934532" start="9524" end="9533" title="MultiMate" label="MultiMate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018709" start="9678" end="9682" title="BYTE" label="BYTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141670" start="9805" end="9814" title="IBM PC AT" label="IBM PC AT"/>
<link wikidata="Q631830" start="10598" end="10609" title="PC Magazine" label="PC Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409872" start="10942" end="10947" title="Samna" label="Samna"/>
<link wikidata="Q164274" start="11153" end="11166" title="spell checker" label="spell checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="11183" end="11196" title="laser printer" label="laser printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="11412" end="11423" title="WordPerfect" label="WordPerfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247856" start="11756" end="11768" title="office suite" label="office suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882395" start="13093" end="13100" title="SoftKey" label="SoftKey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="13293" end="13304" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="13538" end="13556" title="desktop publishing" label="desktop publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="13606" end="13620" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q281039" start="13747" end="13758" title="abandonware" label="abandonware"/>
<link wikidata="Q378098" start="13884" end="13907" title="William F. Buckley, Jr." label="William F. Buckley, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1086549" start="13985" end="14004" title="Christopher Buckley (novelist)" label="Christopher Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q299965" start="14265" end="14278" title="Ralph Ellison" label="Ralph Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q362742" start="14300" end="14316" title="Robert J. Sawyer" label="Robert J. Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181677" start="15017" end="15036" title="George R. R. Martin" label="George R. R. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q525458" start="15079" end="15092" title="Andy Breckman" label="Andy Breckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q189068" start="15115" end="15119" title="Monk (TV series)" label="Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q184785" start="15165" end="15174" title="Anne Rice" label="Anne Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="15740" end="15744" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q610305" start="15796" end="15802" title="TRS-80" label="TRS-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512353" start="15803" end="15807" title="LDOS (operating system)" label="LDOS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15829" end="15852" title="Epson Personal Computer" label="Epson Personal Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129603" start="15874" end="15883" title="Osborne 1" label="Osborne 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="15936" end="15942" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155069" start="16005" end="16009" title="PCjr" label="PCjr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="16078" end="16082" title="UNIX" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q491546" start="16332" end="16339" title="Windows 3.0" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q495432" start="16428" end="16435" title="Windows 3.1" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="16697" end="16725" title="WYSIWYG" label="what you see is what you get"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="17692" end="17709" title="computer terminal" label="computer terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="17781" end="17802" title="CP/M operating system" label="CP/M operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q729752" start="18086" end="18095" title="Caps Lock" label="Caps Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q798515" start="18848" end="18854" title="Backspace" label="Ctrl-H"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="19352" end="19360" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164969" start="19458" end="19471" title="muscle memory" label="muscle memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407729" start="24160" end="24169" title="TextMaker" label="TextMaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="24179" end="24190" title="text editor" label="text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="24214" end="24219" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="24231" end="24235" title="Unix" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q210075" start="24251" end="24258" title="Borland" label="Borland"/>
<link wikidata="Q473201" start="24291" end="24303" title="Turbo Pascal" label="Turbo Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q988482" start="24318" end="24334" title="Borland Sidekick" label="Borland Sidekick"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="24399" end="24402" title="integrated development environment" label="IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759510" start="24501" end="24517" title="TRS-80 Model 100" label="TRS-80 Model 100"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24657" end="24670" title="Write&amp;amp;Set" label="Write&amp;amp;Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="24980" end="24994" title="Microsoft Office Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651672" start="26176" end="26192" title="boilerplate text" label="boilerplate text"/>
<link wikidata="Q164274" start="26767" end="26780" title="spell checker" label="spell checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247856" start="27323" end="27335" title="office suite" label="office suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="27463" end="27466" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531370" start="27467" end="27475" title="outliner" label="outliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325369" start="27699" end="27712" title="Elbit Systems" label="Elbit Systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27772" end="27778" title="DS2100" label="DS2100"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="28420" end="28427" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="28814" end="28819" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="28970" end="28981" title="text editor" label="text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="29087" end="29094" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366300" start="30137" end="30152" title="escape sequence" label="escape sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="30266" end="30269" title="hexadecimal" label="hex"/>
<link wikidata="Q613366" start="30940" end="30957" title="users&amp;#x27; group" label="users&amp;#x27; group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412592" start="31176" end="31194" title="File control block" label="File control block"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="31390" end="31397" title="porting" label="porting"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="31402" end="31419" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="31435" end="31439" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="31451" end="31457" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="31483" end="31487" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060813" start="31511" end="31522" title="file handle" label="file handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q445962" start="31539" end="31555" title="Legacy system" label="legacy interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154788" start="31793" end="31799" title="DOSEMU" label="DOSEMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q479783" start="31869" end="31875" title="DOSBox" label="DOSBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="31903" end="31908" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q473751" start="32079" end="32086" title="FreeDOS" label="FreeDOS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32331" end="32335" title="vDos" label="vDos"/>
<link wikidata="Q479783" start="32353" end="32359" title="DOSBox" label="DOSBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q362742" start="32519" end="32535" title="Robert J. Sawyer" label="Robert J. Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33112" end="33120" title="Touch typing#Home row" label="home row"/>
<link wikidata="Q667566" start="34601" end="34630" title="Visual Basic for Applications" label="Visual Basic for Applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q629579" start="34640" end="34666" title="macro programming language" label="macro programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378" start="34676" end="34688" title="Visual Basic (classic)" label="Visual Basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="34700" end="34714" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34764" end="34776" title="Word add-ins" label="Word add-ins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252773" start="34808" end="34817" title="GNU Emacs" label="GNU Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q214743" start="34982" end="34984" title="Vi (text editor)" label="vi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691315" start="35052" end="35055" title="Joe&amp;#x27;s Own Editor" label="JOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q118470" start="35153" end="35164" title="keybindings" label="keybindings"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="35290" end="35294" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="35295" end="35298" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193600" start="35300" end="35308" title="Markdown" label="Markdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="35320" end="35335" title="markup language" label="markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q478833" start="35388" end="35396" title="Amstrad PCW" label="PCW 8256"/>
<link wikidata="Q478833" start="35398" end="35406" title="Amstrad PCW" label="PCW 8512"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35448" end="35460" title="Floppy disk#Other sizes" label="floppy disks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759510" start="35615" end="35631" title="TRS-80 Model 100" label="TRS-80 Model 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q185534" start="35847" end="35856" title="shareware" label="shareware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="35886" end="35903" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="35908" end="35912" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q307032" start="35913" end="35924" title="eComStation" label="eComStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="35969" end="35974" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="35979" end="35983" title="OS X" label="OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q985710" start="36011" end="36034" title="List of word processors" label="List of word processors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="33777" wikidata="Q1865281" url="?curid=33777" title="Whale">
<text>Whales are a widely distributed and diverse group of fully aquatic placental marine mammals. As an informal and colloquial grouping, they correspond to large members of the infraorder Cetacea, i.e. all cetaceans apart from dolphins and porpoises. Dolphins and porpoises may be considered whales from a formal, cladistic perspective. Whales, dolphins and porpoises belong to the order Cetartiodactyla, which consists of even-toed ungulates. Their closest non-cetacean living relatives are the hippopotamuses, from which they and other cetaceans diverged about 54 million years ago. The two parvorders of whales, baleen whales (Mysticeti) and toothed whales (Odontoceti), are thought to have had their last common ancestor around 34 million years ago. Mysticetes include four extant (living) families: Balaenopteridae (the rorquals), Balaenidae (right whales), Cetotheriidae (the pygmy right whale), and Eschrichtiidae (the grey whale). Odontocetes include the Monodontidae (belugas and narwhals), Physeteridae (the sperm whale), Kogiidae (the dwarf and pygmy sperm whale), and Ziphiidae (the beaked whales), as well as the six families of dolphins and porpoises which are not considered whales in the informal sense.

Whales are fully aquatic, open-ocean animals: they can feed, mate, give birth, suckle and raise their young at sea. Whales range in size from the and dwarf sperm whale to the and blue whale, which is the largest known animal that has ever lived. The sperm whale is the largest toothed predator on Earth. Several whale species exhibit sexual dimorphism, in that the females are larger than males.

Baleen whales have no teeth; instead, they have plates of baleen, fringe-like structures that enable them to expel the huge mouthfuls of water they take in while retaining the krill and plankton they feed on. Because their heads are enormous—making up as much as 40% of their total body mass—and they have throat pleats that enable them to expand their mouths, they are able to take huge quantities of water into their mouth at a time. Baleen whales also have a well-developed sense of smell.

Toothed whales, in contrast, have conical teeth adapted to catching fish or squid. They also have such keen hearing—whether above or below the surface of the water—that some can survive even if they are blind. Some species, such as sperm whales, are particularly well adapted for diving to great depths to catch squid and other favoured prey.

Whales evolved from land-living mammals, and must regularly surface to breathe air, although they can remain underwater for long periods of time. Some species, such as the sperm whale, can stay underwater for up to 90 minutes. They have blowholes (modified nostrils) located on top of their heads, through which air is taken in and expelled. They are warm-blooded, and have a layer of fat, or blubber, under the skin. With streamlined bodies and two limbs that are modified into flippers, whales can travel at speeds of up to 20 knots, though they are not as flexible or agile as seals. Whales produce a great variety of vocalizations, notably the extended songs of the humpback whale. Although whales are widespread, most species prefer the colder waters of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres and migrate to the equator to give birth. Species such as humpbacks and blue whales are capable of travelling thousands of miles without feeding. Males typically mate with multiple females every year, but females only mate every two to three years. Calves are typically born in the spring and summer; females bear all the responsibility for raising them. Mothers in some species fast and nurse their young for one to two years.

Once relentlessly hunted for their products, whales are now protected by international law. The North Atlantic right whales nearly became extinct in the twentieth century, with a population low of 450, and the North Pacific grey whale population is ranked Critically Endangered by the IUCN. Besides the threat from whalers, they also face threats from bycatch and marine pollution. The meat, blubber and baleen of whales have traditionally been used by indigenous peoples of the Arctic. Whales have been depicted in various cultures worldwide, notably by the Inuit and the coastal peoples of Vietnam and Ghana, who sometimes hold whale funerals. Whales occasionally feature in literature and film. A famous example is the great white whale in Herman Melville&#x27;s novel &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;. Small whales, such as belugas, are sometimes kept in captivity and trained to perform tricks, but breeding success has been poor and the animals often die within a few months of capture. Whale watching has become a form of tourism around the world.

==Etymology and definitions==
The word &quot;whale&quot; comes from the Old English &quot;hwæl&quot;, from Proto-Germanic &quot;*hwalaz&quot;, from Proto-Indo-European &quot;*(s)kwal-o-&quot;, meaning &quot;large sea fish&quot;. The Proto-Germanic &quot;*hwalaz&quot; is also the source of Old Saxon &quot;hwal&quot;, Old Norse &quot;hvalr&quot;, &quot;hvalfiskr&quot;, Swedish &quot;val&quot;, Middle Dutch &quot;wal&quot;, &quot;walvisc&quot;, Dutch &quot;walvis&quot;, Old High German &quot;wal&quot;, and German &quot;Wal&quot;. Other archaic English forms include &quot;wal, wale, whal, whalle, whaille, wheal&quot;, etc.

The term &quot;whale&quot; is sometimes used interchangeably with dolphins and porpoises, acting as a synonym for Cetacea. Six species of dolphins have the word &quot;whale&quot; in their name, collectively known as blackfish: the orca, or killer whale, the melon-headed whale, the pygmy killer whale, the false killer whale, and the two species of pilot whales, all of which are classified under the family Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins). Each species has a different reason for it, for example, the killer whale was named &quot;Ballena asesina&quot; &#x27;killer whale&#x27; by Spanish sailors.

The term &quot;Great Whales&quot; covers those currently regulated by the International Whaling Commission: the Odontoceti family Physeteridae (sperm whales); and the Mysticeti families Balaenidae (right and bowhead whales), Eschrichtiidae (grey whales), and some of the Balaenopteridae (Minke, Bryde&#x27;s, Sei, Blue and Fin; not Eden&#x27;s and Omura&#x27;s whales).

==Taxonomy and evolution==
===Phylogeny===
The whales are part of the largely terrestrial mammalian clade Laurasiatheria. Whales do not form a clade or order; the infraorder Cetacea includes dolphins and porpoises, which are not considered whales in the informal sense. The phylogenetic tree shows the relationships of whales and other mammals, with whale groups marked in green.

Cetaceans are divided into two parvorders. The larger parvorder, Mysticeti (baleen whales), is characterized by the presence of baleen, a sieve-like structure in the upper jaw made of keratin, which it uses to filter plankton, among others, from the water. Odontocetes (toothed whales) are characterized by bearing sharp teeth for hunting, as opposed to their counterparts&#x27; baleen.

Cetaceans and artiodactyls now are classified under the order Cetartiodactyla, often still referred to as Artiodactyla, which includes both whales and hippopotamuses. The hippopotamus and pygmy hippopotamus are the whales&#x27; closest terrestrial living relatives.

===Mysticetes===

Mysticetes are also known as baleen whales. They have a pair of blowholes side by side and lack teeth; instead they have baleen plates which form a sieve-like structure in the upper jaw made of keratin, which they use to filter plankton from the water. Some whales, such as the humpback, reside in the polar regions where they feed on a reliable source of schooling fish and krill. These animals rely on their well-developed flippers and tail fin to propel themselves through the water; they swim by moving their fore-flippers and tail fin up and down. Whale ribs loosely articulate with their thoracic vertebrae at the proximal end, but do not form a rigid rib cage. This adaptation allows the chest to compress during deep dives as the pressure increases. Mysticetes consist of four families: rorquals (balaenopterids), cetotheriids, right whales (balaenids), and grey whales (eschrichtiids).

The main difference between each family of mysticete is in their feeding adaptations and subsequent behaviour.
Balaenopterids are the rorquals. These animals, along with the cetotheriids, rely on their throat pleats to gulp large amounts of water while feeding. The throat pleats extend from the mouth to the navel and allow the mouth to expand to a large volume for more efficient capture of the small animals they feed on. Balaenopterids consist of two genera and eight species.
Balaenids are the right whales. These animals have very large heads, which can make up as much as 40% of their body mass, and much of the head is the mouth. This allows them to take in large amounts of water into their mouths, letting them feed more effectively.
Eschrichtiids have one living member: the grey whale. They are bottom feeders, mainly eating crustaceans and benthic invertebrates. They feed by turning on their sides and taking in water mixed with sediment, which is then expelled through the baleen, leaving their prey trapped inside. This is an efficient method of hunting, in which the whale has no major competitors.

===Odontocetes===
Odontocetes are known as toothed whales; they have teeth and only one blowhole. They rely on their well-developed sonar to find their way in the water. Toothed whales send out ultrasonic clicks using the melon. Sound waves travel through the water. Upon striking an object in the water, the sound waves bounce back at the whale. These vibrations are received through fatty tissues in the jaw, which is then rerouted into the ear-bone and into the brain where the vibrations are interpreted. All toothed whales are opportunistic, meaning they will eat anything they can fit in their throat because they are unable to chew. These animals rely on their well-developed flippers and tail fin to propel themselves through the water; they swim by moving their fore-flippers and tail fin up and down. Whale ribs loosely articulate with their thoracic vertebrae at the proximal end, but they do not form a rigid rib cage. This adaptation allows the chest to compress during deep dives as opposed to resisting the force of water pressure. Excluding dolphins and porpoises, odontocetes consist of four families: belugas and narwhals (monodontids), sperm whales (physeterids), dwarf and pygmy sperm whales (kogiids), and beaked whales (ziphiids).

The differences between families of odontocetes include size, feeding adaptations and distribution. Monodontids consist of two species: the beluga and the narwhal. They both reside in the frigid arctic and both have large amounts of blubber. Belugas, being white, hunt in large pods near the surface and around pack ice, their coloration acting as camouflage. Narwhals, being black, hunt in large pods in the aphotic zone, but their underbelly still remains white to remain camouflaged when something is looking directly up or down at them. They have no dorsal fin to prevent collision with pack ice.
Physeterids and Kogiids consist of sperm whales. Sperm whales consist the largest and smallest odontocetes, and spend a large portion of their life hunting squid. &quot;P. macrocephalus&quot; spends most of its life in search of squid in the depths; these animals do not require any degree of light at all, in fact, blind sperm whales have been caught in perfect health. The behaviour of Kogiids remains largely unknown, but, due to their small lungs, they are thought to hunt in the photic zone.
Ziphiids consist of 22 species of beaked whale. These vary from size, to coloration, to distribution, but they all share a similar hunting style. They use a suction technique, aided by a pair of grooves on the underside of their head, not unlike the throat pleats on the rorquals, to feed.

As a formal clade (a group which does not exclude any descendant taxon), odontocetes also contains the porpoises (Phocoenidae) and four or five living families of dolphins: oceanic dolphins (Delphinidae), South Asian river dolphins (Platanistidae), the possibly extinct Yangtze River dolphin (Lipotidae), South American river dolphins (Iniidae), and La Plata dolphin (Pontoporiidae).

===Evolution===

Whales are descendants of land-dwelling mammals of the artiodactyl order (even-toed ungulates). They are related to the &quot;Indohyus&quot;, an extinct chevrotain-like ungulate, from which they split approximately 48 million years ago. Primitive cetaceans, or archaeocetes, first took to the sea approximately 49 million years ago and became fully aquatic 5–10 million years later. What defines an archaeocete is the presence of anatomical features exclusive to cetaceans, alongside other primitive features not found in modern cetaceans, such as visible legs or asymmetrical teeth. Their features became adapted for living in the marine environment. Major anatomical changes included their hearing set-up that channeled vibrations from the jaw to the earbone (&quot;Ambulocetus&quot; 49 mya), a streamlined body and the growth of flukes on the tail (&quot;Protocetus&quot; 43 mya), the migration of the nostrils toward the top of the cranium (blowholes), and the modification of the forelimbs into flippers (&quot;Basilosaurus&quot; 35 mya), and the shrinking and eventual disappearance of the hind limbs (the first odontocetes and mysticetes 34 mya).

Whale morphology shows several examples of convergent evolution, the most obvious being the streamlined fish-like body shape. Other examples include the use of echolocation for hunting in low light conditions — which is the same hearing adaptation used by bats — and, in the rorqual whales, jaw adaptations, similar to those found in pelicans, that enable engulfment feeding.

Today, the closest living relatives of cetaceans are the hippopotamuses; these share a semi-aquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls some 60 mya. Around 40 mya, a common ancestor between the two branched off into cetacea and anthracotheres; nearly all anthracotheres became extinct at the end of the Pleistocene 2.5 mya, eventually leaving only one surviving lineage – the hippopotamus.

Whales split into two separate parvorders around 34 mya – the baleen whales (Mysticetes) and the toothed whales (Odontocetes).

==Biology==
===Anatomy===
Whales have torpedo-shaped bodies with non-flexible necks, limbs modified into flippers, non-existent external ear flaps, a large tail fin, and flat heads (with the exception of monodontids and ziphiids). Whale skulls have small eye orbits, long snouts (with the exception of monodontids and ziphiids) and eyes placed on the sides of its head. Whales range in size from the and dwarf sperm whale to the and blue whale. Overall, they tend to dwarf other cetartiodactyls; the blue whale is the largest creature on Earth. Several species have female-biased sexual dimorphism, with the females being larger than the males. One exception is with the sperm whale, which has males larger than the females.

Odontocetes, such as the sperm whale, possess teeth with cementum cells overlying dentine cells. Unlike human teeth, which are composed mostly of enamel on the portion of the tooth outside of the gum, whale teeth have cementum outside the gum. Only in larger whales, where the cementum is worn away on the tip of the tooth, does enamel show. Mysticetes have large whalebone, as opposed to teeth, made of keratin. Mysticetes have two blowholes, whereas Odontocetes contain only one.

Breathing involves expelling stale air from the blowhole, forming an upward, steamy spout, followed by inhaling fresh air into the lungs; a humpback whale&#x27;s lungs can hold about of air. Spout shapes differ among species, which facilitates identification.

All whales have a thick layer of blubber. In species that live near the poles, the blubber can be as thick as . This blubber can help with buoyancy (which is helpful for a 100-ton whale), protection to some extent as predators would have a hard time getting through a thick layer of fat, and energy for fasting when migrating to the equator; the primary usage for blubber is insulation from the harsh climate. It can constitute as much as 50% of a whale&#x27;s body weight. Calves are born with only a thin layer of blubber, but some species compensate for this with thick lanugos.

Whales have a two- to three-chambered stomach that is similar in structure to those of terrestrial carnivores. Mysticetes contain a proventriculus as an extension of the oesophagus; this contains stones that grind up food. They also have fundic and pyloric chambers.

===Locomotion===

Whales have two flippers on the front, and a tail fin. These flippers contain four digits. Although whales do not possess fully developed hind limbs, some, such as the sperm whale and bowhead whale, possess discrete rudimentary appendages, which may contain feet and digits. Whales are fast swimmers in comparison to seals, which typically cruise at 5–15 kn, or ; the fin whale, in comparison, can travel at speeds up to and the sperm whale can reach speeds of . The fusing of the neck vertebrae, while increasing stability when swimming at high speeds, decreases flexibility; whales are unable to turn their heads. When swimming, whales rely on their tail fin to propel them through the water. Flipper movement is continuous. Whales swim by moving their tail fin and lower body up and down, propelling themselves through vertical movement, while their flippers are mainly used for steering. Some species log out of the water, which may allow them to travel faster. Their skeletal anatomy allows them to be fast swimmers. Most species have a dorsal fin.

Whales are adapted for diving to great depths. In addition to their streamlined bodies, they can slow their heart rate to conserve oxygen; blood is rerouted from tissue tolerant of water pressure to the heart and brain among other organs; haemoglobin and myoglobin store oxygen in body tissue; and they have twice the concentration of myoglobin than haemoglobin. Before going on long dives, many whales exhibit a behaviour known as sounding; they stay close to the surface for a series of short, shallow dives while building their oxygen reserves, and then make a sounding dive.

===Senses===

The whale ear has specific adaptations to the marine environment. In humans, the middle ear works as an impedance equalizer between the outside air&#x27;s low impedance and the cochlear fluid&#x27;s high impedance. In whales, and other marine mammals, there is no great difference between the outer and inner environments. Instead of sound passing through the outer ear to the middle ear, whales receive sound through the throat, from which it passes through a low-impedance fat-filled cavity to the inner ear. The whale ear is acoustically isolated from the skull by air-filled sinus pockets, which allow for greater directional hearing underwater. Odontocetes send out high-frequency clicks from an organ known as a melon. This melon consists of fat, and the skull of any such creature containing a melon will have a large depression. The melon size varies between species, the bigger the more dependent they are on it. A beaked whale for example has a small bulge sitting on top of its skull, whereas a sperm whale&#x27;s head is filled up mainly with the melon.

The whale eye is relatively small for its size, yet they do retain a good degree of eyesight. As well as this, the eyes of a whale are placed on the sides of its head, so their vision consists of two fields, rather than a binocular view like humans have. When belugas surface, their lens and cornea correct the nearsightedness that results from the refraction of light; they contain both rod and cone cells, meaning they can see in both dim and bright light, but they have far more rod cells than they do cone cells. Whales do, however, lack short wavelength sensitive visual pigments in their cone cells indicating a more limited capacity for colour vision than most mammals. Most whales have slightly flattened eyeballs, enlarged pupils (which shrink as they surface to prevent damage), slightly flattened corneas and a tapetum lucidum; these adaptations allow for large amounts of light to pass through the eye and, therefore, a very clear image of the surrounding area. They also have glands on the eyelids and outer corneal layer that act as protection for the cornea.

The olfactory lobes are absent in toothed whales, suggesting that they have no sense of smell. Some whales, such as the bowhead whale, possess a vomeronasal organ, which does mean that they can &quot;sniff out&quot; krill.

Whales are not thought to have a good sense of taste, as their taste buds are atrophied or missing altogether. However, some toothed whales have preferences between different kinds of fish, indicating some sort of attachment to taste. The presence of the Jacobson&#x27;s organ indicates that whales can smell food once inside their mouth, which might be similar to the sensation of taste.

===Communication===

Whale vocalization is likely to serve several purposes. Some species, such as the humpback whale, communicate using melodic sounds, known as whale song. These sounds may be extremely loud, depending on the species. Humpback whales only have been heard making clicks, while toothed whales use sonar that may generate up to 20,000 watts of sound (+73 dBm or +43 dBw) and be heard for many miles.

Captive whales have occasionally been known to mimic human speech. Scientists have suggested this indicates a strong desire on behalf of the whales to communicate with humans, as whales have a very different vocal mechanism, so imitating human speech likely takes considerable effort.

Whales emit two distinct kinds of acoustic signals, which are called whistles and clicks:
Clicks are quick broadband burst pulses, used for sonar, although some lower-frequency broadband vocalizations may serve a non-echolocative purpose such as communication; for example, the pulsed calls of belugas. Pulses in a click train are emitted at intervals of ≈35–50 milliseconds, and in general these inter-click intervals are slightly greater than the round-trip time of sound to the target.
Whistles are narrow-band frequency modulated (FM) signals, used for communicative purposes, such as contact calls.

===Intelligence===

Whales are known to teach, learn, cooperate, scheme, and grieve. The neocortex of many species of whale is home to elongated spindle neurons that, prior to 2007, were known only in hominids. In humans, these cells are involved in social conduct, emotions, judgement, and theory of mind. Whale spindle neurons are found in areas of the brain that are homologous to where they are found in humans, suggesting that they perform a similar function.

Brain size was previously considered a major indicator of the intelligence of an animal. Since most of the brain is used for maintaining bodily functions, greater ratios of brain-to-body mass may increase the amount of brain mass available for more complex cognitive tasks. Allometric analysis indicates that mammalian brain size scales at approximately the ⅔ or ¾ exponent of the body mass. Comparison of a particular animal&#x27;s brain size with the expected brain size based on such allometric analysis provides an encephalisation quotient that can be used as another indication of animal intelligence. Sperm whales have the largest brain mass of any animal on Earth, averaging and in mature males, in comparison to the average human brain which averages in mature males. The brain-to-body mass ratio in some odontocetes, such as belugas and narwhals, is second only to humans.

Small whales are known to engage in complex play behaviour, which includes such things as producing stable underwater toroidal air-core vortex rings or &quot;bubble rings&quot;. There are two main methods of bubble ring production: rapid puffing of a burst of air into the water and allowing it to rise to the surface, forming a ring, or swimming repeatedly in a circle and then stopping to inject air into the helical vortex currents thus formed. They also appear to enjoy biting the vortex-rings, so that they burst into many separate bubbles and then rise quickly to the surface. Some believe this is a means of communication. Whales are also known to produce bubble-nets for the purpose of foraging.

Larger whales are also thought, to some degree, to engage in play. The southern right whale, for example, elevates their tail fluke above the water, remaining in the same position for a considerable amount of time. This is known as &quot;sailing&quot;. It appears to be a form of play and is most commonly seen off the coast of Argentina and South Africa. Humpback whales, among others, are also known to display this behaviour.

=== Life cycle ===
Whales are fully aquatic creatures, which means that birth and courtship behaviours are very different from terrestrial and semi-aquatic creatures. Since they are unable to go onto land to calve, they deliver the baby with the fetus positioned for tail-first delivery. This prevents the baby from drowning either upon or during delivery.
To feed the newborn, whales, being aquatic, must squirt the milk into the mouth of the calf. Nursing can occur while the mother whale is in the vertical or horizontal position. While nursing in the vertical position, a mother whale may sometimes rest with her tail flukes remaining stationary above the water. This position with the flukes above the water is known as &quot;whale-tail-sailing.&quot; Not all whale-tail-sailing includes nursing of the young, as whales have also been observed tail-sailing while no calves were present.

Being mammals, they have mammary glands used for nursing calves; weaning occurs at about 11 months of age. This milk contains high amounts of fat which is meant to hasten the development of blubber; it contains so much fat that it has the consistency of toothpaste. Like humans, female whales typically deliver a single offspring. Whales have a typical gestation period of 12 months. Once born, the absolute dependency of the calf upon the mother lasts from one to two years. Sexual maturity is achieved at around seven to ten years of age. The length of the developmental phases of a whale&#x27;s early life varies between different whale species.

As with humans, the whale mode of reproduction typically produces but one offspring approximately once each year. While whales have fewer offspring over time than most species, the probability of survival for each calf is also greater than for most other species. Female whales are referred to as &quot;cows.&quot; Cows assume full responsibility for the care and training of their young. Male whales, referred to as &quot;bulls,&quot; typically play no role in the process of calf-rearing.

Most baleen whales reside at the poles. To prevent the unborn baleen whale calves from dying of frostbite, the baleen mother must migrate to warmer calving/mating grounds. They will then stay there for a matter of months until the calf has developed enough blubber to survive the bitter temperatures of the poles. Until then, the baleen calves will feed on the mother&#x27;s fatty milk.

With the exception of the humpback whale, it is largely unknown when whales migrate. Most will travel from the Arctic or Antarctic into the tropics to mate, calve, and raise their young during the winter and spring; they will migrate back to the poles in the warmer summer months so the calf can continue growing while the mother can continue eating, as they fast in the breeding grounds. One exception to this is the southern right whale, which migrates to Patagonia and western New Zealand to calve; both are well out of the tropic zone.

===Sleep===

Unlike most animals, whales are conscious breathers. All mammals sleep, but whales cannot afford to become unconscious for long because they may drown. While knowledge of sleep in wild cetaceans is limited, toothed cetaceans in captivity have been recorded to sleep with one side of their brain at a time, so that they may swim, breathe consciously, and avoid both predators and social contact during their period of rest.

A 2008 study found that sperm whales sleep in vertical postures just under the surface in passive shallow &quot;drift-dives&quot;, generally during the day, during which whales do not respond to passing vessels unless they are in contact, leading to the suggestion that whales possibly sleep during such dives.

==Ecology==
===Foraging and predation===


All whales are carnivorous and predatory. Odontocetes, as a whole, mostly feed on fish and cephalopods, and then followed by crustaceans and bivalves. All species are generalist and opportunistic feeders. Mysticetes, as a whole, mostly feed on krill and plankton, followed by crustaceans and other invertebrates. A few are specialists. Examples include the blue whale, which eats almost exclusively krill, the minke whale, which eats mainly schooling fish, the sperm whale, which specialize on squid, and the grey whale which feed on bottom-dwelling invertebrates. The elaborate baleen &quot;teeth&quot; of filter-feeding species, mysticetes, allow them to remove water before they swallow their planktonic food by using the teeth as a sieve. Usually, whales hunt solitarily, but they do sometimes hunt cooperatively in small groups. The former behaviour is typical when hunting non-schooling fish, slow-moving or immobile invertebrates or endothermic prey. When large amounts of prey are available, whales such as certain mysticetes hunt cooperatively in small groups. Some cetaceans may forage with other kinds of animals, such as other species of whales or certain species of pinnipeds.

Large whales, such as mysticetes, are not usually subject to predation, but smaller whales, such as monodontids or ziphiids, are. These species are preyed on by the orca. To subdue and kill whales, orcas continuously ram them with their heads; this can sometimes kill bowhead whales, or severely injure them. Other times they corral the narwhals or belugas before striking. They are typically hunted by groups of 10 or fewer orcas, but they are seldom attacked by an individual. Calves are more commonly taken by orcas, but adults can be targeted as well.

These small whales are also targeted by terrestrial and pagophilic predators. The polar bear is well adapted for hunting Arctic whales and calves. Bears are known to use sit-and-wait tactics as well as active stalking and pursuit of prey on ice or water. Whales lessen the chance of predation by gathering in groups. This however means less room around the breathing hole as the ice slowly closes the gap. When out at sea, whales dive out of the reach of surface-hunting orcas. Polar bear attacks on belugas and narwhals are usually successful in winter, but rarely inflict any damage in summer.

===Whale pump===
A 2010 study considered whales to be a positive influence to the productivity of ocean fisheries, in what has been termed a &quot;whale pump.&quot; Whales carry nutrients such as nitrogen from the depths back to the surface. This functions as an upward biological pump, reversing an earlier presumption that whales accelerate the loss of nutrients to the bottom. This nitrogen input in the Gulf of Maine is &quot;more than the input of all rivers combined&quot; emptying into the gulf, some each year. Whales defecate at the ocean&#x27;s surface; their excrement is important for fisheries because it is rich in iron and nitrogen. The whale faeces are liquid and instead of sinking, they stay at the surface where phytoplankton feed off it.

===Whale fall===

Upon death, whale carcasses fall to the deep ocean and provide a substantial habitat for marine life. Evidence of whale falls in present-day and fossil records shows that deep sea whale falls support a rich assemblage of creatures, with a global diversity of 407 species, comparable to other neritic biodiversity hotspots, such as cold seeps and hydrothermal vents.

Deterioration of whale carcasses happens though a series of three stages. Initially, moving organisms such as sharks and hagfish, scavenge the soft tissues at a rapid rate over a period of months, and as long as two years. This is followed by the colonization of bones and surrounding sediments (which contain organic matter) by enrichment opportunists, such as crustaceans and polychaetes, throughout a period of years. Finally, sulfophilic bacteria reduce the bones releasing hydrogen sulfide enabling the growth of chemoautotrophic organisms, which in turn, support other organisms such as mussels, clams, limpets, and sea snails. This stage may last for decades and supports a rich assemblage of species, averaging 185 species per site.

==Relationship with humans==
===Whaling===

Whaling by humans has existed since the Stone Age. Ancient whalers used harpoons to spear the bigger animals from boats out at sea. People from Norway and Japan started hunting whales around 2000 B.C. Whales are typically hunted for their meat and blubber by aboriginal groups; they used baleen for baskets or roofing, and made tools and masks out of bones. The Inuit hunted whales in the Arctic Ocean. The Basques started whaling as early as the 11th century, sailing as far as Newfoundland in the 16th century in search of right whales. 18th- and 19th-century whalers hunted whales mainly for their oil, which was used as lamp fuel and a lubricant, baleen or whalebone, which was used for items such as corsets and skirt hoops, and ambergris, which was used as a fixative for perfumes. The most successful whaling nations at this time were the Netherlands, Japan, and the United States.

Commercial whaling was historically important as an industry well throughout the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries. Whaling was at that time a sizeable European industry with ships from Britain, France, Spain, Denmark, the Netherlands and Germany, sometimes collaborating to hunt whales in the Arctic, sometimes in competition leading even to war. By the early 1790s, whalers, namely the Americans and Australians, focused efforts in the South Pacific where they mainly hunted sperm whales and right whales, with catches of up to 39,000 right whales by Americans alone. By 1853, US profits reached US$11,000,000 (£6.5m), equivalent to US$348,000,000 (£230m) today, the most profitable year for the American whaling industry. Commonly exploited species included North Atlantic right whales, sperm whales, which were mainly hunted by Americans, bowhead whales, which were mainly hunted by the Dutch, common minke whales, blue whales, and grey whales. The scale of whale harvesting decreased substantially after 1982 when the International Whaling Commission (IWC) placed a moratorium which set a catch limit for each country, excluding aboriginal groups until 2004.

Current whaling nations are Norway, Iceland, and Japan, despite their joining to the IWC, as well as the aboriginal communities of Siberia, Alaska, and northern Canada. Subsistence hunters typically use whale products for themselves and depend on them for survival. National and international authorities have given special treatment to aboriginal hunters since their methods of hunting are seen as less destructive and wasteful. This distinction is being questioned as these aboriginal groups are using more modern weaponry and mechanized transport to hunt with, and are selling whale products in the marketplace. Some anthropologists argue that the term &quot;subsistence&quot; should also apply to these cash-based exchanges as long as they take place within local production and consumption. In 1946, the IWC placed a moratorium, limiting the annual whale catch. Since then, yearly profits for these &quot;subsistence&quot; hunters have been close to US$31 million (£20m) per year.

===Other threats===
Whales can also be threatened by humans more indirectly. They are unintentionally caught in fishing nets by commercial fisheries as bycatch and accidentally swallow fishing hooks. Gillnetting and Seine netting is a significant cause of mortality in whales and other marine mammals. Species commonly entangled include beaked whales. Whales are also affected by marine pollution. High levels of organic chemicals accumulate in these animals since they are high in the food chain. They have large reserves of blubber, more so for toothed whales as they are higher up the food chain than baleen whales. Lactating mothers can pass the toxins on to their young. These pollutants can cause gastrointestinal cancers and greater vulnerability to infectious diseases. They can also be poisoned by swallowing litter, such as plastic bags. Advanced military sonar harms whales. Sonar interferes with the basic biological functions of whales—such as feeding and mating—by impacting their ability to echolocate. Whales swim in response to sonar and sometimes experience decompression sickness due to rapid changes in depth. Mass strandings have been triggered by sonar activity, resulting in injury or death. Whales are sometimes killed or injured during collisions with ships or boats. This is considered to be a significant threat to vulnerable whale populations such as the North Atlantic right whale, whose total population numbers less than 500. It is believed that up to two thirds of whale-ship collisions are not reported; either because they are not noticed in large ships, they occur at night or during conditions of adverse weather or some other reasons. From 2013 up to at least 2023 Chile has been the country in the world with most registered fatal whale-ship collisions.

===Conservation===

Whaling decreased substantially after 1946 when, in response to the steep decline in whale populations, the International Whaling Commission placed a moratorium which set a catch limit for each country; this excluded aboriginal groups up until 2004. As of 2015, aboriginal communities are allowed to take 280 bowhead whales off Alaska and two from the western coast of Greenland, 620 grey whales off Washington state, three common minke whales off the eastern coast of Greenland and 178 on their western coast, 10 fin whales from the west coast of Greenland, nine humpback whales from the west coast of Greenland and 20 off St. Vincent and the Grenadines each year. Several species that were commercially exploited have rebounded in numbers; for example, grey whales may be as numerous as they were prior to harvesting, but the North Atlantic population is functionally extinct. Conversely, the North Atlantic right whale was extirpated from much of its former range, which stretched across the North Atlantic, and only remains in small fragments along the coast of Canada, Greenland, and is considered functionally extinct along the European coastline.

The IWC has designated two whale sanctuaries: the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary, and the Indian Ocean Whale Sanctuary. The Southern Ocean whale sanctuary spans and envelopes Antarctica. The Indian Ocean whale sanctuary takes up all of the Indian Ocean south of 55°S. The IWC is a voluntary organization, with no treaty. Any nation may leave as they wish; the IWC cannot enforce any law it makes.

There are at least 86 cetacean species that are recognized by the International Whaling Commission Scientific Committee. , six are considered at risk, as they are ranked &quot;Critically Endangered&quot; (North Atlantic right whale), &quot;Endangered&quot; (blue whale, North Pacific right whale, and sei whale,) and &quot;Vulnerable&quot; (fin whale and sperm whale). Twenty-one species have a &quot;Data Deficient&quot; ranking. Species that live in polar habitats are vulnerable to the effects of recent and ongoing climate change, particularly the time when pack ice forms and melts.

===Whale watching===

An estimated 13 million people went whale watching globally in 2008, in all oceans except the Arctic. Rules and codes of conduct have been created to minimize harassment of the whales. Iceland, Japan and Norway have both whaling and whale watching industries. Whale watching lobbyists are concerned that the most inquisitive whales, which approach boats closely and provide much of the entertainment on whale-watching trips, will be the first to be taken if whaling is resumed in the same areas. Whale watching generated US$2.1 billion (£1.4 billion) per annum in tourism revenue worldwide, employing around 13,000 workers. In contrast, the whaling industry, with the moratorium in place, generates US$31 million (£20 million) per year. The size and rapid growth of the industry has led to complex and continuing debates with the whaling industry about the best use of whales as a natural resource.

===In myth, literature and art===

As marine creatures that reside in either the depths or the poles, humans knew very little about whales over the course of human history; many feared or revered them. The Vikings and various arctic tribes revered the whale as they were important pieces of their lives. In Inuit creation myths, when &#x27;Big Raven&#x27;, a deity in human form, found a stranded whale, he was told by the Great Spirit where to find special mushrooms that would give him the strength to drag the whale back to the sea and thus, return order to the world. In an Icelandic legend, a man threw a stone at a fin whale and hit the blowhole, causing the whale to burst. The man was told not to go to sea for twenty years, but during the nineteenth year he went fishing and a whale came and killed him.

Whales played a major part in shaping the art forms of many coastal civilizations, such as the Norse, with some dating to the Stone Age. Petroglyphs off a cliff face in Bangudae, South Korea show 300 depictions of various animals, a third of which are whales. Some show particular detail in which there are throat pleats, typical of rorquals. These petroglyphs show these people, of around 7,000 to 3,500 B.C.E. in South Korea, had a very high dependency on whales.

The Pacific Islanders and Australian Aborigines viewed whales as bringers of good and joy. One exception is French Polynesia, where, in many parts, cetaceans are met with great brutality.

In coastal regions of China, Korea and Vietnam, the worship of whale gods, who were associated with Dragon Kings after the arrival of Buddhism, was present along with related legends.The god of the seas, according to Chinese folklore, was a large whale with human limbs.

In Thailand, the most common whales found are the Bryde&#x27;s whale. Thai fishermen refer them as &quot;Pla pu&quot; (; ), &quot;grandfather fish&quot;, what with its large size and its long-term presence in the upper reaches of the Gulf of Thailand. Fishermen do not fish for the whales, holding them in high regard and viewing them as akin to family members. They believe the whales bring good fortune, and their presence is considered as a sign of a healthy marine environment.

In Vietnam, whales hold a sense of divinity. They are so respected in their cultures that they occasionally hold funerals for beached whales, a custom deriving from Vietnam&#x27;s ancient sea-based Champa Kingdom.
Whales have also played a role in sacred texts. The story of Jonah being swallowed by a great fish is told both in the Qur&#x27;an and in the biblical Book of Jonah (and is mentioned by Jesus in the New Testament: Matthew 12:40.). This episode was frequently depicted in medieval art (for example, on a 12th-century column capital at the abbey church of Mozac, France). The Bible also mentions whales in Genesis 1:21, Job 7:12, and Ezekiel 32:2. The &quot;leviathan&quot; described at length in Job 41:1-34 is generally understood to refer to a whale. The &quot;sea monsters&quot; in Lamentations 4:3 have been taken by some to refer to marine mammals, in particular whales, although most modern versions use the word &quot;jackals&quot; instead.
In 1585, Alessandro Farnese, 1585, and Francois, Duke of Anjou, 1582, were greeted on his ceremonial entry into the port city of Antwerp by floats including &quot;Neptune and the Whale&quot;, indicating at least the city&#x27;s dependence on the sea for its wealth.

In 1896, an article in &quot;The Pall Mall Gazette&quot; popularised a practice of alternative medicine that probably began in the whaling town of Eden, Australia two or three years earlier. It was believed that climbing inside a whale carcass and remaining there for a few hours would relieve symptoms of rheumatism.

Whales continue to be prevalent in modern literature. For example, Herman Melville&#x27;s &quot;Moby Dick&quot; features a &quot;great white whale&quot; as the main antagonist for Ahab. The whale is an albino sperm whale, considered by Melville to be the largest type of whale, and is partly based on the historically attested bull whale Mocha Dick. Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s &quot;Just So Stories&quot; includes the story of &quot;How the Whale got in his Throat&quot;. A whale features in the award-winning children&#x27;s book &quot;The Snail and the Whale&quot; (2003) by Julia Donaldson and Axel Scheffler.

Niki Caro&#x27;s film the &quot;Whale Rider&quot; has a Māori girl ride a whale in her journey to be a suitable heir to the chieftain-ship. Walt Disney&#x27;s film &quot;Pinocchio&quot; features a showdown with a giant whale named Monstro at the end of the film.

A recording of &quot;Song with a Humpback Whale&quot; by a team of marine scientists became popular in 1970. Alan Hovhaness&#x27;s orchestral composition &quot;And God Created Great Whales&quot; (1970) includes the recorded sounds of humpback and bowhead whales. Recorded whale songs also appear in a number of other musical works, including Léo Ferré&#x27;s song &quot;Il n&#x27;y a plus rien&quot; and Judy Collins&#x27;s &quot;Farewell to Tarwathie&quot; (on the 1970 album &quot;Whales and Nightingales&quot;).

===In captivity===


Belugas were the first whales to be kept in captivity. Other species were too rare, too shy, or too big. The first beluga was shown at Barnum&#x27;s Museum in New York City in 1861. For most of the 20th century, Canada was the predominant source of wild belugas. They were taken from the St. Lawrence River estuary until the late 1960s, after which they were predominantly taken from the Churchill River estuary until capture was banned in 1992. Russia has become the largest provider since it had been banned in Canada. Belugas are caught in the Amur River delta and their eastern coast, and then are either transported domestically to aquariums or dolphinariums in Moscow, St. Petersburg, and Sochi, or exported to other countries, such as Canada. Most captive belugas are caught in the wild, since captive-breeding programs are not very successful.

As of 2006, 30 belugas were in Canada and 28 in the United States, and 42 deaths in captivity had been reported up to that time. A single specimen can reportedly fetch up to US$100,000 (£64,160) on the market. The beluga&#x27;s popularity is due to its unique colour and its facial expressions. The latter is possible because while most cetacean &quot;smiles&quot; are fixed, the extra movement afforded by the beluga&#x27;s unfused cervical vertebrae allows a greater range of apparent expression.

Between 1960 and 1992, the Navy carried out a program that included the study of marine mammals&#x27; abilities with sonar, with the objective of improving the detection of underwater objects. A large number of belugas were used from 1975 on, the first being dolphins. The program also included training them to carry equipment and material to divers working underwater by holding cameras in their mouths to locate lost objects, survey ships and submarines, and underwater monitoring. A similar program was used by the Russian Navy during the Cold War, in which belugas were also trained for antimining operations in the Arctic.

Aquariums have tried housing other species of whales in captivity. The success of belugas turned attention to maintaining their relative, the narwhal, in captivity. However, in repeated attempts in the 1960s and 1970s, all narwhals kept in captivity died within months. A pair of pygmy right whales were retained in an enclosed area (with nets); they were eventually released in South Africa. There was one attempt to keep a stranded Sowerby&#x27;s beaked whale calf in captivity; the calf rammed into the tank wall, breaking its rostrum, which resulted in death. It was thought that Sowerby&#x27;s beaked whale evolved to swim fast in a straight line, and a tank was not big enough. There have been attempts to keep baleen whales in captivity. There were three attempts to keep grey whales in captivity. Gigi was a grey whale calf that died in transport. Gigi II was another grey whale calf that was captured in the Ojo de Liebre Lagoon, and was transported to SeaWorld. The calf was a popular attraction, and behaved normally, despite being separated from his mother. A year later, the whale grew too big to keep in captivity and was released; it was the first of two grey whales, the other being another grey whale calf named JJ, to successfully be kept in captivity. There were three attempts to keep minke whales in captivity in Japan. They were kept in a tidal pool with a sea-gate at the Izu Mito Sea Paradise. Another, unsuccessful, attempt was made by the U.S. One stranded humpback whale calf was kept in captivity for rehabilitation, but died days later.

==See also==
* List of individual cetaceans
* Whaling in Japan

==References==
==Bibliography==
===Books===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
===Articles===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


===Websites===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
===News===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


=== Other ===
*


==Further reading==

*Research and Education for the Conservation of Baleen Whales, Mingan Island Cetacean Study (MICS)
*Children&#x27;s drawings and lyrics from the song Story Jonas in the Whale/Lord Jonas the Story (French)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="0" end="6" title="Whale" label="Whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756633" start="59" end="66" title="Aquatic animal" label="aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25833" start="67" end="76" title="placental mammal" label="placental"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="77" end="90" title="marine mammal" label="marine mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="112" end="122" title="Colloquialism" label="colloquial"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="184" end="191" title="Cetacea" label="Cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="223" end="230" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="236" end="244" title="porpoise" label="porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="310" end="319" title="Cladistics" label="cladistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="384" end="399" title="Cetartiodactyla" label="Cetartiodactyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="419" end="437" title="even-toed ungulate" label="even-toed ungulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="492" end="504" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="589" end="598" title="parvorder" label="parvorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q168366" start="611" end="623" title="baleen whale" label="baleen whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q144144" start="641" end="654" title="toothed whale" label="toothed whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052390" start="700" end="720" title="Most recent common ancestor" label="last common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="774" end="780" title="Neontology" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="790" end="798" title="Family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q232829" start="800" end="815" title="Balaenopteridae" label="Balaenopteridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q782603" start="832" end="842" title="Balaenidae" label="Balaenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q766441" start="859" end="872" title="Cetotheriidae" label="Cetotheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q898360" start="902" end="916" title="Eschrichtiidae" label="Eschrichtiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q219419" start="959" end="971" title="Monodontidae" label="Monodontidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21446362" start="996" end="1008" title="Physeteridae" label="Physeteridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="1014" end="1025" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965630" start="1028" end="1036" title="Kogiidae" label="Kogiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q193106" start="1076" end="1085" title="Ziphiidae" label="Ziphiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q42669" start="1367" end="1384" title="dwarf sperm whale" label="dwarf sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q42196" start="1396" end="1406" title="blue whale" label="blue whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="1467" end="1478" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="1551" end="1568" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29498" start="1790" end="1795" title="krill" label="krill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="1800" end="1808" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="2184" end="2189" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="2624" end="2635" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q389545" start="2689" end="2698" title="Blowhole (anatomy)" label="blowholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q907248" start="2803" end="2815" title="Endotherm" label="warm-blooded"/>
<link wikidata="Q885539" start="2845" end="2852" title="blubber" label="blubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q128822" start="2981" end="2986" title="Knot (unit)" label="knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="3032" end="3037" title="Pinniped" label="seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="3122" end="3136" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q193683" start="3774" end="3800" title="North Atlantic right whale" label="North Atlantic right whale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3888" end="3923" title="Gray whale#North Pacific" label="North Pacific grey whale population"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="3934" end="3955" title="Critically Endangered" label="Critically Endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="3963" end="3967" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q275426" start="4082" end="4088" title="baleen" label="baleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="4421" end="4436" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="4456" end="4465" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q132072" start="4495" end="4502" title="beluga whale" label="belugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366963" start="4660" end="4674" title="Whale watching" label="Whale watching"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="4795" end="4806" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="4830" end="4844" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="4871" end="4890" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q35219" start="5013" end="5022" title="Old Saxon" label="Old Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="5041" end="5050" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="5093" end="5100" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q178806" start="5118" end="5130" title="Middle Dutch" label="Middle Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="5169" end="5174" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="5195" end="5210" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="5232" end="5238" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="5417" end="5424" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="5430" end="5438" title="porpoise" label="porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="5465" end="5472" title="Cetacea" label="Cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="5582" end="5586" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q724349" start="5609" end="5627" title="melon-headed whale" label="melon-headed whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q244172" start="5633" end="5651" title="pygmy killer whale" label="pygmy killer whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q208132" start="5657" end="5675" title="false killer whale" label="false killer whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q459616" start="5700" end="5711" title="pilot whale" label="pilot whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q215760" start="5759" end="5770" title="Delphinidae" label="Delphinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="6023" end="6055" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="6420" end="6425" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q27379" start="6426" end="6440" title="Laurasiatheria" label="Laurasiatheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="6449" end="6477" title="paraphyletic" label="do not form a clade or order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="6511" end="6518" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="6524" end="6532" title="porpoise" label="porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="6594" end="6611" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q168366" start="6766" end="6775" title="Mysticeti" label="Mysticeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="6885" end="6892" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="6918" end="6926" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q144144" start="6958" end="6969" title="Odontoceti" label="Odontocetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="7103" end="7114" title="artiodactyl" label="artiodactyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="7151" end="7166" title="Cetartiodactyla" label="Cetartiodactyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="7240" end="7252" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q389545" start="7438" end="7446" title="Blowhole (anatomy)" label="blowhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q275426" start="7495" end="7508" title="baleen plates" label="baleen plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="7602" end="7610" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q29498" start="7749" end="7754" title="krill" label="krill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="7905" end="7913" title="Caudal fin" label="tail fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q578786" start="7968" end="7986" title="thoracic vertebrae" label="thoracic vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="7994" end="8002" title="proximal" label="proximal"/>
<link wikidata="Q232829" start="8169" end="8194" title="Balaenopteridae" label="rorquals (balaenopterids)"/>
<link wikidata="Q766441" start="8196" end="8208" title="Cetotheriidae" label="cetotheriids"/>
<link wikidata="Q782603" start="8210" end="8234" title="Balaenidae" label="right whales (balaenids)"/>
<link wikidata="Q898360" start="8240" end="8267" title="Eschrichtiidae" label="grey whales (eschrichtiids)"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="9581" end="9591" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919686" start="9609" end="9614" title="melon (cetacean)" label="melon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="10176" end="10184" title="Caudal fin" label="tail fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q578786" start="10239" end="10257" title="thoracic vertebrae" label="thoracic vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="10265" end="10273" title="proximal" label="proximal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219419" start="10506" end="10540" title="Monodontidae" label="belugas and narwhals (monodontids)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21446362" start="10542" end="10568" title="Physeteridae" label="sperm whales (physeterids)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965630" start="10570" end="10608" title="Kogiidae" label="dwarf and pygmy sperm whales (kogiids)"/>
<link wikidata="Q193106" start="10614" end="10638" title="Ziphiidae" label="beaked whales (ziphiids)"/>
<link wikidata="Q132072" start="10781" end="10787" title="beluga whale" label="beluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q159426" start="10796" end="10803" title="narwhal" label="narwhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="11277" end="11288" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q579649" start="11726" end="11737" title="photic zone" label="photic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193106" start="11773" end="11785" title="beaked whale" label="beaked whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q232829" start="12010" end="12017" title="rorqual" label="rorqual"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="12095" end="12100" title="taxon" label="taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="12133" end="12141" title="porpoise" label="porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q215760" start="12221" end="12232" title="Delphinidae" label="Delphinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q950620" start="12235" end="12260" title="South Asian river dolphin" label="South Asian river dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078080" start="12263" end="12276" title="Platanistidae" label="Platanistidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q188130" start="12300" end="12321" title="Yangtze River dolphin" label="Yangtze River dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242241" start="12323" end="12332" title="Lipotidae" label="Lipotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896224" start="12335" end="12364" title="Inia" label="South American river dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q54873" start="12366" end="12373" title="Iniidae" label="Iniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q622597" start="12380" end="12396" title="La Plata dolphin" label="La Plata dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="12487" end="12498" title="artiodactyl" label="artiodactyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="12499" end="12504" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q133094" start="12558" end="12566" title="Indohyus" label="Indohyus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8535351" start="12585" end="12595" title="chevrotain" label="chevrotain"/>
<link wikidata="Q568536" start="12693" end="12705" title="archaeocetes" label="archaeocetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="13064" end="13082" title="Sea" label="marine environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q132405" start="13200" end="13211" title="Ambulocetus" label="Ambulocetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="13221" end="13224" title="Mya (unit)" label="mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q634407" start="13229" end="13240" title="streamline (fluid dynamics)" label="streamlined"/>
<link wikidata="Q21446751" start="13290" end="13300" title="Protocetus" label="Protocetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="13368" end="13375" title="cranium" label="cranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q389545" start="13377" end="13386" title="Blowhole (anatomy)" label="blowholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134884" start="13448" end="13460" title="Basilosaurus" label="Basilosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="13630" end="13650" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921783" start="13747" end="13759" title="Animal echolocation" label="echolocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="13843" end="13846" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="13921" end="13928" title="pelican" label="pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="14021" end="14033" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715289" start="14051" end="14063" title="Semiaquatic" label="semi-aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q574319" start="14207" end="14221" title="anthracotheres" label="anthracotheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q219419" start="14702" end="14713" title="Monodontidae" label="monodontids"/>
<link wikidata="Q193106" start="14718" end="14726" title="Ziphiidae" label="ziphiids"/>
<link wikidata="Q848382" start="15281" end="15289" title="cementum" label="cementum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189637" start="15306" end="15313" title="dentine" label="dentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q143942" start="15370" end="15376" title="Tooth enamel" label="enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q275426" start="15588" end="15597" title="whalebone" label="whalebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q389545" start="15755" end="15763" title="blowhole (anatomy)" label="blowhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q885539" start="16001" end="16008" title="blubber" label="blubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q522113" start="16683" end="16697" title="proventriculus" label="proventriculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173710" start="16721" end="16731" title="oesophagus" label="oesophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="16789" end="16795" title="Fundic stomach" label="fundic"/>
<link wikidata="Q290248" start="16800" end="16807" title="Pyloric stomach" label="pyloric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685290" start="17742" end="17745" title="Cetacean surfacing behaviour" label="log"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568355" start="17879" end="17889" title="dorsal fin" label="dorsal fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="18131" end="18142" title="haemoglobin" label="haemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="18147" end="18156" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="18532" end="18538" title="Ocean" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q501553" start="18567" end="18577" title="middle ear" label="middle ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q975684" start="18645" end="18654" title="Acoustic impedance" label="impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q317857" start="18663" end="18670" title="cochlea" label="cochlea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919686" start="19204" end="19209" title="melon (cetacean)" label="melon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505544" start="19941" end="19944" title="rod cell" label="rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q147298" start="19949" end="19953" title="cone cell" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045562" start="20375" end="20390" title="tapetum lucidum" label="tapetum lucidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040445" start="20568" end="20587" title="corneal epithelium" label="outer corneal layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q644945" start="20632" end="20647" title="olfactory lobes" label="olfactory lobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q174652" start="20748" end="20761" title="bowhead whale" label="bowhead whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q336484" start="20773" end="20790" title="vomeronasal organ" label="vomeronasal organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q523231" start="21404" end="21414" title="whale sound" label="whale song"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921783" start="21555" end="21560" title="biosonar" label="sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q777017" start="21612" end="21615" title="dBm" label="dBm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285395" start="21623" end="21626" title="Decibel watt" label="dBw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921783" start="22084" end="22089" title="biosonar" label="sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q723733" start="22306" end="22317" title="millisecond" label="millisecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="22458" end="22482" title="frequency modulation" label="frequency modulated (FM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384084" start="22694" end="22709" title="spindle neurons" label="spindle neurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030681" start="23015" end="23025" title="Brain size" label="Brain size"/>
<link wikidata="Q519888" start="23289" end="23299" title="Allometric" label="Allometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q646427" start="23534" end="23558" title="encephalization quotient" label="encephalisation quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="23622" end="23633" title="Sperm whale" label="Sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773734" start="23795" end="23819" title="brain-to-body mass ratio" label="brain-to-body mass ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241394" start="24016" end="24022" title="toroid" label="toroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q732722" start="24034" end="24040" title="vortex" label="vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982231" start="24056" end="24067" title="bubble ring" label="bubble ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q201717" start="24309" end="24316" title="Helix" label="helical"/>
<link wikidata="Q244410" start="24674" end="24694" title="southern right whale" label="southern right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="24931" end="24940" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="24945" end="24957" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="24959" end="24973" title="Humpback whale" label="Humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139299" start="26602" end="26622" title="R/K selection theory" label="mode of reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="27596" end="27603" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q244410" start="27874" end="27894" title="southern right whale" label="southern right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="27914" end="27923" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="28871" end="28875" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="28880" end="28890" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="28914" end="28924" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="28930" end="28937" title="bivalve" label="bivalve"/>
<link wikidata="Q29498" start="29033" end="29038" title="krill" label="krill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="29043" end="29051" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="29087" end="29099" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42196" start="29146" end="29156" title="blue whale" label="blue whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612407" start="29199" end="29210" title="minke whale" label="minke whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="29250" end="29261" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="29283" end="29288" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="29968" end="29977" title="pinnipeds" label="pinnipeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124453" start="30593" end="30603" title="Pagophily" label="pagophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379114" start="31653" end="31668" title="Whale faeces" label="Whales defecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="31865" end="31878" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q576725" start="32203" end="32210" title="neritic" label="neritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107856" start="32242" end="32251" title="cold seep" label="cold seep"/>
<link wikidata="Q867648" start="32257" end="32274" title="hydrothermal vent" label="hydrothermal vent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="32388" end="32393" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q75713" start="32399" end="32406" title="hagfish" label="hagfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="32640" end="32651" title="crustaceans" label="crustaceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18952" start="32656" end="32667" title="polychaetes" label="polychaetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="32756" end="32772" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q747472" start="32796" end="32812" title="chemoautotrophic" label="chemoautotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="33064" end="33071" title="Whaling" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="33104" end="33113" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q207574" start="33136" end="33143" title="harpoon" label="harpoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653150" start="33303" end="33307" title="whale meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680130" start="33471" end="33478" title="History of Basque whaling" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="33543" end="33555" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527843" start="33589" end="33601" title="right whales" label="right whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053334" start="33665" end="33668" title="whale oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q275426" start="33715" end="33734" title="baleen" label="baleen or whalebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180225" start="33769" end="33775" title="corset" label="corset"/>
<link wikidata="Q836084" start="33781" end="33792" title="crinoline" label="skirt hoops"/>
<link wikidata="Q188774" start="33798" end="33807" title="ambergris" label="ambergris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="34973" end="35005" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="35200" end="35203" title="International Whaling Commission" label="IWC"/>
<link wikidata="Q814689" start="36254" end="36261" title="bycatch" label="bycatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474920" start="36302" end="36313" title="Gillnetting" label="Gillnetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q600580" start="36318" end="36331" title="Seine fishing" label="Seine netting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058325" start="36482" end="36498" title="marine pollution" label="marine pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q912951" start="36515" end="36531" title="Persistent organic pollutant" label="organic chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526839" start="36805" end="36828" title="gastrointestinal cancer" label="gastrointestinal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764300" start="36959" end="36986" title="Marine mammals and sonar" label="military sonar harms whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921783" start="37108" end="37118" title="Animal echolocation" label="echolocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q460591" start="37178" end="37200" title="decompression sickness" label="decompression sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366544" start="37237" end="37247" title="Cetacean stranding" label="strandings"/>
<link wikidata="Q193683" start="37485" end="37511" title="North Atlantic right whale" label="North Atlantic right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="37804" end="37809" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="38023" end="38055" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q174652" start="38224" end="38238" title="bowhead whales" label="bowhead whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q201808" start="38339" end="38357" title="common minke whale" label="common minke whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q179020" start="38429" end="38438" title="fin whale" label="fin whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="38479" end="38493" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q757" start="38539" end="38569" title="St. Vincent and the Grenadines" label="St. Vincent and the Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38743" end="38768" title="Gray whale#North Atlantic" label="North Atlantic population"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382594" start="38772" end="38792" title="functionally extinct" label="functionally extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885152" start="39120" end="39150" title="Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary" label="Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421507" start="39160" end="39188" title="Indian Ocean Whale Sanctuary" label="Indian Ocean Whale Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="39534" end="39566" title="International Whaling Commission" label="International Whaling Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="39644" end="39665" title="Critically Endangered species" label="Critically Endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="39708" end="39718" title="Endangered species" label="Endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="39791" end="39801" title="Vulnerable species" label="Vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245245" start="39869" end="39883" title="Data Deficient" label="Data Deficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="39987" end="40001" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366963" start="40115" end="40129" title="whale watching" label="whale watching"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="40909" end="40925" title="whaling" label="whaling industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="40960" end="40976" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="41137" end="41150" title="human history" label="human history"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="41185" end="41192" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="41286" end="41291" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q215304" start="41292" end="41305" title="creation myth" label="creation myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172865" start="41402" end="41414" title="Great Spirit" label="Great Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179020" start="41600" end="41609" title="fin whale" label="fin whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908400" start="41888" end="41893" title="North Germanic peoples" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="41919" end="41928" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q232829" start="42126" end="42133" title="rorqual" label="rorqual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="42264" end="42281" title="Pacific Islanders" label="Pacific Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="42286" end="42307" title="Australian Aborigines" label="Australian Aborigines"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="42368" end="42384" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q939440" start="42549" end="42560" title="Dragon King" label="Dragon King"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="42583" end="42591" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221056" start="42771" end="42789" title="Bryde&amp;#x27;s whale" label="Bryde&amp;#x27;s whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359524" start="42934" end="42950" title="Bangkok Bay" label="upper reaches of"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="42955" end="42971" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q10831815" start="43230" end="43247" title="Whale worship" label="sense of divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="43402" end="43416" title="Champa" label="Champa Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468262" start="43479" end="43484" title="Jonah" label="Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601901" start="43537" end="43548" title="Jonah in Islam" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q178819" start="43569" end="43582" title="Book of Jonah" label="Book of Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="43632" end="43639" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="43689" end="43697" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="43741" end="43748" title="capital (architecture)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q673842" start="43772" end="43777" title="Mozac" label="Mozac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="43792" end="43797" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="43822" end="43829" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179962" start="43836" end="43839" title="Job (biblical figure)" label="Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q194064" start="43850" end="43857" title="Ezekiel" label="Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192677" start="43874" end="43883" title="leviathan" label="leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312903" start="44174" end="44192" title="Alessandro Farnese, Duke of Parma and Piacenza" label="Alessandro Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="44294" end="44301" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628706" start="44461" end="44482" title="The Pall Mall Gazette" label="The Pall Mall Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="44515" end="44535" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047387" start="44579" end="44583" title="Eden, New South Wales" label="Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="44585" end="44594" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="44738" end="44748" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="44818" end="44833" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="44847" end="44856" title="Moby Dick" label="Moby Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437626" start="45089" end="45099" title="Mocha Dick" label="Mocha Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="45101" end="45116" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247723" start="45130" end="45145" title="Just So Stories" label="Just So Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q15546693" start="45284" end="45307" title="The Snail and the Whale" label="The Snail and the Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711833" start="45324" end="45339" title="Julia Donaldson" label="Julia Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q96116" start="45344" end="45358" title="Axel Scheffler" label="Axel Scheffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q449163" start="45361" end="45370" title="Niki Caro" label="Niki Caro"/>
<link wikidata="Q19393" start="45393" end="45404" title="Whale Rider" label="Whale Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341553" start="45531" end="45540" title="Pinocchio (1940 film)" label="Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237652" start="45592" end="45599" title="Monstro" label="Monstro"/>
<link wikidata="Q542232" start="45734" end="45748" title="Alan Hovhaness" label="Alan Hovhaness"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892062" start="45785" end="45813" title="And God Created Great Whales" label="And God Created Great Whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q523231" start="45897" end="45908" title="Whale vocalization" label="whale songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q320146" start="45967" end="45976" title="Léo Ferré" label="Léo Ferré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148526" start="45995" end="46018" title="Il n&amp;#x27;y a plus rien" label="Il n&amp;#x27;y a plus rien"/>
<link wikidata="Q254576" start="46029" end="46041" title="Judy Collins" label="Judy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990544" start="46108" end="46131" title="Whales and Nightingales" label="Whales and Nightingales"/>
<link wikidata="Q808531" start="46297" end="46317" title="Barnum&amp;#x27;s American Museum" label="Barnum&amp;#x27;s Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="46321" end="46334" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059074" start="46450" end="46476" title="Estuary of St. Lawrence" label="St. Lawrence River estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318" start="46550" end="46565" title="Churchill River (Hudson Bay)" label="Churchill River"/>
<link wikidata="Q491675" start="46812" end="46824" title="dolphinarium" label="dolphinarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="46829" end="46835" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="46837" end="46851" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q39420" start="46857" end="46862" title="Sochi" label="Sochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q327968" start="47290" end="47307" title="facial expression" label="facial expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="47542" end="47546" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921783" start="47632" end="47637" title="Animal echolocation" label="sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="47961" end="47970" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="48034" end="48046" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="48107" end="48117" title="Naval mine" label="antimining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068929" start="49062" end="49082" title="Ojo de Liebre Lagoon" label="Ojo de Liebre Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946237" start="49107" end="49115" title="SeaWorld San Diego" label="SeaWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="49524" end="49532" title="waterway" label="sea-gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964139" start="49727" end="49755" title="List of individual cetaceans" label="List of individual cetaceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934603" start="49758" end="49774" title="Whaling in Japan" label="Whaling in Japan"/>
</links>
</doc>
