<doc id="30227" wikidata="Q672" url="?curid=30227" title="Tuvalu">
<text>Tuvalu ( ) is an island country in the Polynesian subregion of Oceania in the Pacific Ocean, about midway between Hawaii and Australia. It lies east-northeast of the Santa Cruz Islands (which belong to the Solomon Islands), northeast of Vanuatu, southeast of Nauru, south of Kiribati, west of Tokelau, northwest of Samoa and Wallis and Futuna, and north of Fiji.

Tuvalu is composed of three reef islands and six atolls spread out between the latitude of 5° and 10° south and between the longitude of 176° and 180°. They lie west of the International Date Line. The 2017 census determined that Tuvalu had a population of 10,645, making it the second-least populous country in the world, behind Vatican City. Tuvalu&#x27;s total land area is .

The first inhabitants of Tuvalu were Polynesians arriving as part of the migration of Polynesians into the Pacific that began about three thousand years ago. Long before European contact with the Pacific islands, Polynesians frequently voyaged by canoe between the islands. Polynesian navigation skills enabled them to make elaborately planned journeys in either double-hulled sailing canoes or outrigger canoes. Scholars believe that the Polynesians spread out from Samoa and Tonga into the Tuvaluan atolls, which then served as a stepping stone for further migration into the Polynesian outliers in Melanesia and Micronesia.

In 1568, Spanish explorer and cartographer Álvaro de Mendaña became the first European known to sail through the archipelago, sighting the island of Nui during an expedition he was making in search of Terra Australis. The island of Funafuti was named Ellice&#x27;s Island in 1819. Later, the whole group was named Ellice Islands by English hydrographer Alexander George Findlay. In the late 19th century, Great Britain claimed control over the Ellice Islands, designating them as within their sphere of influence. Between 9 and 16 October 1892, Captain Herbert Gibson of declared each of the Ellice Islands a British protectorate. Britain assigned a resident commissioner to administer the Ellice Islands as part of the British Western Pacific Territories (BWPT). From 1916 to 1975, they were managed as part of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony.

A referendum was held in 1974 to determine whether the Gilbert Islands and Ellice Islands should each have their own administration. As a result, the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony legally ceased to exist on 1 October 1975; on 1 January 1976, the old administration was officially separated, and two separate British colonies, Kiribati and Tuvalu, were formed. On 1 October 1978, Tuvalu became fully independent as a sovereign state within the Commonwealth, and is a constitutional monarchy with King Charles III as King of Tuvalu. On 5 September 2000, Tuvalu became the 189th member of the United Nations.

The islands do not have a significant amount of soil, so the country relies heavily on imports and fishing for food. Licensing fishing permits to international companies, grants and aid projects, and remittances to their families from Tuvaluan seafarers who work on cargo ships are important parts of the economy. Because it is a low-lying island nation, Tuvalu is extremely vulnerable to sea level rise due to climate change. It is active in international climate negotiations as part of the Alliance of Small Island States.

==History==

===Prehistory===
The origins of the people of Tuvalu are addressed in the theories regarding the migration into the Pacific that began about 3,000 years ago. During pre-European-contact times, there was frequent canoe voyaging between the nearer islands including Samoa and Tonga. Eight of the nine islands of Tuvalu were inhabited. This explains the origin of the name, Tuvalu, which means &quot;eight standing together&quot; in Tuvaluan (compare to &quot;*walu&quot; meaning &quot;eight&quot; in Proto-Austronesian). Possible evidence of human-made fires in the Caves of Nanumanga suggests humans may have occupied the islands for thousands of years.

An important creation myth in the islands of Tuvalu is the story of &quot;te Pusi mo te Ali&quot; (the Eel and the Flounder), who are said to have created the islands of Tuvalu. &quot;Te Ali&quot; (the flounder) is believed to be the origin of the flat atolls of Tuvalu and &quot;te Pusi&quot; (the eel) is the model for the coconut palms that are important in the lives of Tuvaluans. The stories of the ancestors of the Tuvaluans vary from island to island. On Niutao, Funafuti and Vaitupu, the founding ancestor is described as being from Samoa, whereas on Nanumea, the founding ancestor is described as being from Tonga.

===Early contacts with other cultures===
Tuvalu was first sighted by Europeans on 16 January 1568, during the voyage of Álvaro de Mendaña from Spain, who sailed past Nui and charted it as &quot;Isla de Jesús&quot; (Spanish for &quot;Island of Jesus&quot;) because the previous day was the feast of the Holy Name. Mendaña made contact with the islanders but was unable to land. During Mendaña&#x27;s second voyage across the Pacific, he passed Niulakita on 29 August 1595, which he named &quot;La Solitaria&quot;.

Captain John Byron passed through the islands of Tuvalu in 1764, during his circumnavigation of the globe as captain of the . He charted the atolls as &quot;Lagoon Islands&quot;. The first recorded sighting of Nanumea by Europeans was by Spanish naval officer Francisco Mourelle de la Rúa who sailed past it on 5 May 1781 as captain of the frigate &quot;La Princesa&quot;, when attempting a southern crossing of the Pacific from the Philippines to New Spain. He charted Nanumea as &quot;San Augustin&quot;. Keith S. Chambers and Doug Munro (1980) identified Niutao as the island that Mourelle also sailed past on 5 May 1781, thus solving what Europeans had called &quot;The Mystery of Gran Cocal&quot;. Mourelle&#x27;s map and journal named the island &quot;El Gran Cocal&quot; (&#x27;The Great Coconut Plantation&#x27;); however, the latitude and longitude was uncertain. Longitude could be reckoned only crudely at the time, as accurate chronometers did not become available until the late 18th century.

In 1809, Captain Patterson in the brig &quot;Elizabeth&quot; sighted Nanumea while passing through the northern Tuvalu waters on a trading voyage from Port Jackson, Sydney, Australia to China.
In May 1819, Arent Schuyler de Peyster, of New York, captain of the armed brigantine or privateer &quot;Rebecca&quot;, sailing under British colours, passed through the southern Tuvaluan waters. De Peyster sighted Nukufetau, and Funafuti which he named Ellice&#x27;s Island after an English politician, Edward Ellice, the Member of Parliament for Coventry and the owner of the &quot;Rebecca&quot;″s cargo. The name Ellice was applied to all nine islands after the work of English hydrographer Alexander George Findlay.

In 1820, the Russian explorer Mikhail Lazarev visited Nukufetau as commander of the &quot;Mirny&quot;. Louis-Isidore Duperrey, captain of &quot;La Coquille&quot;, sailed past Nanumanga in May 1824 during a circumnavigation of the Earth (1822–1825). A Dutch expedition by the frigate &quot;Maria Reigersberg&quot; under captain Koerzen, and the corvette &quot;Pollux&quot; under captain C. Eeg, found Nui on the morning of 14 June 1825 and named the main island (Fenua Tapu) as &quot;Nederlandsch Eiland&quot;.

Whalers began roving the Pacific, although they visited Tuvalu only infrequently because of the difficulties of landing on the atolls. The American Captain George Barrett of the Nantucket whaler &quot;Independence II&quot; has been identified as the first whaler to hunt the waters around Tuvalu. He bartered coconuts from the people of Nukulaelae in November 1821, and also visited Niulakita. He established a shore camp on Sakalua islet of Nukufetau, where coal was used to melt down the whale blubber.

Christianity came to Tuvalu in 1861 when Elekana, a deacon of a Congregational church in Manihiki, Cook Islands, became caught in a storm and drifted for eight weeks before landing at Nukulaelae on 10 May 1861. Elekana began preaching Christianity. He was trained at Malua Theological College, a London Missionary Society (LMS) school in Samoa, before beginning his work in establishing the Church of Tuvalu. In 1865, the Rev. Archibald Wright Murray of the LMS, a Protestant congregationalist missionary society, arrived as the first European missionary; he also evangelised among the inhabitants of Tuvalu. By 1878 Protestantism was considered well established, as there were preachers on each island. In the later 19th and early 20th centuries, the ministers of what became the Church of Tuvalu (&quot;Te Ekalesia Kelisiano Tuvalu&quot;) were predominantly Samoans, who influenced the development of the Tuvaluan language and the music of Tuvalu.

For less than a year between 1862 and 1863, Peruvian ships engaged in the so-called &quot;blackbirding&quot; trade, by which they recruited or impressed workers, combed the smaller islands of Polynesia from Easter Island in the eastern Pacific to Tuvalu and the southern atolls of the Gilbert Islands (now Kiribati). They sought recruits to fill the extreme labour shortage in Peru. On Funafuti and Nukulaelae, the resident traders facilitated the recruiting of the islanders by the &quot;blackbirders&quot;. The Rev. Archibald Wright Murray, the earliest European missionary in Tuvalu, reported that in 1863 about 170 people were taken from Funafuti and about 250 were taken from Nukulaelae, as there were fewer than 100 of the 300 recorded in 1861 as living on Nukulaelae.

The islands came into Britain&#x27;s sphere of influence in the late 19th century, when each of the Ellice Islands was declared a British protectorate by Captain Herbert Gibson of , between 9 and 16 October 1892.

===Trading firms and traders===

Trading companies became active in Tuvalu in the mid-19th century; the trading companies engaged white (palagi) traders who lived on the islands. John (also known as Jack) O&#x27;Brien was the first European to settle in Tuvalu; he became a trader on Funafuti in the 1850s. He married Salai, the daughter of the paramount chief of Funafuti. Louis Becke, who later found success as a writer, was a trader on Nanumanga from April 1880 until the trading station was destroyed later that year in a cyclone. He then became a trader on Nukufetau.

In 1892, Captain Edward Davis of reported on trading activities and traders on each of the islands visited. Captain Davis identified the following traders in the Ellice Group: Edmund Duffy (Nanumea); Jack Buckland (Niutao); Harry Nitz (Vaitupu); Jack O&#x27;Brien (Funafuti); Alfred Restieaux and Emile Fenisot (Nukufetau); and Martin Kleis (Nui). During this time, the greatest number of palagi traders lived on the atolls, acting as agents for the trading companies. Some islands would have competing traders, while dryer islands might only have a single trader.

In the 1890s, structural changes occurred in the operation of the Pacific trading companies; they moved from a practice of having traders resident on each island to instead becoming a business operation where the supercargo (the cargo manager of a trading ship) would deal directly with the islanders when a ship visited an island. After the high point in the 1880s, the numbers of palagi traders in Tuvalu declined; the last of them were Fred Whibley on Niutao, Alfred Restieaux on Nukufetau, and Martin Kleis on Nui. By 1909 there were no more resident palagi traders representing the trading companies, although Whibley, Restieaux and Kleis remained in the islands until their deaths.

===Scientific expeditions and travellers===

The United States Exploring Expedition under Charles Wilkes visited Funafuti, Nukufetau, and Vaitupu in 1841. During this expedition, engraver and illustrator Alfred Thomas Agate recorded the dress and tattoo patterns of the men of Nukufetau.

In 1885 or 1886, the New Zealand photographer Thomas Andrew visited Funafuti and Nui.

In 1890, Robert Louis Stevenson, his wife Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson and her son Lloyd Osbourne sailed on the &quot;Janet Nicoll&quot;, a trading steamer owned by Henderson and Macfarlane of Auckland, New Zealand, which operated between Sydney and Auckland and into the central Pacific. The &quot;Janet Nicoll&quot; visited three of the Ellice Islands; while Fanny records that they made landfall at Funafuti, Niutao and Nanumea, Jane Resture suggests that it was more likely they landed at Nukufetau rather than Funafuti, as Fanny describes meeting Alfred Restieaux and his wife Litia; however they had been living on Nukufetau since the 1880s. An account of this voyage was written by Fanny Stevenson and published under the title &quot;The Cruise of the Janet Nichol&quot;, together with photographs taken by Robert Louis Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne.

In 1894, Count Rudolf Festetics de Tolna, his wife Eila (&quot;née&quot; Haggin) and her daughter Blanche Haggin visited Funafuti aboard the yacht &quot;Le Tolna&quot;. The Count spent several days photographing men and women on Funafuti.
The boreholes on Funafuti, at the site now called &quot;Darwin&#x27;s Drill&quot;, are the result of drilling conducted by the Royal Society of London for the purpose of investigating the formation of coral reefs to determine whether traces of shallow water organisms could be found at depth in the coral of Pacific atolls. This investigation followed the work on &quot;The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs&quot; conducted by Charles Darwin in the Pacific. Drilling occurred in 1896, 1897 and 1898. Professor Edgeworth David of the University of Sydney was a member of the 1896 &quot;Funafuti Coral Reef Boring Expedition of the Royal Society&quot;, under Professor William Sollas and led the expedition in 1897. Photographers on these trips recorded people, communities, and scenes at Funafuti.

Charles Hedley, a naturalist at the Australian Museum, accompanied the 1896 expedition, and during his stay on Funafuti he collected invertebrate and ethnological objects. The descriptions of these were published in &quot;Memoir III of the Australian Museum Sydney&quot; between 1896 and 1900. Hedley also wrote the &quot;General Account of the Atoll of Funafuti&quot;, &quot;The Ethnology of Funafuti&quot;, and &quot;The Mollusca of Funafuti&quot;. Edgar Waite was also part of the 1896 expedition and published &quot;The mammals, reptiles, and fishes of Funafuti&quot;. William Rainbow described the spiders and insects collected at Funafuti in &quot;The insect fauna of Funafuti&quot;.

Harry Clifford Fassett, captain&#x27;s clerk and photographer, recorded people, communities and scenes at Funafuti in 1900 during a visit of USFC &quot;Albatross&quot; when the United States Fish Commission was investigating the formation of coral reefs on Pacific atolls.

===Colonial administration===
The Ellice Islands were administered as a British Protectorate from 1892 to 1916, as part of the British Western Pacific Territories (BWPT), by a Resident Commissioner based in the Gilbert Islands. The administration of the BWPT ended in 1916, and the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony was established, which existed until October 1975.

===Second World War===
During the Second World War, as a British colony the Ellice Islands were aligned with the Allies. Early in the war, the Japanese invaded and occupied Makin, Tarawa and other islands in what is now Kiribati. The United States Marine Corps landed on Funafuti on 2 October 1942, and on Nanumea and Nukufetau in August 1943. Funafuti was used as a base to prepare for the subsequent seaborne attacks on the Gilbert Islands (Kiribati) that were occupied by Japanese forces.

The islanders assisted the American forces to build airfields on Funafuti, Nanumea and Nukufetau and to unload supplies from ships. On Funafuti, the islanders shifted to the smaller islets so as to allow the American forces to build the airfield and Naval Base Funafuti on Fongafale. A Naval Construction Battalion (Seabees) built a seaplane ramp on the lagoon side of Fongafale islet, for seaplane operations by both short- and long-range seaplanes, and a compacted coral runway was also constructed on Fongafale, with runways also constructed to create Nanumea Airfield and Nukufetau Airfield. USN Patrol Torpedo Boats (PTs) and seaplanes were based at Naval Base Funafuti from 2 November 1942 to 11 May 1944.

The atolls of Tuvalu acted as staging posts during the preparation for the Battle of Tarawa and the Battle of Makin that commenced on 20 November 1943, which were part of the implementation of &quot;Operation Galvanic&quot;. After the war, the military airfield on Funafuti was developed into Funafuti International Airport.

===Post-World War II – transition to independence===
The formation of the United Nations after World War II resulted in the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization committing to a process of decolonisation; as a consequence, the British colonies in the Pacific started on a path to self-determination.

In 1974, the ministerial government was introduced to the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony through a change to the Constitution. In that year a general election was held, and a referendum was held in 1974 to determine whether the Gilbert Islands and Ellice Islands should each have their own administration. As a consequence of the referendum, separation occurred in two stages. The Tuvaluan Order 1975, which took effect on 1 October 1975, recognised Tuvalu as a separate Crown Colony with its own government. The second stage occurred on 1 January 1976, when separate administrations were created out of the civil service of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony.

In 1976, Tuvalu adopted the Tuvaluan dollar, whose currency circulates alongside the Australian dollar, which was previously adopted in 1966.

Elections to the House of Assembly of the British Colony of Tuvalu were held on 27 August 1977, with Toaripi Lauti being appointed chief minister in the House of Assembly of the Colony of Tuvalu on 1 October 1977. The House of Assembly was dissolved in July 1978, with the government of Toaripi Lauti continuing as a caretaker government until the 1981 elections were held.

===Independence===
Toaripi Lauti became the first prime minister on 1 October 1978, when Tuvalu became an independent state. That date is also celebrated as the country&#x27;s Independence Day and is a public holiday.

On 26 October 1982, Queen Elizabeth II made a special royal tour to Tuvalu.

On 5 September 2000, Tuvalu became the 189th member of the United Nations.

On 15 November 2022, amidst sea level rises, Tuvalu announced plans as the first country in the world to build a self-digital replica in the metaverse in order to preserve its cultural heritage.

On 10 November 2023, Tuvalu signed the Falepili Union treaty with Australia. In the Tuvaluan language, &quot;Falepili&quot; describes the traditional values of good neighbourliness, care and mutual respect. The Treaty addresses climate change and security, with security threats encompassing major natural disasters, health pandemics and traditional security threats. The implementation of the Treaty will involve Australia increasing its contribution to the Tuvalu Trust Fund and the Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project. Australia will also provide a pathway for 280 citizens of Tuvalu to migrate to Australia each year, to enable climate-related mobility for Tuvaluans.

==Geography and environment==

===Geography===
Tuvalu is a volcanic archipelago, and consists of three reef islands (Nanumanga, Niutao and Niulakita) and six true atolls (Funafuti, Nanumea, Nui, Nukufetau, Nukulaelae and Vaitupu). Its small, scattered group of low-lying atolls have poor soil and a total land area of only about making it the fourth smallest country in the world. The highest elevation is above sea level on Niulakita; however the low-lying atolls and reef islands of Tuvalu are susceptible to seawater flooding during cyclones and storms. The sea level at the Funafuti tide gauge has risen at 3.9 mm per year, which is approximately twice the global average. However, over four decades, there had been a net increase in land area of the islets of (2.9%), although the changes are not uniform, with 74% increasing and 27% decreasing in size. A 2018 report stated that the rising sea levels are identified as creating an increased transfer of wave energy across reef surfaces, which shifts sand, resulting in accretion to island shorelines. The Tuvalu Prime Minister objected to the report&#x27;s implication that there were &quot;alternate&quot; strategies for Islanders to adapt to rising sea levels, and criticised it for neglecting issues such as saltwater intrusion into groundwater tables as a result of sea level rise.

Funafuti is the largest atoll, and comprises numerous islets around a central lagoon that is approximately (N–S) by (W-E), centred on 179°7&#x27;E and 8°30&#x27;S. On the atolls, an annular reef rim surrounds the lagoon with seven natural reef channels. Surveys were carried out in May 2010 of the reef habitats of Nanumea, Nukulaelae and Funafuti; a total of 317 fish species were recorded during this &quot;Tuvalu Marine Life&quot; study. The surveys identified 66 species that had not previously been recorded in Tuvalu, which brings the total number of identified species to 607. Tuvalu&#x27;s exclusive economic zone (EEZ) covers an oceanic area of approximately 900,000 km2.

Tuvalu signed the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in 1992, and ratified it in December 2002. The predominant vegetation type on the islands of Tuvalu is the cultivated coconut woodland, which covers 43% of the land. The native broadleaf forest is limited to 4.1% of the vegetation types. Tuvalu contains the Western Polynesian tropical moist forests terrestrial ecoregion.

===Environmental pressures===

The eastern shoreline of Funafuti Lagoon on Fongafale was modified during World War II when the airfield (now Funafuti International Airport) was constructed. The coral base of the atoll was used as fill to create the runway. The resulting borrow pits impacted the fresh-water aquifer. In the low-lying areas of Funafuti, the sea water can be seen bubbling up through the porous coral rock to form pools with each high tide. In 2014, the Tuvalu Borrow Pits Remediation (BPR) project was approved so that 10 borrow pits would be filled with sand from the lagoon, leaving Tafua Pond, which is a natural pond. The New Zealand Government funded the BPR project. The project was carried out in 2015, with 365,000 sqm of sand being dredged from the lagoon to fill the holes and improve living conditions on the island. This project increased the usable land space on Fongafale by eight per cent.

During World War II, several piers were also constructed on Fongafale in the Funafuti Lagoon; beach areas were filled and deep-water access channels were excavated. These alterations to the reef and shoreline resulted in changes to wave patterns, with less sand accumulating to form the beaches, compared to former times. Attempts to stabilise the shoreline did not achieve the desired effect. In December 2022, work on the Funafuti reclamation project commenced, which is part of the Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project. Sand was dredged from the lagoon to construct a platform on Fongafale islet that is meters long and meters wide, giving a total area of approximately 7.8 ha. (19.27 acres), which is designed to remain above sea level rise and the reach of storm waves beyond the year 2100. The platform starts from the northern boundary of the Queen Elizabeth Park (QEP) reclamation area and extends to the northern Tausoa Beach Groyne and the Catalina Ramp Harbour.

The reefs at Funafuti suffered damage during the El Niño events that occurred between 1998 and 2001, with an average of 70% of the Staghorn (&quot;Acropora spp.&quot;) corals becoming bleached as a consequence of the increase in ocean temperatures. A reef restoration project has investigated reef restoration techniques; and researchers from Japan have investigated rebuilding the coral reefs through the introduction of foraminifera. The project of the Japan International Cooperation Agency is designed to increase the resilience of the Tuvalu coast against sea level rise, through ecosystem rehabilitation and regeneration and through support for sand production.

The rising population has resulted in an increased demand on fish stocks, which are under stress, although the creation of the Funafuti Conservation Area has provided a fishing exclusion area to help sustain the fish population across the Funafuti lagoon. Population pressure on the resources of Funafuti, and inadequate sanitation systems, have resulted in pollution. The Waste Operations and Services Act of 2009 provides the legal framework for waste management and pollution control projects funded by the European Union directed at organic waste composting in eco-sanitation systems. The Environment Protection (Litter and Waste Control) Regulation 2013 is intended to improve the management of the importation of non-biodegradable materials. Plastic waste is a problem in Tuvalu, for much imported food and other commodities are supplied in plastic containers or packaging.

In 2023 the governments of Tuvalu and other islands vulnerable to climate change (Fiji, Niue, the Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu) launched the &quot;Port Vila Call for a Just Transition to a Fossil Fuel Free Pacific&quot;, calling for the phase out fossil fuels and the &#x27;rapid and just transition&#x27; to renewable energy and strengthening environmental law including introducing the crime of ecocide.

===Climate===
Tuvalu experiences two distinct seasons, a wet season from November to April and a dry season from May to October. Westerly gales and heavy rain are the predominant weather conditions from November to April, the period that is known as &quot;Tau-o-lalo&quot;, with tropical temperatures moderated by easterly winds from May to October.

Tuvalu experiences the effects of El Niño and La Niña, which is caused by changes in ocean temperatures in the equatorial and central Pacific. El Niño effects increase the chances of tropical storms and cyclones, while La Niñan effects increase the chances of drought. Typically the islands of Tuvalu receive between of rainfall per month. The central Pacific Ocean experiences changes from periods of La Niña to periods of El Niño.



===Impact of climate change===

As low-lying islands lacking a surrounding shallow shelf, the communities of Tuvalu are especially susceptible to changes in sea level and undissipated storms. At its highest, Tuvalu is only above sea level. Tuvaluan leaders have been concerned about the effects of rising sea levels. It is estimated that a sea level rise of in the next 100 years could make Tuvalu uninhabitable. A study published in 2018 estimated the change in land area of Tuvalu&#x27;s nine atolls and 101 reef islands between 1971 and 2014, indicating that 75% of the islands had grown in area, with an overall increase of more than 2%. Enele Sopoaga, the prime minister of Tuvalu at the time, responded to the research by stating that Tuvalu is not expanding and has gained no additional habitable land. Sopoaga has also said that evacuating the islands is the last resort.

Whether there are measurable changes in the sea level relative to the islands of Tuvalu is a contentious issue. There were problems associated with the pre-1993 sea level records from Funafuti which resulted in improvements in the recording technology to provide more reliable data for analysis. The degree of uncertainty as to estimates of sea level change relative to the islands of Tuvalu was reflected in the conclusions made in 2002 from the available data. The uncertainty as to the accuracy of the data from this tide gauge resulted in a modern Aquatrak acoustic gauge being installed in 1993 by the Australian National Tidal Facility (NTF) as part of the AusAID-sponsored South Pacific Sea Level and Climate Monitoring Project. The 2011 report of the &quot;Pacific Climate Change Science Program&quot; published by the Australian Government, concludes: &quot;The sea-level rise near Tuvalu measured by satellite altimeters since 1993 is about per year.&quot;

Tuvalu has adopted a national plan of action as the observable transformations over the last ten to fifteen years show Tuvaluans that there have been changes to the sea levels. These include sea water bubbling up through the porous coral rock to form pools at high tide and the flooding of low-lying areas including the airport during spring tides and king tides.

In November 2022, Simon Kofe, Minister for Justice, Communication &amp; Foreign Affairs, proclaimed that in response to rising sea levels and the perceived failures by the outside world to combat global warming, the country would be uploading a virtual version of itself to the metaverse in an effort to preserve its history and culture.

The major concerns about climate change has led to the launching and development of the National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA). These adaptation measures are needed to decrease the amount and volume of the negative effects from climate change. NAPA has selected seven adaptation projects with all different themes. These are: coastal, agricultural, water, health, fisheries (two different projects) and disaster. For example, a &quot;target&quot; of one of these projects, like the project &quot;coastal&quot;, is &quot;increasing resilience of coastal areas and settlement to climate change&quot;. And for the project &quot;water&quot; it is &quot;adaptation to frequent water shortages through increasing household water capacity, water collection accessories, and water conservation techniques&quot;.

The Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project (TCAP) was launched in 2017 for the purpose on enhancing the resilience of the islands of Tuvalu to meet the challenges resulting from higher sea levels. Tuvalu was the first country in the Pacific to access climate finance from Green Climate Fund, with the support of the UNDP. In December 2022, work on the Funafuti reclamation project commenced. The project is to dredge sand from the lagoon to construct a platform on Funafuti that is meters long and meters wide, giving a total area of approximately 7.8 ha. (19.27 acres), which is designed to remain above sea level rise and the reach of storm waves beyond the year 2100. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) also provided funding for the TCAP. Further projects that are part of TCAP are capital works on the outer islands of Nanumea and Nanumaga aimed at reducing exposure to coastal damage resulting from storms.

===Cyclones and king tides===
====Cyclones====

Because of the low elevation, the islands that make up this country are vulnerable to the effects of tropical cyclones and by the threat of current and future sea level rise. A warning system, which uses the Iridium satellite network, was introduced in 2016 to allow outlying islands to be better prepared for natural disasters.

The highest elevation is above sea level on Niulakita. Tuvalu thus has the second-lowest maximum elevation of any country (after the Maldives). The highest elevations are typically in narrow storm dunes on the ocean side of the islands which are prone to overtopping in tropical cyclones, as occurred with Cyclone Bebe, which was a very early-season storm that passed through the Tuvaluan atolls in October 1972. Cyclone Bebe submerged Funafuti, eliminating 95% of structures on the island, with 6 people lost in the cyclone. Sources of drinking water were contaminated as a result of the system&#x27;s storm surge and the flooding of the sources of fresh water.

George Westbrook, a trader on Funafuti, recorded a cyclone that struck Funafuti on 23–24 December 1883. A cyclone struck Nukulaelae on 17–18 March 1886.
A cyclone caused severe damage to the islands in 1894.

Tuvalu experienced an average of three cyclones per decade between the 1940s and 1970s; however, eight occurred in the 1980s. The impact of individual cyclones is subject to variables including the force of the winds and also whether a cyclone coincides with high tides. Funafuti&#x27;s Tepuka Vili Vili islet was devastated by Cyclone Meli in 1979, with all its vegetation and most of its sand swept away during the cyclone. Along with a tropical depression that affected the islands a few days later, Severe Tropical Cyclone Ofa had a major impact on Tuvalu with most islands reporting damage to vegetation and crops. Cyclone Gavin was first identified during 2 March 1997, and was the first of three tropical cyclones to affect Tuvalu during the 1996–97 cyclone season, with Cyclones Hina and Keli following later in the season.

In March 2015, the winds and storm surge created by Cyclone Pam resulted in waves of breaking over the reef of the outer islands, causing damage to houses, crops and infrastructure. A state of emergency was declared. On Nui, the sources of fresh water were destroyed or contaminated. The flooding in Nui and Nukufetau caused many families to shelter in evacuation centres or with other families. Nui suffered the most damage of the three central islands (Nui, Nukufetau and Vaitupu); with both Nui and Nukufetau suffering the loss of 90% of the crops. Of the three northern islands (Nanumanga, Niutao and Nanumea), Nanumanga suffered the most damage, with from 60 to 100 houses flooded, with the waves also causing damage to the health facility. Vasafua islet, part of the Funafuti Conservation Area, was severely damaged by Cyclone Pam. The coconut palms were washed away, leaving the islet as a sand bar.

The Tuvalu Government carried out assessments of the damage caused by Cyclone Pam to the islands and has provided medical aid, food as well as assistance for the cleaning-up of storm debris. Government and Non-Government Organisations provided assistance technical, funding and material support to Tuvalu to assist with recovery, including WHO, UNICEF EAPRO, UNDP Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme, OCHA, World Bank, DFAT, New Zealand Red Cross &amp; IFRC, Fiji National University and governments of New Zealand, Netherlands, UAE, Taiwan and the United States.

Despite passing over to the south of the island nation, Cyclone Tino and its associated convergence zone impacted the whole of Tuvalu between January 16 - 19 of 2020.

====King tides====
Tuvalu is also affected by perigean spring tide events which raise the sea level higher than a normal high tide. The highest peak tide recorded by the Tuvalu Meteorological Service is , on 24 February 2006 and again on 19 February 2015. As a result of the historical sea level rise, the king tide events lead to flooding of low-lying areas, which is compounded when sea levels are further raised by La Niña effects or local storms and waves.

===Water and sanitation===
Rainwater harvesting is the principal source of fresh water in Tuvalu. Nukufetau, Vaitupu and Nanumea are the only islands with sustainable groundwater supplies. The effectiveness of rainwater harvesting is diminished because of poor maintenance of roofs, gutters and pipes. Aid programmes of Australia and the European Union have been directed to improving the storage capacity on Funafuti and in the outer islands.

Reverse osmosis (R/O) desalination units supplement rainwater harvesting on Funafuti. The 65 m3 desalination plant operates at a real production level of around 40 m3 per day. R/O water is only intended to be produced when storage falls below 30%, however demand to replenish household storage supplies with tanker-delivered water means that the R/O desalination units are continually operating. Water is delivered at a cost of A$3.50 per m3. Cost of production and delivery has been estimated at A$6 per m3, with the difference subsidised by the government.

In July 2012, a United Nations Special Rapporteur called on the Tuvalu Government to develop a national water strategy to improve access to safe drinking water and sanitation. In 2012, Tuvalu developed a National Water Resources Policy under the Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) Project and the Pacific Adaptation to Climate Change (PACC) Project, which are sponsored by the Global Environment Fund/SOPAC. Government water planning has established a target of between 50 and 100L of water per person per day accounting for drinking water, cleaning, community and cultural activities.

Tuvalu is working with the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) to implement composting toilets and to improve the treatment of sewage sludge from septic tanks on Fongafale, for septic tanks are leaking into the freshwater lens in the sub-surface of the atoll as well as the ocean and lagoon. Composting toilets reduce water use by up to 30%.

==Government==

===Parliamentary democracy===

The &quot;Constitution of Tuvalu&quot; states that it is &quot;the supreme law of Tuvalu&quot; and that &quot;all other laws shall be interpreted and applied subject to this Constitution&quot;; it sets out the Principles of the Bill of Rights and the Protection of the Fundamental Rights and Freedoms. On 5 September 2023, Tuvalu&#x27;s parliament passed the Constitution of Tuvalu Act 2023, with the changes to the constitution came into effect on 1 October 2023.

Tuvalu is a parliamentary democracy and Commonwealth realm with Charles III as King of Tuvalu. Since the King resides in the United Kingdom, he is represented in Tuvalu by a governor general, whom he appoints upon the advice of the prime minister of Tuvalu. Referendums were carried out in 1986 and 2008 seeking to abolish the monarchy and establish a republic, but on both occasions the monarchy was retained.

From 1974 (the creation of the British colony of Tuvalu) until independence, the legislative body of Tuvalu was called the &quot;House of the Assembly&quot; or &quot;Fale I Fono&quot;. Following independence in October 1978, the House of the Assembly was renamed the Parliament of Tuvalu or &quot;Palamene o Tuvalu&quot;. The place at which the parliament sits is called the &quot;Vaiaku maneapa&quot;. The &quot;maneapa&quot; on each island is an open meeting place where the chiefs and elders deliberate and make decisions.

The unicameral Parliament has 16 members, with elections held every four years. The members of parliament select the Prime Minister (who is the head of government) and the Speaker of Parliament. The ministers that form the Cabinet are appointed by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister. There are no formal political parties; election campaigns are largely based on personal/family ties and reputations.

The 2023 amendments to the Constitution recognise the Falekaupule as the traditional governing authorities of the islands of Tuvalu.

The Tuvalu National Library and Archives holds &quot;vital documentation on the cultural, social and political heritage of Tuvalu&quot;, including surviving records from the colonial administration, as well as Tuvalu government archives.

Tuvalu is a state party to the following human rights treaties: the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC); the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and; the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). Tuvalu has commitments to ensuring human rights are respected under the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

The national strategy plan &quot;Te Kete - National Strategy for Sustainable Development 2021-2030&quot; sets out the development agenda of the Government of Tuvalu, which followed on from &quot;Te Kakeega III – National Strategy for Sustainable Development-2016-2020&quot; (TK III). The areas of development in these strategic plans include education; climate change; environment; migration and urbanisation.

The Tuvalu National Council for Women acts as an umbrella organisation for non-governmental women&#x27;s rights groups throughout the country and works closely with the government.

===Legal system===
There are eight Island Courts and Lands Courts; appeals in relation to land disputes are made to the Lands Courts Appeal Panel. Appeals from the Island Courts and the Lands Courts Appeal Panel are made to the Magistrates Court, which has jurisdiction to hear civil cases involving up to $T10,000. The superior court is the High Court of Tuvalu as it has unlimited original jurisdiction to determine the Law of Tuvalu and to hear appeals from the lower courts. Rulings of the High Court can be appealed to the Court of Appeal of Tuvalu. From the Court of Appeal, there is a right of appeal to His Majesty in Council, i.e., the Privy Council in London.

With regard to the judiciary, &quot;the first female Island Court magistrate was appointed to the Island Court in Nanumea in the 1980s and another in Nukulaelae in the early 1990s.&quot; There were 7 female magistrates in the Island Courts of Tuvalu (as of 2007) in comparison &quot;to the past where only one woman magistrate served in the Magistrate Court of Tuvalu.&quot;

The Law of Tuvalu comprises the Acts voted into law by the Parliament of Tuvalu and statutory instruments that become law; certain Acts passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom (during the time Tuvalu was either a British protectorate or British colony); the common law; and customary law (particularly in relation to the ownership of land). The land tenure system is largely based on &quot;kaitasi&quot; (extended family ownership).

===Foreign relations===
Tuvalu participates in the work of the Pacific Community (SPC) and is a member of the Pacific Islands Forum, the Commonwealth of Nations and the United Nations. It has maintained a mission at the United Nations in New York City since 2000. Tuvalu became a member of the Asian Development Bank in 1993, and became a member of the World Bank in 2010.

Tuvalu maintains close relations with Fiji, New Zealand, Australia (which has maintained a High Commission in Tuvalu since 2018), Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the European Union. It has diplomatic relations with Taiwan; which maintains an embassy in Tuvalu and has a large assistance programme in the islands.

A major international priority for Tuvalu in the UN, at the 2002 Earth Summit in Johannesburg, South Africa and in other international fora, is promoting concern about global warming and the possible sea level rising. Tuvalu advocates ratification and implementation of the Kyoto Protocol. In December 2009, the islands stalled talks on climate change at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen, fearing some other developing countries were not committing fully to binding deals on a reduction in carbon emissions. Their chief negotiator stated, &quot;Tuvalu is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change and our future rests on the outcome of this meeting.&quot;

Tuvalu participates in the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), which is a coalition of small island and low-lying coastal countries that have concerns about their vulnerability to the adverse effects of global climate change. Under the Majuro Declaration, which was signed on 5 September 2013, Tuvalu has made a commitment to implement power generation of 100% renewable energy (between 2013 and 2020), which is proposed to be implemented using Solar PV (95% of demand) and biodiesel (5% of demand). The feasibility of wind power generation will be considered. Tuvalu participates in the operations of the Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) and the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP).

Tuvalu is party to a treaty of friendship with the United States, signed soon after independence and ratified by the US Senate in 1983, under which the United States renounced prior territorial claims to four Tuvaluan islands (Funafuti, Nukufetau, Nukulaelae and Niulakita) under the Guano Islands Act of 1856.

Tuvalu participates in the operations of the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC). The Tuvaluan government, the US government, and the governments of other Pacific islands are parties to the South Pacific Tuna Treaty (SPTT), which entered into force in 1988. Tuvalu is also a member of the Nauru Agreement which addresses the management of tuna purse seine fishing in the tropical western Pacific. The United States and the Pacific Islands countries have negotiated the Multilateral Fisheries Treaty (which encompasses the South Pacific Tuna Treaty) to confirm access to the fisheries in the Western and Central Pacific for US tuna boats. Tuvalu and the other members of the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and the United States have settled a tuna fishing deal for 2015; a longer-term deal will be negotiated. The treaty is an extension of the Nauru Agreement and provides for the US flagged purse seine vessels to fish 8,300 days in the region in return for a payment of US$90 million made up by tuna fishing industry and US-Government contributions. In 2015, Tuvalu refused to sell fishing days to certain nations and fleets that have blocked Tuvaluan initiatives to develop and sustain their own fishery. In 2016, the Minister of Natural Resources drew attention to Article 30 of the WCPF Convention, which describes the collective obligation of members to consider the disproportionate burden that management measures might place on small-island developing states.

In July 2013, Tuvalu signed the memorandum of understanding (MOU) to establish the Pacific Regional Trade and Development Facility, which Facility originated in 2006, in the context of negotiations for an Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) between Pacific ACP States and the European Union. The rationale for the creation of the Facility being to improve the delivery of aid to Pacific island countries in support of the Aid-for-Trade (AfT) requirements. The Pacific ACP States are the countries in the Pacific that are signatories to the Cotonou Agreement with the European Union. On 31 May 2017 the first enhanced High Level Political Dialogue between Tuvalu and the European Union under the Cotonou Agreement was held in Funafuti.

On 18 February 2016, Tuvalu signed the Pacific Islands Development Forum Charter and formally joined the Pacific Islands Development Forum (PIDF). In June 2017, Tuvalu signed the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations (PACER). Tuvalu ratified the PACER agreement in January 2022. The agreement is designed to reduce trade barriers between signatories of the agreement. Existing import tariffs will reduce to zero, and the agreement contemplates additional actions to reduce trade barriers, including harmonizing customs procedures and rules of origin, as well as eliminating restrictions to services trade, and improving labour mobility schemes between countries.

===Defence and law enforcement===

Tuvalu has no regular military forces, and spends no money on the military. Its national police force, the Tuvalu Police Force headquartered in Funafuti, includes a maritime surveillance unit, customs, prisons and immigration. Police officers wear British-style uniforms.

From 1994 to 2019 Tuvalu policed its 200-kilometre exclusive economic zone with the Pacific-class patrol boat HMTSS &quot;Te Mataili&quot;, provided by Australia. In 2019, Australia gifted a Guardian-class patrol boat as replacement. Named HMTSS &quot;Te Mataili II&quot;, it is meant for use in maritime surveillance, fishery patrol and for search-and-rescue missions. (&quot;HMTSS&quot; stands for &quot;His/Her Majesty&#x27;s Tuvaluan State Ship&quot; or for &quot;His/Her Majesty&#x27;s Tuvalu Surveillance Ship&quot;.) &quot;Te Mataili II&quot; was severely damaged by cyclones. On 16 October 2024 Australia handed over a Guardian-class patrol boat to Tuvalu, which was named HMTSS &quot;Te Mataili III&quot;&gt;

In May 2023 the Government of Tuvalu signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Sea Shepherd Global, which is based in the Netherlands, to combat illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing in Tuvalu&#x27;s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). Sea Shepherd Global will provide the &quot;Allankay&quot;, a motor vessel, to support Tuvalu&#x27;s law enforcement activities. &quot;Allankay&quot; will accommodate officers from the Tuvalu Police Force, who have the authority to board, inspect, and arrest fishing vessels engaged in IUU activity in Tuvalu&#x27;s EEZ.

Male homosexuality is illegal in Tuvalu. Crime in Tuvalu is not a significant social problem due to an effective criminal justice system, also due to the influence of the &quot;Falekaupule&quot; (the traditional assembly of elders of each island) and the central role of religious institutions in the Tuvaluan community.

===Administrative divisions===

Tuvalu consists of six atolls and three reef islands, each constituting a district of the country. The smallest, Niulakita, is administered as part of Niutao. The districts, their island counts, and their populations as of the 2017 census are as follows:

Each island has its own high-chief (ulu-aliki), several sub-chiefs (alikis), and a community council (Falekaupule). The &quot;Falekaupule&quot;, also known as &quot;te sina o fenua&quot; (grey-hairs of the land), is the traditional assembly of elders.

The ulu-aliki and aliki exercise informal authority at the local level, with the former chosen on the basis of ancestry. Since the passage of the Falekaupule Act in 1997, the powers and functions of the &quot;Falekaupule&quot; are shared with the &quot;pule o kaupule&quot;, a village president elected on each atoll.

Tuvalu has ISO 3166-2 codes defined for one town council (Funafuti) and seven island councils. Niulakita, which now has its own island council, is not listed, as it is administered as part of Niutao.

==Society==
===Demographics===

The population at the 2002 census was 9,561, and the population at the 2017 census was 10,645. The most recent evaluation in 2020 puts the population at 11,342. The population of Tuvalu is primarily of Polynesian ethnicity, with approximately 5.6% of the population being Micronesians speaking Gilbertese, especially on Nui.

Life expectancy for women in Tuvalu is 70.2 years and 65.6 years for men (2018 est.). The country&#x27;s population growth rate is 0.86% (2018 est.). The net migration rate is estimated at −6.6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2018 est.). The threat of global warming in Tuvalu is not yet a dominant motivation for migration as Tuvaluans appear to prefer to continue living on the islands for reasons of lifestyle, culture and identity.

From 1947 to 1983, a number of Tuvaluans from Vaitupu migrated to Kioa, an island in Fiji. The settlers from Tuvalu were granted Fijian citizenship in 2005. In recent years, New Zealand and Australia have been the primary destinations for migration or seasonal work.

In 2014, attention was drawn to an appeal to the New Zealand Immigration and Protection Tribunal against the deportation of a Tuvaluan family on the basis that they were &quot;climate change refugees&quot;, who would suffer hardship resulting from the environmental degradation of Tuvalu. However, the subsequent grant of residence permits to the family was made on grounds unrelated to the refugee claim. The family was successful in their appeal because, under the relevant immigration legislation, there were &quot;exceptional circumstances of a humanitarian nature&quot; that justified the grant of resident permits, for the family was integrated into New Zealand society with a sizeable extended family that had effectively relocated to New Zealand. Indeed, in 2013 a claim of a Kiribati man of being a &quot;climate change refugee&quot; under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (1951) was determined by the New Zealand High Court to be untenable, as there was no persecution or serious harm related to any of the five stipulated Refugee Convention grounds. Permanent migration to Australia and New Zealand, such as for family reunification, requires compliance with the immigration legislation of those countries.

New Zealand announced the &quot;Pacific Access Category&quot; in 2001, which provided an annual quota of 75 work permits for Tuvaluans. The applicants register for the Pacific Access Category (PAC) ballots; the primary criterion is that the principal applicant must have a job offer from a New Zealand employer. Tuvaluans also have access to seasonal employment in the horticulture and viticulture industries in New Zealand under the &quot;Recognised Seasonal Employer&quot; (RSE) Work Policy introduced in 2007 allowing for employment of up to 5,000 workers from Tuvalu and other Pacific islands. Tuvaluans can participate in the Australian &quot;Pacific Seasonal Worker Program&quot;, which allows Pacific Islanders to obtain seasonal employment in the Australian agriculture industry, in particular, cotton and cane operations; fishing industry, in particular aquaculture; and with accommodation providers in the tourism industry.

On 10 November 2023, Tuvalu signed the Falepili Union, a bilateral diplomatic relationship with Australia, under which Australia will provide a pathway for citizens of Tuvalu to migrate to Australia, to enable climate-related mobility for Tuvaluans.

===Languages===
The Tuvaluan language and English are the national languages of Tuvalu. Tuvaluan is of the Ellicean group of Polynesian languages, distantly related to all other Polynesian languages such as Hawaiian, Māori, Tahitian, Rapa Nui, Samoan and Tongan. It is most closely related to the languages spoken on the Polynesian outliers in Micronesia and northern and central Melanesia. The Tuvaluan language has borrowed from the Samoan language, as a consequence of Christian missionaries in the late 19th and early 20th centuries being predominantly Samoan.

The Tuvaluan language is spoken by virtually everyone, while a Micronesian language very similar to Gilbertese is spoken on Nui. English is also an official language but is not spoken in daily use. Parliament and official functions are conducted in the Tuvaluan language.

There are about 13,000 Tuvaluan speakers worldwide. Radio Tuvalu transmits Tuvaluan-language programming.

===Religion===


The Congregational Christian Church of Tuvalu, which is part of the Calvinist tradition, is the state church of Tuvalu; although in practice this merely entitles it to &quot;the privilege of performing special services on major national events&quot;. Its adherents comprise about 97% of the 10,837 (2012 census) inhabitants of the archipelago. The Constitution of Tuvalu guarantees freedom of religion, including the freedom to practice, the freedom to change religion, the right not to receive religious instruction at school or to attend religious ceremonies at school, and the right not to &quot;take an oath or make an affirmation that is contrary to his religion or belief&quot;.

Other Christian groups include the Catholic community served by the Mission Sui Iuris of Funafuti, and the Seventh-day Adventist which has 2.8% of the population. According to its own estimates, the Tuvalu Brethren Church has about 500 members (i.e. 4.5% of the population).

The Baháʼí Faith is the largest minority religion and the largest non-Christian religion in Tuvalu. It constitutes 2.0% of the population. The Baháʼís are present on Nanumea, and Funafuti. The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community consists of about 50 members (0.4% of the population).

The introduction of Christianity ended the worship of ancestral spirits and other deities (animism), along with the power of the &quot;vaka-atua&quot; (the priests of the old religions). Laumua Kofe describes the objects of worship as varying from island to island, although ancestor worship was described by the Rev. Samuel James Whitmee in 1870 as being common practice.

===Health===
The Princess Margaret Hospital on Funafuti is the only hospital in Tuvalu and the primary provider of medical services.

Since the late 20th century, the biggest health problems in Tuvalu have been obesity-related. The leading cause of death has been heart disease, which is closely followed by diabetes and high blood pressure. In 2016 the majority of deaths resulted from cardiac diseases, with diabetes mellitus, hypertension, obesity, and cerebral-vascular disease among the other causes of death.

===Education===
Education in Tuvalu is free and compulsory between the ages of 6 and 15 years. Each island has a primary school. Motufoua Secondary School is located on Vaitupu. Students board at the school during the school term, returning to their home islands each school vacation. Fetuvalu Secondary School, a day school operated by the Church of Tuvalu, is on Funafuti.

Fetuvalu offers the Cambridge syllabus. Motufoua offers the Fiji Junior Certificate (FJC) at year 10, Tuvaluan Certificate at Year 11 and the Pacific Senior Secondary Certificate (PSSC) at Year 12, which is set by SPBEA, the Fiji-based exam board. Sixth form students who pass their PSSC go on to the Augmented Foundation Programme, funded by the Tuvalu government. This program is required for tertiary education programmes outside of Tuvalu and is available at the University of the South Pacific (USP) Extension Centre in Funafuti.

Required attendance at school is 10 years for males and 11 years for females (2001). The adult literacy rate is 99.0% (2002). In 2010, there were 1,918 students who were taught by 109 teachers (98 certified and 11 uncertified). The teacher-pupil ratio for primary schools in Tuvalu is around 1:18 for all schools with the exception of Nauti School, which has a ratio of 1:27. Nauti School on Funafuti is the largest primary school in Tuvalu with more than 900 students (45 per cent of the total primary school enrolment). The pupil-teacher ratio for Tuvalu is low compared to the entire Pacific region (ratio of 1:29).

Community Training Centres (CTCs) have been established within the primary schools on each atoll. They provide vocational training to students who do not progress beyond Class 8 because they failed the entry qualifications for secondary education. The CTCs offer training in basic carpentry, gardening and farming, sewing and cooking. At the end of their studies the graduates can apply to continue studies either at Motufoua Secondary School or the Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute (TMTI). Adults can also attend courses at the CTCs.

Four tertiary institutions offer technical and vocational courses: Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute (TMTI), Tuvalu Atoll Science Technology Training Institute (TASTII), Australian Pacific Training Coalition (APTC) and University of the South Pacific (USP) Extension Centre.

The Tuvaluan Employment Ordinance of 1966 sets the minimum age for paid employment at 14 years and prohibits children under the age of 15 from performing hazardous work.

==Culture==
===Architecture===
The traditional buildings of Tuvalu used plants and trees from the native broadleaf forest, including timber from &quot;pouka&quot; (&quot;Hernandia peltata&quot;); &quot;ngia&quot; or &quot;ingia&quot; bush (&quot;Pemphis acidula&quot;); &quot;miro&quot; (&quot;Thespesia populnea&quot;); &quot;Tonga&quot; (&quot;Rhizophora mucronata&quot;); &quot;fau&quot; or &quot;fo fafini&quot;, or woman&#x27;s fibre tree (&quot;Hibiscus tiliaceus&quot;). Fibre is from coconut; &quot;ferra&quot;, native fig (&quot;Ficus aspem&quot;); &quot;fala&quot;, screw pine or &quot;Pandanus&quot;. The buildings were constructed without nails, lashed together with plaited sennit rope handmade from dried coconut fibre.

Following contact with Europeans, iron products were used including nails and corrugated roofing material. Modern buildings in Tuvalu are constructed from imported building materials, including imported timber and concrete.
Church and community buildings (&quot;maneapa&quot;) are usually coated with white paint that is known as &quot;lase&quot;, which is made by burning a large amount of dead coral with firewood. The whitish powder that is the result is mixed with water and painted on the buildings.

===Art===
The women of Tuvalu use cowrie and other shells in traditional handicrafts. The artistic traditions of Tuvalu have traditionally been expressed in the design of clothing and traditional handicrafts such as the decoration of mats and fans. Crochet (&quot;kolose&quot;) is one of the art forms practised by Tuvaluan women. The design of women&#x27;s skirts (&quot;titi&quot;), tops (&quot;teuga saka&quot;), headbands, armbands, and wristbands, which continue to be used in performances of the traditional dance songs of Tuvalu, represents contemporary Tuvaluan art and design. The material culture of Tuvalu uses traditional design elements in artefacts used in everyday life such as the design of canoes and fish hooks made from traditional materials.

In 2015, an exhibition was held on Funafuti of the art of Tuvalu, with works that addressed climate change through the eyes of artists and the display of &quot;Kope ote olaga&quot; (possessions of life), a display of the various artefacts of Tuvalu culture.

===Dance and music===


The traditional music of Tuvalu consists of a number of dances, including &quot;fakaseasea&quot;, &quot;fakanau&quot; and &quot;fatele&quot;. The &quot;fatele&quot;, in its modern form, is performed at community events and to celebrate leaders and other prominent individuals, such as the visit of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge in September 2012. The Tuvaluan style can be described &quot;as a musical microcosm of Polynesia, where contemporary and older styles co-exist&quot;.

===Cuisine===

The cuisine of Tuvalu is based on the staple of coconut and the many species of fish found in the ocean and lagoons of the atolls. Desserts made on the islands include coconut and coconut milk, rather than animal milk. The traditional foods eaten in Tuvalu are pulaka, taro, bananas, breadfruit and coconut. Tuvaluans also eat seafood, including coconut crab and fish from the lagoon and ocean. Flying fish are also caught as a source of food. Another traditional food source is seabirds (&quot;taketake&quot; or black noddy and &quot;akiaki&quot; or white tern), with pork being eaten mostly at &quot;fateles&quot; (or parties with dancing to celebrate events).

Pulaka is the main source for carbohydrates. Seafood provides protein. Bananas and breadfruit are supplemental crops. Coconut is used for its juice, to make other beverages (such as toddy) and to improve the taste of some dishes.

A 1560-square-metre pond was built in 1996 on Vaitupu to sustain aquaculture in Tuvalu.

Flying fish are also caught as a source of food; and as an exciting activity, using a boat, a butterfly net and a spotlight to attract the flying fish.

===Heritage===
The traditional community system still survives to a large extent on Tuvalu. Each family has its own task, or &quot;salanga&quot;, to perform for the community, such as fishing, house building or defence. The skills of a family are passed on from parents to children.

Most islands have their own &quot;fusi&quot;, community-owned shops similar to convenience stores, where canned foods and bags of rice can be purchased. Goods are cheaper, and fusis give better prices for their own produce.

Another important building is the &quot;falekaupule&quot; or &quot;maneapa&quot;, the traditional island meeting hall, where important matters are discussed and which is also used for wedding celebrations and community activities such as a &quot;fatele&quot; involving music, singing and dancing. &quot;Falekaupule&quot; is also used as the name of the council of elders – the traditional decision-making body on each island. Under the Falekaupule Act, &quot;Falekaupule&quot; means &quot;traditional assembly in each island ... composed in accordance with the Aganu of each island&quot;. &quot;Aganu&quot; means traditional customs and culture.

Tuvalu does not have any museums, however the creation of a Tuvalu National Cultural Centre and Museum is part of the government&#x27;s strategic plan for 2018–24.

===Traditional single-outrigger canoe===

&quot;Paopao&quot; (from the Samoan language, meaning a small fishing-canoe made from a single log), is the traditional single-outrigger canoe of Tuvalu, of which the largest could carry four to six adults. The variations of single-outrigger canoes that had been developed on Vaitupu and Nanumea were reef-type or paddled canoes; that is, they were designed for carrying over the reef and being paddled, rather than being sailed. Outrigger canoes from Nui were constructed with an indirect type of outrigger attachment and the hull is double-ended, with no distinct bow and stern. These canoes were designed to be sailed over the Nui lagoon. The booms of the outrigger are longer than those found in other designs of canoes from the other islands. This made the Nui canoe more stable when used with a sail than the other designs.

==Sport and leisure==
A traditional sport played in Tuvalu is &quot;kilikiti&quot;, which is similar to cricket. A popular sport specific to Tuvalu is &quot;Te ano&quot; (The ball), which is played with two round balls of diameter. &quot;Te ano&quot; is a traditional game that is similar to volleyball, in which the two hard balls made from pandanus leaves are volleyed at great speed with the team members trying to stop the ball hitting the ground. Traditional sports in the late 19th century were foot racing, lance throwing, quarterstaff fencing and wrestling, although the Christian missionaries disapproved of these activities.

The popular sports in Tuvalu include &quot;kilikiti&quot;, &quot;Te ano&quot;, association football, futsal, volleyball, handball, basketball and rugby sevens. Tuvalu has sports organisations for athletics, badminton, tennis, table tennis, volleyball, football, basketball, rugby union, weightlifting and powerlifting. At the 2013 Pacific Mini Games, Tuau Lapua Lapua won Tuvalu&#x27;s first gold medal in an international competition in the weightlifting 62 kilogram male snatch. (He also won bronze in the clean and jerk, and obtained the silver medal overall for the combined event.) In 2015, Telupe Iosefa received the first gold medal won by Tuvalu at the Pacific Games in the powerlifting 120 kg male division.
Football in Tuvalu is played at club and national team level. The Tuvalu national football team trains at the Tuvalu Sports Ground in Funafuti and competes in the Pacific Games. The Tuvalu National Football Association is an associate member of the Oceania Football Confederation (OFC) and is seeking membership in FIFA. The Tuvalu national futsal team participates in the Oceanian Futsal Championship.

A major sporting event is the &quot;Independence Day Sports Festival&quot; held annually on 1 October. The most important sports event within the country is arguably the Tuvalu Games, which are held yearly since 2008. Tuvalu first participated in the Pacific Games in 1978 and in the Commonwealth Games in 1998, when a weightlifter attended the games held at Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Two table tennis players attended the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester, England; Tuvalu entered competitors in shooting, table tennis and weightlifting at the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne, Australia; three athletes participated in the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi, India, entering the discus, shot put and weightlifting events; and a team of 3 weightlifters and 2 table tennis players attended the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow. Tuvaluan athletes have also participated in the men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s 100 metres sprint at the World Championships in Athletics from 2009.

The Tuvalu Association of Sports and National Olympic Committee (TASNOC) was recognised as a National Olympic Committee in July 2007. Tuvalu entered the Olympic Games for the first time at the 2008 Summer Games in Beijing, China, with a weightlifter and two athletes in the men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s 100 metres sprint. A team with athletes in the same events represented Tuvalu at the 2012 Summer Olympics. Etimoni Timuani was the sole representative of Tuvalu at the 2016 Summer Olympics in the 100m event. Karalo Maibuca and Matie Stanley represented Tuvalu at the 2020 Summer Olympics in the 100m events. Tuvalu sent a team to the 2023 Pacific Games. Tuvalu was represented in athletic events at the 2024 Summer Olympics by Karalo Maibuca in the men&#x27;s 100 metres, and Temalini Manatoa in the women&#x27;s 100 metres.

==Economy and government services==
===Economy===

From 1996 to 2002, Tuvalu was one of the best-performing Pacific Island economies and achieved an average real gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 5.6% per annum. Economic growth slowed after 2002, with GDP growth of 1.5% in 2008. Tuvalu was exposed to rapid rises in world prices of fuel and food in 2008, with the level of inflation peaking at 13.4%. Tuvalu has the smallest total GDP of any sovereign state in the world.

Tuvalu joined the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on 24 June 2010. The IMP 2010 Report on Tuvalu estimates that Tuvalu experienced zero growth in its 2010 GDP, after the economy contracted by about 2% in 2009. On 5 August 2012, the executive board of the IMF concluded the Article IV consultation with Tuvalu, and assessed the economy of Tuvalu: &quot;A slow recovery is underway in Tuvalu, but there are important risks. GDP grew in 2011 for the first time since the global financial crisis, led by the private retail sector and education spending.&quot; The IMF 2014 Country Report noted that real GDP growth in Tuvalu had been volatile averaging only 1 per cent in the past decade. The 2014 Country Report describes economic growth prospects as generally positive as the result of large revenues from fishing licences, together with substantial foreign aid. In 2023, the IMF Article IV consultation with Tuvalu concluded that a successful vaccination strategy allowed Tuvalu to lift coronavirus disease (COVID) containment measures at the end of 2022. However, the economic cost of the pandemic was significant, with real gross domestic product growth falling from 13.8% in 2019 to -4.3 percent in 2020, although it recovered to 1.8% in 2021. Inflation rose to 11.5% in 2022, but inflation is project to fall to 2.8% by 2028.

The increase in inflation in 2022 was due to the rapid rise in the cost of food resulting from a drought that affected food production and from rising global food prices, following Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine (food imports represent 19 percent of Tuvalu&#x27;s GDP, while agriculture makes up for only 10 percent of GDP).

The government is the primary provider of medical services through Princess Margaret Hospital on Funafuti, which operates health clinics on the other islands. Banking services are provided by the National Bank of Tuvalu. Public sector workers make up about 65% of those formally employed. Remittances from Tuvaluans living in Australia and New Zealand, and remittances from Tuvaluan sailors employed on overseas ships are important sources of income for Tuvaluans. Approximately 15% of adult males work as seamen on foreign-flagged merchant ships. Agriculture in Tuvalu is focused on coconut trees and growing pulaka in large pits of composted soil below the water table. Tuvaluans are otherwise involved in traditional subsistence agriculture and fishing.

Tuvaluans are well known for their seafaring skills, with the Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute on Amatuku motu (island), Funafuti, providing training to approximately 120 marine cadets each year so that they have the skills necessary for employment as seafarers on merchant shipping. The Tuvalu Overseas Seamen&#x27;s Union (TOSU) is the only registered trade union in Tuvalu. It represents workers on foreign ships. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) estimates that 800 Tuvaluan men are trained, certified and active as seafarers. The ADB estimates that, at any one time, about 15% of the adult male population works abroad as seafarers. Job opportunities also exist as observers on tuna boats where the role is to monitor compliance with the boat&#x27;s tuna fishing licence.

Government revenues largely come from sales of fishing licences, income from the Tuvalu Trust Fund, and from the lease of its &quot;.tv&quot; internet Top Level Domain (TLD). Tuvalu began deriving revenue from the commercialisation of its &quot;.tv&quot; internet domain name, which was managed by Verisign until 2021. In 2023, an agreement between the government of Tuvalu and the GoDaddy company, outsourced the marketing, sales, promotion and branding of the .tv domain to the Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation, which established a .tv unit. Tuvalu also generates income from postage stamps by the Tuvalu Philatelic Bureau, and from the Tuvalu Ship Registry.

The Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF) was established in 1987 by the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand. The TTF is a sovereign wealth fund that is owned by Tuvalu but is administered by an international board and the government of Tuvalu. When the performance of the TTF exceeds its operating target each year, excess funds are transferred to the Consolidated Investment Fund (CIF), and can be freely drawn upon by the Tuvaluan government to finance budgetary expenditures. In 2022, the value of the Tuvalu Trust Fund is approximately $190 million. In 2021 the market value of the TTF rose by 12 percent to its highest level on record (261 percent of GDP). However, the volatility in global equity markets in 2022 resulted in the TTF&#x27;s value falling by 7 percent as compared to the end of 2021.

Financial support to Tuvalu is also provided by Japan, South Korea and the European Union. Australia and New Zealand continue to contribute capital to the TTF, and provide other forms of development assistance.

The U.S. government is also a major revenue source for Tuvalu. In 1999, the payment from the South Pacific Tuna Treaty (SPTT) was about $9 million, with the value increasing in the following years. In May 2013, representatives from the United States and the Pacific Islands countries agreed to sign interim arrangement documents to extend the Multilateral Fisheries Treaty (which encompasses the South Pacific Tuna Treaty) for 18 months.

The United Nations designates Tuvalu as a least developed country (LDC) because of its limited potential for economic development, absence of exploitable resources and its small size and vulnerability to external economic and environmental shocks. Tuvalu participates in the Enhanced Integrated Framework for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries (EIF), which was established in October 1997 under the auspices of the World Trade Organisation. In 2013, Tuvalu deferred its graduation from least developed country (LDC) status to a developing country to 2015. Enele Sopoaga, the prime minister in 2013, said that this deferral was necessary to maintain access by Tuvalu to the funds provided by the United Nations&#x27;s National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), as &quot;Once Tuvalu graduates to a developed country, it will not be considered for funding assistance for climate change adaptation programmes like NAPA, which only goes to LDCs&quot;. Tuvalu had met targets so that Tuvalu was to graduate from LDC status. Enele Sopoaga wanted the United Nations to reconsider its criteria for graduation from LDC status as not enough weight is given to the environmental plight of small island states like Tuvalu in the application of the Environmental Vulnerability Index (EVI).

===Tourism===
Due to the country&#x27;s remoteness, tourism is not significant. Visitors totalled 1,684 in 2010: 65% were on business, development officials or technical consultants, 20% were tourists (360 people), and 11% were expatriates returning to visit family. In 2016, the number of visitors had increased to 2,000.

The main island of Funafuti is the focus of travellers, since the only airport in Tuvalu is the Funafuti International Airport and Funafuti is the only island that has hotel facilities. However, there are no tour guides, tour operators or organised activities and no cruise ships visit. Ecotourism is a motivation of travellers to Tuvalu. The Funafuti Conservation Area consists of of ocean, reef, lagoon, channel and six uninhabited islets.

The outer atolls can be visited on the two passenger-cargo ships, &quot;Nivaga III&quot; and &quot;Manú Folau&quot;, which provide round-trip visits to the outer islands every three or four weeks. There is guesthouse accommodation on many of the outer islands.

===Telecommunications and media===
The Tuvalu Media Department of the Government of Tuvalu operates &quot;Radio Tuvalu&quot; which broadcasts from Funafuti. In 2011, the Japanese government provided financial support to construct a new AM broadcast studio. The installation of upgraded transmission equipment allows Radio Tuvalu to be heard on all nine islands of Tuvalu. The new AM radio transmitter on Funafuti replaced the FM radio service to the outer islands and freed up satellite bandwidth for mobile services. &quot;Fenui – news from Tuvalu&quot; is a free digital publication of the Tuvalu Media Department that is emailed to subscribers and operates a Facebook page, which publishes news about government activities and news about Tuvaluan events.

Communications in Tuvalu rely on satellite dishes for telephone, television, and internet access. The Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation (TTC) is a state-owned enterprise that provides fixed line telephone communications to subscribers on each island, mobile phone services on Funafuti, Vaitupu and Nukulaelae, and is a distributor of the Fiji Television service (Sky Pacific satellite television service).

In July 2020, the Government of Tuvalu signed a five-year agreement with Kacific Broadband Satellites to supply Tuvalu with internet via sixty 1.2 metre VSAT satellite receivers. The agreement provided a combined data transfer capacity of 400 to 600 Mbit/s to schools, medical clinics, government agencies, small businesses, and 40 outdoor Wi-Fi hotspots, as well as Tuvaluan interisland ferries via three maritime antennae. A Ka band antenna was installed to provide the island&#x27;s mobile phone network with trunking and backhaul services. By February 2022, Kacific and Agility Beyond Space (ABS) satellites provided the island with a combined capacity of 510 Mbit/s. 

The average download of data per device is about 9 GB/user/month, with 95% of devices in use supporting 4G LTE service. Also, Tuvalu has 5,915 active broadband users (the largest base of users is on Funafuti), with dedicated satellite and hotspot users on the outer islands, each of which having three to five hotspots.

===Transport===
There are limited transport services in Tuvalu. There are about of roads. The streets of Funafuti were paved in mid-2002, but other roads are unpaved. Tuvalu does not have any railways.

Funafuti is the only port, but there is a deep-water berth in the lagoon at Nukufetau. Landing passengers and cargo on some of the islands is difficult as the reef islands do not have a lagoon that shipping can enter or the atoll&#x27;s lagoon does not have navigable channels. Landing on these islands involves passengers and cargo being transferred from ships to workboats for delivery to landing points on the islands. In May 2023 the Australian Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific (AIFFP) approved the payment of AUD$21.4m (US$15m) for a AUD$120.6m (US$84.4m) Asian Development Bank (ADB) led fund to finance the construction of passenger and cargo facilities on Pacific Islands. The AIFFP funds, together with AUD$11m (US$7.2m) of in-kind contribution from the Government of Tuvalu, are allocated to complete a project at Niutao and to implement a project at Nui, to construct workboat harbors, including constructing a navigation channel, boat ramp, passenger terminal, cargo shed, as well as shoreline reclamation.

The merchant marine fleet consists of two passenger/cargo ships, &quot;Nivaga III&quot; and &quot;Manu Folau&quot;, both of which were donated by Japan. They provide round-trip visits to the outer islands every three or four weeks, and travel between Suva, Fiji and Funafuti three or four times a year. &quot;Manu Folau&quot; is a 50-metre vessel. In 2015 &quot;Nivaga III&quot; replaced &quot;Nivaga II&quot;, which had been in service in Tuvalu from 1989.

In 2020, the government of Tuvalu purchased a landing barge, which is intended to transport of dangerous goods and building material from the capital to the outer islands. The barge was named &quot;Moeiteava&quot;. The government of Taiwan provided financial assistance.

The Tuvalu Fisheries Department operates two vessels for carrying out its activities within the country&#x27;s exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and outer islands. These are the 18-metre &quot;Manaui&quot; and 32-metre &quot;Tala Moana&quot;. The vessels are used for fisheries research, deploying fish aggregating devices (FADs), visiting outer islands for monitoring and consultations, including to implement Tuvalu&#x27;s National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) to address climate change. The &quot;Manaui&quot; was procured through the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) in 1989 and is nearing the end of its life. In 2015, the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) provided assistance to acquire &quot;Tala Moana&quot;; which is also used for Monitoring Control and Surveillance (MCS) patrols. &quot;Tala Moana&quot; is a steel monohull oil rig supply vessel that is equipped with facilities for a team of about 15 people.

The only international airport in Tuvalu is Funafuti International Airport. Fiji Airways operates services to Funafuti International Airport. Fiji Airways operates services three times a week (Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday) between Suva and Funafuti with ATR 72-600 aircraft, which has a capacity of 72 passengers. Beginning 18 March 2024, flights also operate on Mondays between Nadi and Funafuti.

==Filmography and bibliography==
Tuvalu doesn&#x27;t have a movie or TV industry whatsoever, and foreign movies and TV shows (e.g. Hollywood movies) are commonly watched in the country.
===Filmography===

Documentary films about Tuvalu:
* &quot;Tu Toko Tasi&quot; (Stand by Yourself) (2000) Conrad Mill, a Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) production.
* &quot;Paradise Domain – Tuvalu&quot; (Director: Joost De Haas, Bullfrog Films/TVE 2001) 25:52 minutes – YouTube video. 
* &quot;Tuvalu island tales (A Tale of two Islands&quot;) (Director: Michel Lippitsch) 34 minutes – YouTube video.
* &quot;The Disappearing of Tuvalu: Trouble in Paradise&quot; (2004) by Christopher Horner and Gilliane Le Gallic.
* &quot;Paradise Drowned: Tuvalu, the Disappearing Nation&quot; (2004) Written and produced by Wayne Tourell. Directed by Mike O&#x27;Connor, Savana Jones-Middleton and Wayne Tourell.
* &quot;Going Under&quot; (2004) by Franny Armstrong, Spanner Films.
* &quot;Before the Flood: Tuvalu&quot; (2005) by Paul Lindsay (Storyville/BBC Four).
* &quot;Time and Tide&quot; (2005) by Julie Bayer and Josh Salzman, Wavecrest Films.
* &quot;Tuvalu: That Sinking Feeling&quot; (2005) by Elizabeth Pollock from PBS Rough Cut
* &quot;Atlantis Approaching&quot; (2006) by Elizabeth Pollock, Blue Marble Productions.
* &quot;King Tide | The Sinking of Tuvalu&quot; (2007) by Juriaan Booij.
* &quot;Tuvalu&quot; (Director: Aaron Smith, &#x27;Hungry Beast&#x27; program, ABC June 2011) 6:40 minutes – YouTube video.
* &quot;Tuvalu: Renewable Energy in the Pacific Islands Series&quot; (2012) a production of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and SPREP 10 minutes – YouTube video.
* &quot;Mission Tuvalu&quot; (Missie Tuvalu) (2013) feature documentary directed by Jeroen van den Kroonenberg.
* &quot;ThuleTuvalu&quot; (2014) by Matthias von Gunten, HesseGreutert Film/OdysseyFilm.

===Bibliography===

* Bibliography of Tuvalu 
==See also==
* Outline of Tuvalu

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Lonely Planet Guide: South Pacific &amp; Micronesia&quot;, by various. 
* Chalkley, John, (1999) &quot;Vaitupu: Two Years on a Remote Polynesian Atoll&quot;, Matuku Publications. 
* Ells, Philip, (2008) &quot;Where the Hell Is Tuvalu?&quot; Virgin Books. 
* Grimble, Arthur, (1952) &quot;A Pattern of Islands&quot;, John Murray.
Biodiversity

* Watling, Dick, (2003) &quot;A Guide to the Birds of Fiji and Western Polynesia: Including American Samoa, Niue, Samoa, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu and Wallis and Futuna&quot;, Environmental Consultants (Fiji) Ltd; 2nd edition. 
* 


Culture, customs and traditions

* Sandra Iren (2013), Barkås, &quot;Alofa – Expressions of Love: Change and Continuity in Tuvalu&quot;
* Brady, Ivan (1972). &quot;Kinship Reciprocity in the Ellice Islands&quot;, &quot;Journal of the Polynesian Society&quot; 81:3, 290–316
* Brady, Ivan, (1974). &quot;Land Tenure in the Ellice Islands&quot;, in Henry P. Lundsaarde (ed). &quot;Land Tenure in Oceania&quot;, Honolulu, University Press of Hawaii. 
* Chambers, Keith &amp; Anne Chambers, (January 2001) &quot;Unity of Heart: Culture and Change in a Polynesian Atoll Society&quot;, Waveland Pr Inc. 
* Kennedy, Donald Gilbert, &quot;Field Notes on the Culture of Vaitupu, Ellice Islands&quot; (1931): Thomas Avery &amp; Sons, New Plymouth, N.Z.
* Kennedy, Donald Gilbert, &quot;Land tenure in the Ellice Islands&quot;, Journal of the Polynesian Society., Vol. 64, no. 4 (Dec. 1953):348–358.
* Koch, Gerd, (1961) &quot;Die Materielle Kulture der Ellice-Inseln&quot;, Berlin: Museum fur Volkerkunde; The English translation by Guy Slatter, was published as &quot;The Material Culture of Tuvalu&quot;, University of the South Pacific in Suva (1981) ASIN B0000EE805.
History
*
* &quot;Tuvalu: A History&quot; (1983) Isala, Tito and Laracy, Hugh (eds.), Institute of Pacific Studies, University of the South Pacific and Government of Tuvalu.
* Bedford, R., Macdonald, B., &amp; Munro, D., (1980) &quot;Population Estimates for Kiribati and Tuvalu, 1850–1900: Review and Speculation&quot;, Journal of the Polynesian Society, 89, 199–246.
* Bollard, AE., (1981) &quot;The financial adventures of J. C. Godeffroy and Son in the Pacific&quot;, Journal of Pacific History, 16: 3–19.
* Firth, S., (1973) &quot;German Firms in the Western Pacific Islands, 1857–1914&quot;, Journal of Pacific History, 8: 10–28.
* Geddes, W. H., Chambers, A., Sewell, B., Lawrence, R., &amp; Watters, R. (1982) &quot;Islands on the Line, team report. Atoll economy: Social change in Kiribati and Tuvalu, No. 1&quot;, Canberra: Australian National University, Development Studies Centre.
* Goodall, N. (1954) &quot;A history of the London Missionary Society 1895–1945&quot;, London: Oxford University Press.
* Macdonald, Barrie, (1971) &quot;Local Government in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands 1892–1969 – part 1&quot;, Journal of Administration Overseas, 10, 280–293.
* Macdonald, Barrie, (1972) &quot;Local Government in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands 1892–1969 – part 2&quot;, Journal of Administration Overseas, 11, 11–27.
* Macdonald, Barrie, (2001) &quot;Cinderellas of the Empire: Towards a History of Kiribati and Tuvalu&quot;, Institute of Pacific Studies, University of the South Pacific, Suva, Fiji. (Australian National University Press, first published 1982).
* Munro, D, Firth, S., (1986) &quot;Towards Colonial Protectorates: The Case of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands&quot;, Australian Journal of Politics and History, 32: 63–71.
* Maude, H. E., (1949) &quot;The Co-operative Movement in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands&quot; (Technical Paper No. 1), South Pacific Commission, Sydney.
* Suamalie N.T. Iosefa, Doug Munro, Niko Besnier, (1991) &quot;Tala O Niuoku, Te: The German Plantation on Nukulaelae Atoll 1865–1890&quot;, Published by the Institute of Pacific Studies. .
* Pulekai A. Sogivalu, (1992) &quot;A Brief History of Niutao&quot;, Published by the Institute of Pacific Studies. .
Language

* &quot;Vaiaso ote Gana&quot;, Tuvalu Language Week Education Resource 2016 (New Zealand Ministry for Pacific Peoples) 
* Besnier, Niko, (1995) &quot;Literacy, Emotion and Authority: Reading and Writing on a Polynesian Atoll&quot;, Cambridge University Press. 
* Besnier, Niko, (2000) &quot;Tuvaluan: A Polynesian Language of the Central Pacific. (Descriptive Grammars)&quot; Routledge .
* Jackson, Geoff W. &amp; Jenny Jackson, (1999) &quot;An Introduction to Tuvaluan&quot;. .
* Jackson, Geoff W., (1994) &quot;Te Tikisionale O Te Gana Tuvalu&quot;, A Tuvaluan-English Dictionary, Suva, Fiji, Oceania Printers. ASIN: B0006F7FNY
* Kennedy, Donald Gilbert, &quot;Te ngangana a te Tuvalu – Handbook on the language of the Ellice Islands&quot; (1946) Websdale, Shoosmith, Sydney N.S.W.
Music and dance

* Christensen, Dieter, (1964) &quot;Old Musical Styles in the Ellice Islands&quot;, Western Polynesia, Ethnomusicology, 8:1, 34–40.
* Christensen, Dieter and Gerd Koch, (1964) &quot;Die Musik der Ellice-Inseln&quot;, Berlin: Museum fur Volkerkunde.
* Koch, Gerd, (2000) &quot;Songs of Tuvalu&quot; (translated by Guy Slatter), Institute of Pacific Studies, University of the South Pacific. 
==External links==

* &quot;Te Kakeega III – National Strategy for Sustainable Development 2016–2020&quot;
* &quot;Te Kete – National Strategy for Sustainable Development 2021–2030&quot;
* Tuvalu from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Tuvalu profile from the BBC News
* tuvaluparadise.tv website 
* Tuvalu. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="0" end="6" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="17" end="31" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="39" end="48" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="63" end="70" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="78" end="91" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="114" end="120" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="125" end="134" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148839" start="166" end="184" title="Santa Cruz Islands" label="Santa Cruz Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="206" end="221" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="237" end="244" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="259" end="264" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="275" end="283" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="293" end="300" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="315" end="320" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="325" end="342" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="357" end="361" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="392" end="396" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="413" end="418" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="443" end="451" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391389" start="455" end="457" title="5th parallel south" label="5°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390214" start="462" end="471" title="10th parallel south" label="10° south"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="488" end="497" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669339" start="501" end="505" title="176th meridian east" label="176°"/>
<link wikidata="Q838283" start="510" end="514" title="180th meridian" label="180°"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="537" end="560" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="639" end="685" title="List of countries and dependencies by population" label="the second-least populous country in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="694" end="706" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="781" end="792" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="817" end="858" title="History of the Polynesian people" label="migration of Polynesians into the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="940" end="955" title="List of islands in the Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q826781" start="1018" end="1039" title="Polynesian navigation" label="Polynesian navigation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1107" end="1135" title="Catamaran#Development in Oceania and Asia" label="double-hulled sailing canoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q639140" start="1139" end="1154" title="outrigger canoe" label="outrigger canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="1211" end="1216" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="1221" end="1226" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q179917" start="1322" end="1340" title="Polynesian outlier" label="Polynesian outlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="1345" end="1354" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="1359" end="1369" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="1402" end="1414" title="cartographer" label="cartographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q313273" start="1415" end="1432" title="Álvaro de Mendaña de Neira" label="Álvaro de Mendaña"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="1521" end="1524" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q323750" start="1573" end="1588" title="Terra Australis" label="Terra Australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="1604" end="1612" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718937" start="1725" end="1749" title="Alexander George Findlay" label="Alexander George Findlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q127699863" start="1925" end="1939" title="Herbert William Sumner Gibson" label="Herbert Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479969" start="1981" end="2001" title="British protectorates" label="British protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315432" start="2022" end="2043" title="resident commissioner" label="resident commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545934" start="2092" end="2127" title="British Western Pacific Territories" label="British Western Pacific Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="2188" end="2214" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="Gilbert and Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365294" start="2226" end="2253" title="1974 Ellice Islands self-determination referendum" label="referendum was held in 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="2554" end="2562" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="2644" end="2659" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2667" end="2683" title="the Commonwealth" label="the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="2694" end="2717" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="2723" end="2739" title="King Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320130" start="2743" end="2757" title="Monarchy of Tuvalu" label="King of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121732" start="2798" end="2832" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1290" label="189th member of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="3224" end="3238" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133493" start="3246" end="3260" title="Climate change in Tuvalu" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q496967" start="3328" end="3359" title="Alliance of Small Island States" label="Alliance of Small Island States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="3396" end="3427" title="History of the Polynesian people" label="origins of the people of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="3649" end="3654" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34055" start="3805" end="3813" title="Tuvaluan language" label="Tuvaluan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3873" end="3891" title="Proto-Austronesian language#Numerals" label="Proto-Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q616963" start="3939" end="3957" title="Caves of Nanumanga" label="Caves of Nanumanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569734" start="4042" end="4080" title="Tuvaluan mythology" label="creation myth in the islands of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q128913" start="4188" end="4205" title="islands of Tuvalu" label="islands of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q838524" start="4231" end="4239" title="Bothidae" label="flounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="4282" end="4287" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q35076" start="4328" end="4331" title="Moray eel" label="eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="4354" end="4361" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="4491" end="4497" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="4512" end="4519" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="4588" end="4595" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="4646" end="4651" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q313273" start="4774" end="4791" title="Álvaro de Mendaña de Neira" label="Álvaro de Mendaña"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="4820" end="4823" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576064" start="4956" end="4965" title="Feast of the Holy Name of Jesus" label="Holy Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="5097" end="5106" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q507665" start="5176" end="5186" title="John Byron" label="John Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="5378" end="5385" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317782" start="5428" end="5456" title="Francisco Antonio Mourelle" label="Francisco Mourelle de la Rúa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="5616" end="5625" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="5726" end="5732" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307829" start="6107" end="6119" title="Marine chronometer" label="chronometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189418" start="6442" end="6452" title="brigantine" label="brigantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="6456" end="6465" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="6582" end="6591" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q157691" start="6671" end="6684" title="Edward Ellice (merchant)" label="Edward Ellice"/>
<link wikidata="Q182468" start="6848" end="6860" title="hydrographer" label="hydrographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718937" start="6861" end="6885" title="Alexander George Findlay" label="Alexander George Findlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q186203" start="6918" end="6933" title="Mikhail Lazarev" label="Mikhail Lazarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295865" start="6978" end="6983" title="Mirny (sloop-of-war)" label="Mirny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871768" start="6991" end="7013" title="Louis-Isidore Duperrey" label="Louis-Isidore Duperrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013847" start="7026" end="7049" title="French ship Astrolabe (1811)" label="&amp;quot;La Coquille&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q367027" start="7063" end="7072" title="Nanumanga" label="Nanumanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="7288" end="7291" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840927" start="7350" end="7360" title="Fenua Tapu (isle)" label="Fenua Tapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="7399" end="7406" title="Whaling" label="Whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49149" start="7577" end="7586" title="Nantucket" label="Nantucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q128654" start="7736" end="7746" title="Nukulaelae" label="Nukulaelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="7782" end="7791" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402798" start="7824" end="7831" title="Sakalua" label="Sakalua"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="7841" end="7850" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325233" start="7946" end="7953" title="Elekana" label="Elekana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="7969" end="7990" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational church"/>
<link wikidata="Q967796" start="7994" end="8002" title="Manihiki" label="Manihiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="8004" end="8016" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="8130" end="8139" title="evangelism" label="preaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744944" start="8172" end="8177" title="Malua" label="Malua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="8201" end="8226" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q447977" start="8296" end="8312" title="Church of Tuvalu" label="Church of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="8370" end="8380" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q447977" start="8686" end="8702" title="Church of Tuvalu" label="Church of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34055" start="8812" end="8829" title="Tuvaluan language" label="Tuvaluan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q716335" start="8838" end="8853" title="music of Tuvalu" label="music of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q880704" start="8946" end="8958" title="blackbirding" label="blackbirding"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="9048" end="9057" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="9063" end="9076" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479969" start="9762" end="9782" title="British protectorate" label="British protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127699863" start="9794" end="9808" title="Herbert William Sumner Gibson" label="Herbert Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q956486" start="9983" end="9989" title="palagi" label="palagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481115" start="10220" end="10231" title="George Lewis Becke" label="Louis Becke"/>
<link wikidata="Q367027" start="10286" end="10295" title="Nanumanga" label="Nanumanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="10373" end="10380" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="10409" end="10418" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q98549593" start="10438" end="10450" title="Edward H. M. Davis" label="Edward Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="10611" end="10618" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111457" start="10621" end="10634" title="Jack Buckland" label="Jack Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="10636" end="10642" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="10657" end="10664" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16043787" start="10697" end="10713" title="Alfred Restieaux" label="Alfred Restieaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="10733" end="10742" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q30327380" start="10749" end="10761" title="Christian Martin Kleis" label="Martin Kleis"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="10763" end="10766" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q915830" start="11200" end="11210" title="supercargo" label="supercargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496536" start="11426" end="11438" title="Fred Whibley" label="Fred Whibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16043787" start="11450" end="11466" title="Alfred Restieaux" label="Alfred Restieaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q30327380" start="11485" end="11497" title="Christian Martin Kleis" label="Martin Kleis"/>
<link wikidata="Q119129" start="11725" end="11759" title="United States Exploring Expedition" label="United States Exploring Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q119329" start="11766" end="11780" title="Charles Wilkes" label="Charles Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="11789" end="11797" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="11799" end="11808" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="11814" end="11821" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373427" start="11880" end="11899" title="Alfred Thomas Agate" label="Alfred Thomas Agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495371" start="12011" end="12024" title="Thomas Andrew (photographer)" label="Thomas Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="12046" end="12049" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="12061" end="12083" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066501" start="12094" end="12120" title="Fanny Van de Grift" label="Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387643" start="12133" end="12147" title="Lloyd Osbourne" label="Lloyd Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790579" start="12215" end="12239" title="Thomas Henderson (New Zealand politician)" label="Henderson and Macfarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="12473" end="12480" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16043787" start="12602" end="12618" title="Alfred Restieaux" label="Alfred Restieaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q695165" start="12930" end="12939" title="Festetics family" label="Festetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="13274" end="13297" title="Royal Society of London" label="Royal Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="13335" end="13359" title="formation of coral reefs" label="formation of coral reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="13446" end="13451" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767074" start="13517" end="13562" title="The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs" label="The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="13582" end="13596" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q498915" start="13665" end="13680" title="Edgeworth David" label="Edgeworth David"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="13688" end="13708" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q547384" start="13812" end="13836" title="William Johnson Sollas" label="Professor William Sollas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959332" start="13953" end="13967" title="Charles Hedley" label="Charles Hedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q769416" start="13989" end="14006" title="Australian Museum" label="Australian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="14086" end="14098" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="14103" end="14115" title="ethnological" label="ethnological"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047481" start="14404" end="14415" title="Edgar Ravenswood Waite" label="Edgar Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568753" start="14526" end="14541" title="William Joseph Rainbow" label="William Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998372" start="14644" end="14666" title="Harry Clifford Fassett" label="Harry Clifford Fassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867152" start="14785" end="14811" title="USS Albatross (1882)" label="USFC &amp;quot;Albatross&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889888" start="14821" end="14850" title="United States Fish Commission" label="United States Fish Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479969" start="14990" end="15010" title="British protectorates" label="British Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545934" start="15045" end="15080" title="British Western Pacific Territories" label="British Western Pacific Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315432" start="15094" end="15115" title="Resident Commissioner" label="Resident Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="15200" end="15226" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="Gilbert and Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="15320" end="15336" title="Pacific War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="15343" end="15357" title="Crown colony" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="15399" end="15405" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q65270011" start="15429" end="15458" title="Japanese occupation of the Gilbert Islands" label="Japanese invaded and occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q867325" start="15459" end="15464" title="Butaritari" label="Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="15466" end="15472" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="15506" end="15514" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="15520" end="15546" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="15729" end="15737" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q115819414" start="16029" end="16048" title="Naval Base Funafuti" label="Naval Base Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="16052" end="16061" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757145" start="16095" end="16102" title="Seabees" label="Seabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762732" start="16334" end="16350" title="Nanumea Airfield" label="Nanumea Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068891" start="16355" end="16373" title="Nukufetau Airfield" label="Nukufetau Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888190" start="16379" end="16399" title="PT Boat" label="Patrol Torpedo Boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="16410" end="16418" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q115819414" start="16434" end="16453" title="Naval Base Funafuti" label="Naval Base Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q250309" start="16567" end="16583" title="Battle of Tarawa" label="Battle of Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670873" start="16592" end="16607" title="Battle of Makin" label="Battle of Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327938" start="16785" end="16815" title="Funafuti International Airport" label="Funafuti International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q530843" start="16942" end="16992" title="United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization" label="United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="17111" end="17129" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="17190" end="17216" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="Gilbert and Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365294" start="17310" end="17337" title="1974 Ellice Islands self-determination referendum" label="referendum was held in 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="17606" end="17618" title="Crown Colony" label="Crown Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406" start="17828" end="17843" title="Tuvaluan dollar" label="Tuvaluan dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q259502" start="17885" end="17902" title="Australian dollar" label="Australian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q965247" start="18044" end="18057" title="Toaripi Lauti" label="Toaripi Lauti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112663" start="18260" end="18280" title="caretaker government" label="caretaker government"/>
<link wikidata="Q965247" start="18337" end="18350" title="Toaripi Lauti" label="Toaripi Lauti"/>
<link wikidata="Q592866" start="18368" end="18382" title="Prime Minister of Tuvalu" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788791" start="18494" end="18510" title="List of national independence days" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="18557" end="18575" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121732" start="18653" end="18687" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1290" label="189th member of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632041" start="18831" end="18840" title="metaverse" label="metaverse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18925" end="18939" title="Australia–Tuvalu relations#Australia–Tuvalu Falepili Union" label="Falepili Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857109" start="19345" end="19362" title="Tuvalu Trust Fund" label="Tuvalu Trust Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q123454466" start="19371" end="19404" title="Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project" label="Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q111494758" start="19516" end="19540" title="Climate migration" label="climate-related mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="19660" end="19664" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q367027" start="19674" end="19683" title="Nanumanga" label="Nanumanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="19685" end="19691" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="19696" end="19705" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="19720" end="19726" title="atolls" label="atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="19728" end="19736" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="19738" end="19745" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="19747" end="19750" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="19752" end="19761" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q128654" start="19763" end="19773" title="Nukulaelae" label="Nukulaelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="19778" end="19785" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="19900" end="19936" title="List of sovereign states by area" label="fourth smallest country in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="19982" end="19991" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002254" start="20824" end="20843" title="saltwater intrusion" label="saltwater intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q106091745" start="21198" end="21211" title="Coral reefs of Tuvalu" label="reef habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="21498" end="21521" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="21600" end="21634" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Convention on Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q102398172" start="21899" end="21940" title="Western Polynesian tropical moist forests" label="Western Polynesian tropical moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="22040" end="22049" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327938" start="22106" end="22136" title="Funafuti International Airport" label="Funafuti International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232202" start="22236" end="22246" title="borrow pit" label="borrow pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="22273" end="22280" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="22947" end="22956" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q123454466" start="23372" end="23405" title="Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project" label="Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="23467" end="23476" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q153084" start="23819" end="23825" title="Groyne" label="Groyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q106091745" start="23862" end="23879" title="Coral reefs of Tuvalu" label="reefs at Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="23907" end="23914" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q292100" start="24005" end="24013" title="Acropora" label="Acropora"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="24240" end="24251" title="coral reefs" label="coral reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q107027" start="24280" end="24292" title="foraminifera" label="foraminifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508708" start="24654" end="24680" title="Funafuti Conservation Area" label="Funafuti Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="25275" end="25288" title="Plastic waste" label="Plastic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="25490" end="25494" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="25496" end="25500" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="25506" end="25521" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="25523" end="25528" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="25533" end="25540" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="25661" end="25672" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316391" start="25698" end="25713" title="just transition" label="just transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="25723" end="25739" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q328798" start="25758" end="25775" title="environmental law" label="environmental law"/>
<link wikidata="Q296486" start="25811" end="25818" title="ecocide" label="ecocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="26206" end="26213" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="26218" end="26225" title="La Niña" label="La Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="26375" end="26383" title="cyclones" label="cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q330640" start="27250" end="27263" title="Enele Sopoaga" label="Enele Sopoaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q923429" start="28096" end="28130" title="Bureau of Meteorology" label="Australian National Tidal Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168469" start="28792" end="28804" title="Perigean spring tide" label="spring tides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303867" start="28809" end="28818" title="king tide" label="king tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q67199457" start="28840" end="28850" title="Simon Kofe" label="Simon Kofe"/>
<link wikidata="Q123454466" start="29978" end="30011" title="Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project" label="Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075923" start="30241" end="30259" title="Green Climate Fund" label="Green Climate Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="30285" end="30289" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="30434" end="30442" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055310" start="30655" end="30694" title="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade" label="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="30819" end="30826" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q367027" start="30831" end="30839" title="Nanumaga" label="Nanumaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="31058" end="31074" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="31116" end="31130" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672736" start="31165" end="31172" title="Iridium satellite constellation" label="Iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="31331" end="31340" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="31420" end="31428" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006346" start="31593" end="31605" title="Cyclone Bebe" label="Cyclone Bebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701406" start="32447" end="32463" title="Pukasavilivili" label="Tepuka Vili Vili"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="32464" end="32469" title="islet" label="islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160649" start="32488" end="32500" title="Cyclone Meli" label="Cyclone Meli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32599" end="32618" title="1989–90 South Pacific cyclone season#Samoa Depression" label="tropical depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198852" start="32663" end="32690" title="Cyclone Ofa" label="Severe Tropical Cyclone Ofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198797" start="32780" end="32793" title="Cyclone Gavin" label="Cyclone Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048861" start="32947" end="32951" title="Cyclone Hina" label="Hina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198838" start="32956" end="32960" title="Cyclone Keli" label="Keli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19567333" start="33045" end="33056" title="Cyclone Pam" label="Cyclone Pam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260330" start="33739" end="33746" title="Vasafua" label="Vasafua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508708" start="33766" end="33792" title="Funafuti Conservation Area" label="Funafuti Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="34241" end="34244" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865276" start="34246" end="34258" title="UNICEF East Asia and Pacific Regional Office" label="UNICEF EAPRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806247" start="34260" end="34311" title="Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme" label="UNDP Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065854" start="34313" end="34317" title="United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs" label="OCHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="34319" end="34329" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055310" start="34331" end="34335" title="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade" label="DFAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015611" start="34337" end="34358" title="New Zealand Red Cross" label="New Zealand Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="34365" end="34369" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="IFRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707084" start="34371" end="34395" title="Fiji National University" label="Fiji National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q84267506" start="34533" end="34545" title="Cyclone Tino" label="Cyclone Tino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168469" start="34691" end="34711" title="perigean spring tide" label="perigean spring tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="34766" end="34775" title="high tide" label="high tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867903" start="34815" end="34844" title="Tuvalu Meteorological Service" label="Tuvalu Meteorological Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303867" start="34951" end="34960" title="king tide" label="king tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="35063" end="35070" title="La Niña" label="La Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137507" start="35134" end="35154" title="Rainwater harvesting" label="Rainwater harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568102" start="36735" end="36778" title="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission" label="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="36886" end="36895" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449157" start="36935" end="36950" title="Lens (hydrology)" label="freshwater lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002848" start="37124" end="37146" title="Constitution of Tuvalu" label="Constitution of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191296" start="37324" end="37356" title="Bill of rights" label="Principles of the Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="37365" end="37414" title="Fundamental rights" label="Protection of the Fundamental Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="37592" end="37615" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="37620" end="37638" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="37644" end="37655" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320130" start="37659" end="37673" title="Monarchy of Tuvalu" label="King of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q644809" start="37754" end="37770" title="Governor General of Tuvalu" label="governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q592866" start="37812" end="37836" title="Prime Minister of Tuvalu" label="prime minister of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857123" start="37870" end="37874" title="1986 Tuvaluan constitutional referendum" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454852" start="37879" end="37883" title="2008 Tuvaluan constitutional referendum" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q897278" start="38259" end="38279" title="Parliament of Tuvalu" label="Parliament of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="38523" end="38533" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="38663" end="38681" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812635" start="38691" end="38712" title="List of Speakers of the Parliament of Tuvalu" label="Speaker of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932382" start="38742" end="38749" title="Cabinet of Tuvalu" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002848" start="38970" end="38982" title="Constitution of Tuvalu" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048825" start="38997" end="39008" title="Falekaupule" label="Falekaupule"/>
<link wikidata="Q618244" start="39081" end="39117" title="Tuvalu National Library and Archives" label="Tuvalu National Library and Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="39251" end="39259" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q466087" start="39384" end="39421" title="Convention on the Rights of the Child" label="Convention on the Rights of the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q277072" start="39433" end="39507" title="Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women" label="Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069706" start="39525" end="39578" title="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities" label="Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q876072" start="39659" end="39684" title="Universal Periodic Review" label="Universal Periodic Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="39699" end="39728" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q108440321" start="40153" end="40186" title="Tuvalu National Council for Women" label="Tuvalu National Council for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406" start="40637" end="40639" title="Tuvaluan dollar" label="$T"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003097" start="40673" end="40693" title="High Court of Tuvalu" label="High Court of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003356" start="40753" end="40766" title="Law of Tuvalu" label="Law of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002880" start="40859" end="40884" title="Court of Appeal of Tuvalu" label="Court of Appeal of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="40976" end="40989" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003356" start="41382" end="41395" title="Law of Tuvalu" label="Law of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="41643" end="41653" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="41659" end="41672" title="customary law" label="customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="41878" end="41905" title="Secretariat of the Pacific Community" label="the Pacific Community (SPC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="41929" end="41950" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="41956" end="41979" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="42113" end="42135" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="42172" end="42182" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q123695" start="42284" end="42299" title="High commissioner (Commonwealth)" label="High Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="42408" end="42422" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q751149" start="42621" end="42633" title="Earth Summit" label="Earth Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="42637" end="42649" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="42830" end="42844" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888355" start="42915" end="42955" title="United Nations Climate Change Conference" label="United Nations Climate Change Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q496967" start="43292" end="43323" title="Alliance of Small Island States" label="Alliance of Small Island States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078419" start="43506" end="43524" title="Majuro Declaration" label="Majuro Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q14367588" start="43626" end="43647" title="100% renewable energy" label="100% renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568102" start="43876" end="43921" title="Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission" label="Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922764" start="43938" end="43995" title="Pacific Regional Environment Programme" label="Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="44123" end="44132" title="United States Senate" label="US Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="44233" end="44241" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="44243" end="44252" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q128654" start="44254" end="44264" title="Nukulaelae" label="Nukulaelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="44269" end="44278" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q513470" start="44290" end="44307" title="Guano Islands Act" label="Guano Islands Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122517" start="44363" end="44401" title="Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency" label="Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565027" start="44416" end="44464" title="Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission" label="Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="44503" end="44516" title="US government" label="US government"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855996" start="44681" end="44696" title="Nauru Agreement" label="Nauru Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q600580" start="44736" end="44755" title="seine fishing" label="purse seine fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="46152" end="46166" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052298" start="46298" end="46311" title="Aid effectiveness" label="Aid-for-Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q832200" start="46416" end="46433" title="Cotonou Agreement" label="Cotonou Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="46443" end="46457" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122280" start="46791" end="46837" title="Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations" label="Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503312" start="47427" end="47446" title="Tuvalu Police Force" label="Tuvalu Police Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="47494" end="47506" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527859" start="47568" end="47581" title="Law enforcement in the United Kingdom" label="British-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434" start="47582" end="47589" title="uniform" label="uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="47644" end="47667" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259719" start="47677" end="47702" title="Pacific-class patrol boat" label="Pacific-class patrol boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q60456794" start="47703" end="47731" title="HMTSS Te Mataili" label="HMTSS &amp;quot;Te Mataili&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815436" start="47784" end="47810" title="Guardian-class patrol boat" label="Guardian-class patrol boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064394" start="47833" end="47864" title="HMTSS Te Mataili II (802)" label="HMTSS &amp;quot;Te Mataili II&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="47912" end="47919" title="fishery" label="fishery"/>
<link wikidata="Q675637" start="48463" end="48513" title="Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing" label="illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="48531" end="48554" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503312" start="48746" end="48765" title="Law enforcement in Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu Police Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458220" start="48883" end="48901" title="LGBT rights in Tuvalu" label="Male homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048816" start="48924" end="48939" title="Crime in Tuvalu" label="Crime in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048825" start="49060" end="49071" title="Falekaupule" label="Falekaupule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311246" start="49154" end="49176" title="Religion in Tuvalu" label="religious institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="49260" end="49265" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="49277" end="49281" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615280" start="49529" end="49538" title="ulu-aliki" label="ulu-aliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861281" start="49561" end="49566" title="Ariki" label="aliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048825" start="49595" end="49606" title="Falekaupule" label="Falekaupule"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50076" end="50092" title="ISO 3166-2:TV" label="ISO 3166-2 codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="50500" end="50510" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="50570" end="50582" title="Micronesians" label="Micronesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="50592" end="50602" title="Gilbertese language" label="Gilbertese"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="50618" end="50621" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018888" start="50644" end="50659" title="women in Tuvalu" label="women in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133493" start="50873" end="50897" title="global warming in Tuvalu" label="global warming in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377902" start="51124" end="51128" title="Kioa" label="Kioa"/>
<link wikidata="Q111494758" start="51502" end="51525" title="climate migrant" label="climate change refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="51578" end="51603" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="52110" end="52118" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52134" end="52168" title="Environmental migrant#Asia and the Pacific" label="&amp;quot;climate change refugee&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60433" start="52179" end="52224" title="Convention relating to the Status of Refugees" label="Convention relating to the Status of Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q55655239" start="53554" end="53602" title="Australia–Tuvalu relations" label="bilateral diplomatic relationship with Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111494758" start="53707" end="53731" title="Climate migration" label="climate-related mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q34055" start="53768" end="53785" title="Tuvaluan language" label="Tuvaluan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="53873" end="53893" title="Polynesian languages" label="Polynesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="53955" end="53963" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="53965" end="53970" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q34128" start="53972" end="53980" title="Tahitian language" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36746" start="53982" end="53990" title="Rapa Nui language" label="Rapa Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="53992" end="53998" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34094" start="54003" end="54009" title="Tongan language" label="Tongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179917" start="54069" end="54087" title="Polynesian outlier" label="Polynesian outlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="54128" end="54137" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34055" start="54318" end="54335" title="Tuvaluan language" label="Tuvaluan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q420591" start="54377" end="54388" title="Micronesian languages" label="Micronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="54414" end="54424" title="Gilbertese language" label="Gilbertese"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="54438" end="54441" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q513491" start="54639" end="54651" title="Tuvalu Media Corporation" label="Radio Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q447977" start="54715" end="54756" title="Church of Tuvalu" label="Congregational Christian Church of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="54779" end="54788" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="54807" end="54819" title="state church" label="state church"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="55042" end="55053" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002848" start="55059" end="55081" title="Constitution of Tuvalu" label="Constitution of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="55432" end="55440" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752580" start="55465" end="55494" title="Mission Sui Iuris of Funafuti" label="Mission Sui Iuris of Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="55504" end="55525" title="Seventh-day Adventist" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="55677" end="55689" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="55866" end="55892" title="Ahmadiyya Muslim Community" label="Ahmadiyya Muslim Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="56040" end="56047" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956832" start="56340" end="56366" title="Princess Margaret Hospital (Funafuti)" label="Princess Margaret Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="56587" end="56600" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="56631" end="56639" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="56644" end="56663" title="high blood pressure" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56855" end="56874" title="History of Tuvalu#Education in Tuvalu" label="Education in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q511009" start="56887" end="56897" title="Compulsory education" label="compulsory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15256609" start="56968" end="56993" title="Motufoua Secondary School" label="Motufoua Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="57008" end="57015" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250998" start="57124" end="57149" title="Fetuvalu Secondary School" label="Fetuvalu Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q447977" start="57180" end="57196" title="Church of Tuvalu" label="Church of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242586" start="57235" end="57253" title="International General Certificate of Secondary Education" label="Cambridge syllabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="57440" end="57444" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419285" start="57451" end="57461" title="exam board" label="exam board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062121" start="57682" end="57713" title="University of the South Pacific" label="University of the South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="57846" end="57859" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="58482" end="58501" title="vocational training" label="vocational training"/>
<link wikidata="Q652122" start="58686" end="58692" title="sewing" label="sewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857105" start="58821" end="58855" title="Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute" label="Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857105" start="58976" end="59010" title="Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute" label="Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q105063705" start="59019" end="59069" title="Tuvalu Atoll Science Technology Training Institute" label="Tuvalu Atoll Science Technology Training Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062121" start="59129" end="59160" title="University of the South Pacific" label="University of the South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="59237" end="59248" title="minimum age" label="minimum age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701380" start="59527" end="59536" title="Hernandia" label="Hernandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310464" start="59603" end="59610" title="Pemphis" label="Pemphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q715739" start="59651" end="59669" title="Thespesia populnea" label="Thespesia populnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613405" start="59703" end="59723" title="Rhizophora mucronata" label="Rhizophora mucronata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15768656" start="59808" end="59826" title="Hibiscus tiliaceus" label="Hibiscus tiliaceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="59849" end="59856" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="59895" end="59900" title="Ficus" label="Ficus"/>
<link wikidata="Q471914" start="59953" end="59961" title="Pandanus" label="Pandanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450880" start="60044" end="60050" title="sennit" label="sennit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727364" start="60348" end="60367" title="Maneaba" label="&amp;quot;maneapa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q366291" start="60632" end="60638" title="cowrie" label="cowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="60671" end="60682" title="handicrafts" label="handicrafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136834" start="60832" end="60835" title="mat" label="mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498398" start="60841" end="60844" title="Fan (machine)" label="fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208386" start="60847" end="60854" title="Crochet" label="Crochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q934849" start="61014" end="61022" title="headband" label="headband"/>
<link wikidata="Q680343" start="61025" end="61032" title="armband" label="armband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549506" start="61039" end="61048" title="wristband" label="wristband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143054" start="61188" end="61204" title="material culture" label="material culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="61305" end="61310" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q205276" start="61316" end="61325" title="fish hook" label="fish hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="61453" end="61467" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048822" start="61724" end="61734" title="fakaseasea" label="fakaseasea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431448" start="61748" end="61755" title="fakanau" label="fakanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048829" start="61772" end="61778" title="fatele" label="fatele"/>
<link wikidata="Q836810" start="61946" end="61950" title="Duke of Cambridge" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q836810" start="61955" end="61975" title="Duchess of Cambridge" label="Duchess of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192795" start="62146" end="62163" title="cuisine of Tuvalu" label="cuisine of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="62180" end="62186" title="Staple food" label="staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="62190" end="62197" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q841779" start="62322" end="62334" title="coconut milk" label="coconut milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048875" start="62403" end="62409" title="pulaka" label="pulaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="62411" end="62415" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="62426" end="62436" title="breadfruit" label="breadfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q206070" start="62488" end="62500" title="coconut crab" label="coconut crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q183686" start="62537" end="62548" title="Flying fish" label="Flying fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="62621" end="62628" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273772" start="62655" end="62666" title="black noddy" label="black noddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q248740" start="62693" end="62703" title="white tern" label="white tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="62836" end="62848" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="62868" end="62875" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q839492" start="62988" end="62993" title="Palm wine" label="toddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782650" start="63102" end="63123" title="aquaculture in Tuvalu" label="aquaculture in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q183686" start="63126" end="63137" title="Flying fish" label="Flying fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071788" start="63220" end="63233" title="butterfly net" label="butterfly net"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888958" start="63472" end="63486" title="house building" label="house building"/>
<link wikidata="Q843389" start="63668" end="63679" title="canned food" label="canned food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727364" start="63849" end="63868" title="Maneaba" label="&amp;quot;maneapa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q240854" start="63893" end="63905" title="meeting hall" label="meeting hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048829" start="64034" end="64040" title="fatele" label="fatele"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048825" start="64091" end="64102" title="Falekaupule" label="Falekaupule"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64495" end="64537" title="Tuvalu National Cultural Centre and Museum" label="Tuvalu National Cultural Centre and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064478" start="64642" end="64660" title="Paopao (canoe)" label="&amp;quot;Paopao&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="64671" end="64686" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q639140" start="64769" end="64784" title="outrigger canoe" label="outrigger canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="65094" end="65097" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291258" start="65541" end="65549" title="kilikiti" label="kilikiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="65577" end="65584" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q108597762" start="65630" end="65636" title="Te ano" label="Te ano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="65765" end="65775" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q471914" start="65815" end="65823" title="pandanus" label="pandanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003053" start="65987" end="65992" title="lance" label="lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154477" start="66003" end="66015" title="quarterstaff" label="quarterstaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q327248" start="66028" end="66037" title="Folk wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q171401" start="66210" end="66216" title="futsal" label="futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="66230" end="66238" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="66240" end="66250" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q270102" start="66255" end="66267" title="rugby sevens" label="rugby sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048908" start="66305" end="66314" title="Tuvalu Athletics Association" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783259" start="66361" end="66369" title="Tuvalu Islands Football Association" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873760" start="66371" end="66381" title="Basketball in Tuvalu" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958515" start="66383" end="66394" title="Tuvalu Rugby Union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q24185181" start="66396" end="66409" title="Tuvalu Weightlifting Federation" label="weightlifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25059213" start="66414" end="66426" title="Tuvalu Powerlifting Federation" label="powerlifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q14792743" start="66435" end="66458" title="2013 Pacific Mini Games" label="2013 Pacific Mini Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589424" start="66460" end="66476" title="Tuau Lapua Lapua" label="Tuau Lapua Lapua"/>
<link wikidata="Q14786282" start="66582" end="66588" title="Snatch (weightlifting)" label="snatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531690" start="66617" end="66631" title="clean and jerk" label="clean and jerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22005552" start="66705" end="66718" title="Telupe Iosefa" label="Telupe Iosefa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648458" start="66770" end="66783" title="Tuvalu at the 2015 Pacific Games" label="Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352875" start="66826" end="66844" title="Football in Tuvalu" label="Football in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q733047" start="66892" end="66921" title="Tuvalu national football team" label="Tuvalu national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q182636" start="66936" end="66956" title="Tuvalu Sports Ground" label="Tuvalu Sports Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="66960" end="66968" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q114699" start="66989" end="67002" title="Pacific Games" label="Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783259" start="67008" end="67044" title="Tuvalu National Football Association" label="Tuvalu National Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q180344" start="67075" end="67105" title="Oceania Football Confederation" label="Oceania Football Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="67141" end="67145" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349293" start="67151" end="67178" title="Tuvalu national futsal team" label="Tuvalu national futsal team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589882" start="67199" end="67227" title="OFC Futsal Nations Cup" label="Oceanian Futsal Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351329" start="67400" end="67412" title="Tuvalu Games" label="Tuvalu Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966386" start="67514" end="67532" title="Tuvalu at the Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958509" start="67777" end="67813" title="Tuvalu at the 2006 Commonwealth Games" label="2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857113" start="67861" end="67893" title="Tuvalu at the 2010 Commonwealth Games" label="2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128902" start="68028" end="68062" title="Tuvalu at the 2014 Commonwealth Games" label="2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="68140" end="68150" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q25315523" start="68165" end="68197" title="Tuvalu at the World Championships in Athletics" label="World Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627238" start="68214" end="68273" title="Tuvalu Association of Sports and National Olympic Committee" label="Tuvalu Association of Sports and National Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q139963" start="68403" end="68420" title="Tuvalu at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q140517" start="68583" end="68617" title="Tuvalu at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="Tuvalu at the 2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440937" start="68619" end="68634" title="Etimoni Timuani" label="Etimoni Timuani"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="68680" end="68700" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107325902" start="68720" end="68734" title="Karalo Maibuca" label="Karalo Maibuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q42914040" start="68739" end="68752" title="Matie Stanley" label="Matie Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q42914040" start="68779" end="68799" title="Tuvalu at the 2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q123451656" start="68846" end="68864" title="Tuvalu at the 2023 Pacific Games" label="2023 Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="68915" end="68935" title="2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="69540" end="69567" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956832" start="71250" end="71276" title="Princess Margaret Hospital (Funafuti)" label="Princess Margaret Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740215" start="71379" end="71402" title="National Bank of Tuvalu" label="National Bank of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980370" start="71731" end="71752" title="Agriculture in Tuvalu" label="Agriculture in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="71767" end="71774" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048875" start="71793" end="71799" title="pulaka" label="pulaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857105" start="72003" end="72037" title="Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute" label="Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494219" start="72041" end="72048" title="Amatuku" label="Amatuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="72049" end="72053" title="islet" label="motu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857106" start="72231" end="72266" title="Tuvalu Overseas Seamen&amp;#x27;s Union" label="Tuvalu Overseas Seamen&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857109" start="72801" end="72818" title="Tuvalu Trust Fund" label="Tuvalu Trust Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q40373" start="72852" end="72855" title=".tv" label=".tv"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="72871" end="72887" title="Top Level Domain" label="Top Level Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q734338" start="73018" end="73026" title="Verisign" label="Verisign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416215" start="73102" end="73109" title="GoDaddy" label="GoDaddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40373" start="73182" end="73185" title=".tv" label=".tv"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155768" start="73200" end="73237" title="Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation" label="Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048913" start="73325" end="73349" title="Tuvalu Philatelic Bureau" label="Tuvalu Philatelic Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857108" start="73364" end="73384" title="Tuvalu Ship Registry" label="Tuvalu Ship Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857109" start="73391" end="73408" title="Tuvalu Trust Fund" label="Tuvalu Trust Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="74261" end="74275" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="74402" end="74417" title="U.S. government" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="74879" end="74902" title="least developed country" label="least developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="75281" end="75305" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="75352" end="75375" title="least developed country" label="least developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="75394" end="75412" title="developing country" label="developing country"/>
<link wikidata="Q330640" start="75422" end="75435" title="Enele Sopoaga" label="Enele Sopoaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970171" start="75583" end="75622" title="National Adaptation Programme of Action" label="National Adaptation Programme of Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q260607" start="75739" end="75764" title="climate change adaptation" label="climate change adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163508" start="76106" end="76139" title="Environmental Vulnerability Index" label="Environmental Vulnerability Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327938" start="76568" end="76598" title="Funafuti International Airport" label="Funafuti International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="76759" end="76769" title="Ecotourism" label="Ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508708" start="76815" end="76841" title="Funafuti Conservation Area" label="Funafuti Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q513491" start="77216" end="77239" title="Tuvalu Media Corporation" label="Tuvalu Media Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="77413" end="77415" title="AM broadcasting" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q542001" start="77936" end="77960" title="Communications in Tuvalu" label="Communications in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155768" start="78038" end="78075" title="Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation" label="Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="78216" end="78224" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="78226" end="78233" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q128654" start="78238" end="78248" title="Nukulaelae" label="Nukulaelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448144" start="78278" end="78293" title="Fiji Television" label="Fiji Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962833" start="78303" end="78314" title="Sky Pacific" label="Sky Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084813" start="78420" end="78448" title="Kacific Broadband Satellites" label="Kacific Broadband Satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="78471" end="78479" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434308" start="78500" end="78504" title="Very-small-aperture terminal" label="VSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351621" start="78560" end="78582" title="Data-rate units" label="data transfer capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q334765" start="78687" end="78700" title="Wi-Fi hotspot" label="Wi-Fi hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q967772" start="78774" end="78781" title="Ka band" label="Ka band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020782" start="78859" end="78867" title="trunking" label="trunking"/>
<link wikidata="Q798444" start="78872" end="78880" title="Backhaul (telecommunications)" label="backhaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="79621" end="79630" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="80386" end="80392" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="80423" end="80426" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="80586" end="80601" title="merchant marine" label="merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38807" start="80833" end="80837" title="Suva" label="Suva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970171" start="81734" end="81773" title="National Adaptation Programme of Action" label="National Adaptation Programme of Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="81784" end="81806" title="climate change mitigation" label="address climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="81959" end="81993" title="United Nations Development Program" label="United Nations Development Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327938" start="82304" end="82334" title="Funafuti International Airport" label="Funafuti International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q407719" start="82336" end="82348" title="Fiji Airways" label="Fiji Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q38807" start="82493" end="82497" title="Suva" label="Suva"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="82516" end="82526" title="ATR 72" label="ATR 72-600"/>
<link wikidata="Q619443" start="82641" end="82645" title="Nadi" label="Nadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="83873" end="83876" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030927" start="83877" end="83886" title="Rough Cuts (TV series)" label="Rough Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922764" start="84352" end="84357" title="Pacific Regional Environment Programme" label="SPREP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112497" start="84649" end="84666" title="Outline of Tuvalu" label="Outline of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q651599" start="84969" end="84984" title="Arthur Grimble" label="Grimble, Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932152" start="84999" end="85019" title="A Pattern of Islands" label="A Pattern of Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460820" start="85056" end="85069" title="Dick Watling" label="Watling, Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q33133744" start="85883" end="85906" title="Donald Gilbert Kennedy" label="Kennedy, Donald Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989577" start="86174" end="86184" title="Gerd Koch" label="Koch, Gerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062121" start="87915" end="87946" title="University of the South Pacific" label="University of the South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="87961" end="87991" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989577" start="89626" end="89635" title="Gerd Koch" label="Gerd Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989577" start="89719" end="89729" title="Gerd Koch" label="Koch, Gerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="90120" end="90128" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="90174" end="90192" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="90200" end="90227" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30229" wikidata="Q897500" url="?curid=30229" title="Geography of Tuvalu">
<text>The Western Pacific archipelagic nation of Tuvalu, formerly known as the Ellice Islands, is situated northeast of Australia and is approximately halfway between Australia and Hawaii. It lies east-northeast of the Santa Cruz Islands (belonging to the Solomons), southeast of Nauru, south of Kiribati, west of Tokelau, northwest of Samoa and Wallis and Futuna and north of Fiji. It is a very small island country of . Due to the spread out islands it has the 38th largest Exclusive Economic Zone of . In terms of size, it is the second-smallest country in Oceania.

The islands of Tuvalu consists of three reef islands and six atolls, containing approximately of reef platforms. The reef islands have a different structure to the atolls, and are described as reef platforms as they are smaller tabular reef platforms that do not have a salt-water lagoon, although they have a completely closed rim of dry land, with the remnants of a lagoon that has no connection to the open sea or that may be drying up. For example, Niutao has two lakes, which are brackish to saline; and are the degraded lagoon as the result of coral debris filling the lagoon.

The soils of Tuvalu&#x27;s islands are usually shallow, porous, alkaline, coarse-textured, with carbonate mineralogy and high pH values of up to 8.2 to 8.9. The soils are usually deficient in most of the important nutrients needed for plant growth (e.g., nitrogen, potassium and micronutrients such as iron, manganese, copper and zinc), so garden beds need to be enhanced with mulch and fertiliser to increase their fertility. The Tuvalu islands have a total land area of only about 26 km2, less than .

The land is very low-lying, with narrow coral atolls. The highest elevation is above sea level on Niulakita. Over 4 decades, there had been a net increase in land area of the islets of 73.5 ha (2.9%), although the changes are not uniform, with 74% increasing and 27% decreasing in size. The sea level at the Funafuti tide gauge has risen at 3.9 mm per year, which is approximately twice the global average. The rising sea levels are identified as creating an increased transfer of wave energy across reef surfaces, which shifts sand, resulting in accretion to island shorelines, although this process does not result in additional habitable land. As of March 2018 Enele Sopoaga, the prime minister of Tuvalu, stated that Tuvalu is not expanding and has gained no additional habitable land.

Tuvalu experiences two distinct seasons, a wet season from November to April and a dry season from May to October. Westerly gales and heavy rain are the predominant weather conditions from November to April, the period that is known as &quot;Tau-o-lalo&quot;, with tropical temperatures moderated by easterly winds from May to October.

==Geography==
Location:
Oceania, island group of nine islands comprising three reef islands and six true atolls in the South Pacific Ocean. The islands of Tuvalu are spread out between the latitude of 5° to 10° south and longitude of 176° to 180°, west of the International Date Line.

Geographic coordinates: to 

Map references:
Oceania

Area:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
26 km2
&lt;br&gt;&quot;land:&quot;
26 km2
&lt;br&gt;&quot;water:&quot;
0 km2

Area – comparative:
0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
0 km

Coastline:
Maritime claims:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;contiguous zone:&quot;

&lt;br&gt;&quot;exclusive economic zone:&quot;
 and 
&lt;br&gt;&quot;territorial sea:&quot;
Tuvalu&#x27;s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) covers an oceanic area of approximately .

On 29 August 2012 an &quot;Agreement between Tuvalu and Kiribati concerning their Maritime Boundary&quot;, was signed by their respective leaders that determined the boundary as being seaward of Nanumea and Niutao in Tuvalu on the one hand and Tabiteuea, Tamana and Arorae in Kiribati on the other hand, along the geodesics connecting the points of latitude and longitude set out in the agreement.

In October 2014 the prime ministers of Fiji and Tuvalu signed the &quot;Fiji-Tuvalu Maritime Boundary Treaty&quot;, which establishes the extent of the national areas of jurisdiction between Fiji and Tuvalu as recognized in international law under the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

Climate:
tropical; moderated by easterly trade winds (March to November); westerly gales and heavy rain (November to March).

Terrain:
low-lying and narrow coral atolls.

Elevation extremes:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;lowest point:&quot;
Pacific Ocean 0 m
&lt;br&gt;&quot;highest point:&quot;
unnamed location, on Niulakita.

Extreme points:

This is a list of the extreme points of Tuvalu, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location:

* Northernmost point – Lakena islet, Nanumea
* Easternmost point – Niuoko islet, Nukulaelae
* Southernmost point – Niulakita
* Westernmost point – Lakena islet, Nanumea

Natural resources:
fish

Land use:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;arable land:&quot;
0%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;permanent crops:&quot;
60%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;other:&quot;
40% (2011)

Irrigated land:
NA km2

==Trees and shrubs==

===Most common trees===
Thaman (2016) described about 362 species or distinct varieties of vascular plants that have been recorded at some time on Tuvalu, of which only about 59 (16%) are possibly indigenous. The most common trees found on all islands are coconut (&quot;Cocos nucifera&quot;) stands, hibiscus (&quot;Hibiscus tiliaceus&quot;), papaya (&quot;Carica papaya&quot;), pandanus (&quot;Pandanus tectorius&quot;), salt bush (&quot;Scaevola taccada&quot;), &quot;Premna serratifolia&quot;, &quot;Tournefortia samoensis&quot;, zebra wood (&quot;Guettarda speciosa&quot;), Kanava (&quot;Cordia subcordata&quot;), (beach cordia) and terminalia (&quot;Terminalia samoensis&quot;). Indigenous broadleaf species, including Fetau (&quot;Calophyllum inophyllum&quot;), make up single trees or small stands around the coastal margin. While Coconut palms are common in Tuvalu, they are usually cultivated rather than naturally seeding and growing. Tuvaluan traditional histories are that the first settlers of the islands planted Coconut palms as they were not found on the islands.

The two recorded mangrove species in Tuvalu are the common Togo (&quot;Rhizophora stylosa&quot;) and the red-flowered mangrove Sagale (&quot;Lumnitzera littorea&quot;), which is only reported on Nanumaga, Niutao, Nui and Vaitupu. Mangrove ecosystems are protected under Tuvaluan law.

The land cover types found on Funafuti include inland broadleaf forest and woodland, coastal littoral forest and scrub, mangroves and wetlands, and coconut woodland and agroforest.

===Native broadleaf forest===

The native broadleaf forest is limited to 4.1% of the vegetation types on the islands of Tuvalu. The islets of the Funafuti Conservation Area have 40% of the remaining native broadleaf forest on Funafuti atoll. The native broadleaf forest of Funafuti would include the following species, that were described by Charles Hedley in 1896, which include the Tuvaluan name (some of which may follow Samoan plant names):

* &quot;Fala&quot; or Screw Pine, (&quot;Pandanus&quot;)
* &quot;Puka&quot; or &quot;pouka&quot;, (&quot;Hernandia peltata&quot;)
* &quot;Futu&quot;, (&quot;Barringtonia asiatica&quot;)
* &quot;Fetau&quot;, (&quot;Calophyllum inophyllum&quot;)
* &quot;Ferra&quot;, (&quot;Ficus aspem&quot;), native fig 
* &quot;Fau&quot; or &quot;Fo fafini&quot;, or woman&#x27;s fibre tree (&quot;Hibiscus tiliaceus&quot;)
* &quot;Lakoumonong&quot;, (&quot;Wedelia strigulosa&quot;)
* &quot;Lou&quot;, (&quot;Cardamine sarmentosa&quot;)
* &quot;Meili&quot;, (&quot;Polypodium&quot;), fern 
* &quot;Laukatafa&quot;, &quot;Asplenium nidus&quot;, bird&#x27;s-nest fern
* &quot;Milo&quot; or &quot;miro&quot;, (&quot;Thespesia populnea&quot;)
* &quot;Ngashu&quot; or &quot;Naupaka&quot;, (&quot;Scaevola taccada&quot;)
* &quot;Ngia&quot; or &quot;Ingia&quot;, (&quot;Pemphis acidula&quot;), bush
* &quot;Nonou&quot; or &quot;nonu&quot;, (&quot;Morinda citrifolia&quot;)
* &quot;Pukavai&quot;, (Pisonia grandis) 
* &quot;Sageta&quot;, (&quot;Dioclea violacea&quot;), vine
* &quot;Talla talla gemoa&quot;, (&quot;Psilotum triquetrum&quot;), fern
* &quot;Tausunu&quot; or &quot;tausoun&quot;, (&quot;Heliotropium foertherianum&quot;)
* &quot;Tonga&quot; or &quot;tongo&quot;, (&quot;Rhizophora mucronata&quot;), found around swamps
* &quot;Tulla tulla&quot;, (&quot;Triumfetta procumbens&quot;), whose prostrate stems trailed for several feet over the ground
* &quot;Valla valla&quot;, (&quot;Premna tahitensis&quot;)
The blossoms that are valued for their scent and for use in flower necklaces and headdresses include: &quot;Fetau&quot;, (&quot;Calophyllum inophyllum&quot;); &quot;Jiali&quot;, (&quot;Gardenia taitensis&quot;); &quot;Boua&quot; (&quot;Guettarda speciosa&quot;); and &quot;Crinum&quot;.

Donald Gilbert Kennedy, the resident District Officer in the administration of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony from 1932 to 1938, identified other trees found in the broadleaf forest:

* &quot;Pua&quot;, (Guettarda speciosa) 
* &quot;Kanava&quot;, (Cordia subcordata)

Charles Hedley (1896) identified the uses of plants and trees from the native broadleaf forest as including:
* Food plants: Coconut; and &quot;Ferra&quot;, native fig (&quot;Ficus aspem&quot;).
* Fibre: Coconut; &quot;Ferra&quot;; &quot;Fala&quot;, Screw Pine, &quot;Pandanus&quot;; &quot;Fau&quot; or &quot;Fo fafini&quot;, or woman&#x27;s fibre tree (&quot;Hibiscus tiliaceus&quot;).
* Timber: &quot;Fau&quot; or &quot;Fo fafini&quot;; &quot;Pouka&quot;, (&quot;Hernandia peltata&quot;); &quot;Ngia&quot; or &quot;Ingia&quot;, (&quot;Pemphis acidula&quot;); &quot;Miro&quot;, (&quot;Thespesia populnea&quot;); and &quot;Tonga&quot;, (&quot;Rhizophora mucronata&quot;).
* Dye: &quot;Valla valla&quot;, (&quot;Premna tahitensis&quot;); &quot;Tonga&quot;, (&quot;Rhizophora mucronata&quot;); and &quot;Nonou&quot;, (&quot;Morinda citrifolia&quot;).
* Scent: &quot;Fetau&quot;, (&quot;Calophyllum inophyllum&quot;); &quot;Jiali&quot;, (&quot;Gardenia taitensis&quot;); and &quot;Boua&quot; (&quot;Guettarda speciosa&quot;); &quot;Valla valla&quot;, (&quot;Premna tahitensis&quot;); and Crinum.
* Medicinal: &quot;Tulla tulla&quot;, (&quot;Triumfetta procumbens&quot;); &quot;Nonou&quot;, (&quot;Morinda citrifolia&quot;); &quot;Tausoun&quot;, (&quot;Heliotropium foertherianum&quot;); &quot;Valla valla&quot;, (&quot;Premna tahitensis&quot;); &quot;Talla talla gemoa&quot; (&quot;Psilotum triquetrum&quot;); &quot;Lou&quot;, (&quot;Cardamine sarmentosa&quot;); and &quot;Lakoumonong&quot;, (&quot;Wedelia strigulosa&quot;).

Thaman (1992) provides a literature review of the ethnobiology of the Pacific Islands.

==Climate and natural hazards==

===El Niño and La Niña===
Tuvalu experiences the effects of El Niño and La Niña that flow from changes in ocean temperatures in equatorial and central Pacific. El Niño effects increase the chances of tropical storms and cyclones; while La Niña effects increase the chances of drought conditions in Tuvalu. On 3 October 2011, drought conditions resulted in a state of emergency being declared as water reserves ran low. Typically the islands of Tuvalu receive between 200mm to 400mm of rainfall per month, however a weak La Niña effect causes a drought by cooling the surface of the sea around Tuvalu.

===Tropical cyclones===
Severe tropical cyclones are usually rare, but the low level of islands makes them very sensitive to sea-level rise. Tuvalu experienced an average of three cyclones per decade between the 1940s and 1970s, however eight occurred in the 1980s. The impact of individual cyclones is subject to variables including the force of the winds and also whether a cyclone coincides with high tides. A warning system, which uses the Iridium satellite network, was introduced in 2016 in order to allow outlying islands to be better prepare for natural disasters.

George Westbrook recorded a cyclone that struck Funafuti on 23–24 December 1883. A cyclone struck Nukulaelae on 17–18 March 1886. Captain Edward Davis of HMS &quot;Royalist&quot;, who visited the Ellice Group in 1892, recorded in the ship&#x27;s diary that in February 1891 the Ellice Group was devastated by a severe cyclone. A cyclone caused severe damage to the islands in 1894.
Cyclone Bebe caused severe damage to Funafuti during the 1972–73 South Pacific cyclone season. Funafuti&#x27;s Tepuka Vili Vili islet was devastated by Cyclone Meli in 1979, with all its vegetation and most of its sand swept away during the cyclone. Cyclone Gavin was first identified during 2 March 1997, and was the first of three tropical cyclones to affect Tuvalu during the 1996–97 cyclone season with Cyclones Hina and Keli following later in the season. Cyclone Ofa had a major impact on Tuvalu in late January and early February 1990. On Vaitupu Island around 85 percent of residential homes, trees and food crops were destroyed, while residential homes were also destroyed on the islands of Niutao, Nui and Nukulaelae. The majority of the islands in Tuvalu reported damage to vegetation and crops especially bananas, coconuts and breadfruit, with the extent of damage ranging from 10 to 40 percent. In Funafuti sea waves flattened the Hurricane Bebe bank at the southern end of the airstrip, which caused sea flooding and prompted the evacuation of several families from their homes. In Nui and Niulakita there was a minor loss of the landscape because of sea flooding while there were no lives lost. Soon after the systems had impacted Tuvalu, a Disaster Rehabilitation Sub-Committee was appointed to evaluate the damage caused and make recommendations to the National Disaster Committee and to the Cabinet of Tuvalu, on what should be done to help rehabilitate the affected areas.

In March 2015 Cyclone Pam, the Category 5 cyclone that devastated Vanuatu, caused damage to houses, crops and infrastructure on the outer islands. A state of emergency was subsequently declared on 13 March. An estimated 45 percent of the nation&#x27;s nearly 10,000 people were displaced, according to Prime Minister Enele Sopoaga. The three northern islands, Nanumea, Nanumanga and Niutao were badly affected by flooding as the result of storm surges. More than 400 people from the northern island of Nanumanga were moved to emergency accommodation in the school buildings, as well as another 85 families from Nukulaelae in the south of Tuvalu. On Nui the storm surges contaminated the water supplies and damaged septic tanks and grave sites. The central islands of Vaitupu and Nukufetau were also affected by flooding caused by storm surges. The Situation Report published on 30 March reported that on Nukufetau all the displaced people have returned to their homes.

Nui suffered the most damage of the three central islands (Nui, Nukufetau and Vaitupu); with both Nui and Nukufetau suffering the loss of 90% of the crops. Of the three northern islands (Nanumanga, Niutao, Nanumea), Nanumanga suffered the most damage, with 60–100 houses flooded and damage to the health facility. Vasafua islet, part of the Funafuti Conservation Area, was severely damaged by Cyclone Pam. The coconut palms were washed away, leaving the islet as a sand bar.

Despite passing over to the south of the island nation, Cyclone Tino and its associated convergence zone impacted the whole of Tuvalu between January 16 - 19 of 2020.

===Tsunami===
Nui was struck by a giant wave on 16 February 1882; earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occurring in the basin of the Pacific Ocean and along the Pacific Ring of Fire are a possible cause of a tsunami. There is earthquake activity in the Solomon Islands, where earthquakes occurred in relation to the New Hebrides Trench, and movement along the boundary of the Pacific Plate with, respectively, the Indo-Australia, Woodlark, and Solomon Sea plates.

Tuvalu has the third lowest tsunami risk of Pacific Island countries, with a maximum tsunami amplitude of 1.6m for a 2000-year return period (comparatively, the highest is 5.2m for PNG, and the lowest is 1m for Nauru). The assessment of the tsunami risk of Tuvalu was that major source of risk was activity associated with the New Hebrides trench. The orientation of the trench vis-à-vis the islands of Tuvalu results in the conclusion that most of the energy originating from New Hebrides trench is likely to be directed towards the southern islands of Tuvalu, so that the tsunami risk is lower for the northern islands when compared to the southern islands.

===Climate data===

==Environment==

===Island, reef and lagoon habitats===

Tuvalu consists of three reef islands and six true atolls. Its small, scattered group of atolls have poor soil and a total land area of only about 26.26 square kilometres (less than 10 sq. mi.) making it the fourth smallest country in the world. The islets that form the atolls are very low-lying. Nanumaga, Niutao, Niulakita are reef islands and the six true atolls are Funafuti, Nanumea, Nui, Nukufetau, Nukulaelae and Vaitupu. Funafuti is the largest atoll of the nine low reef islands and atolls that form the Tuvalu volcanic island chain. It comprises numerous islets around a central lagoon that is approximately (N–S) by (W-E), centred on 179°7’E and 8°30’S. On the atolls an annular reef rim surrounds the lagoon, with several natural reef channels. A standard definition of an &quot;atoll&quot; is &quot;an annular reef enclosing a lagoon in which there are no promontories other than reefs and islets composed of reef detritus&quot;. The northern part of the Funafuti lagoon has a deep basin (maximum depth recorded of 54.7 m) basin, and the southern part of the lagoon has very narrow shallow basin.

The eastern shoreline of Fongafale in the Funafuti lagoon (&quot;Te Namo&quot;) was modified during World War II; several piers were constructed, beach areas filled, and deep water access channels were excavated. These alternations to the reef and shoreline have resulted in changes to wave patterns with less sand accumulating to form the beaches as compared to former times; and the shoreline is now exposed to wave action. Several attempts to stabilize the shoreline have not achieved the desired effect.

The rising population results in increased demand on fish stocks, which are under stress; although the creation of the Funafuti Conservation Area has provided a fishing exclusion area that helps sustain fish populations across the Funafuti lagoon. Population pressure on the resources of Funafuti and in-adequation sanitation systems have resulted in pollution. The Waste Operations and Services Act 2009 provides the legal framework for the waste management and pollution control projects funded by the European Union that are directed to organic waste composting in eco-sanitation systems.

Surveys were carried out in May 2010 of the reef habitats of Nanumea, Nukulaelae and Funafuti (including the Funafuti Conservation Area) and a total of 317 fish species were recorded during this &quot;Tuvalu Marine Life&quot; study. The surveys identified 66 species that had not previously been recorded in Tuvalu, which brings the total number of identified species to 607.

The terrestrial invertebrates are land and shore crabs, including &quot;Paikea&quot; (&quot;Discoplax rotunda&quot;), &quot;Tupa&quot; (&quot;Cardisoma carnifex&quot;), &quot;Kamakama&quot; (&quot;Grapsus albolineatus&quot;), a range of hermit crabs, &quot;Uga&quot; (&quot;Coenobita spp&quot;) and the coconut crab, &quot;Uu&quot; (&quot;Birgus latro&quot;). Also important are a range of land snails, misa (&quot;Melampus spp&quot;) used to make shell leis (ula) and traditional handicrafts, which includes the decoration of mats, fans and wall hangings.

===Environment – climate change issues===

Since there are no streams or rivers and groundwater is not potable, most water needs must be met by catchment systems with storage facilities; beachhead erosion because of the use of sand for building materials; excessive clearance of forest undergrowth for use as fuel; damage to coral reefs from the bleaching of the coral as a consequence of the increase of the ocean temperatures and acidification from increased levels of carbon dioxide; Tuvalu is very concerned about global increases in greenhouse gas emissions and their effect on rising sea levels, which threaten the country&#x27;s underground water table. Tuvalu has adopted a national plan of action as the observable transformations over the last ten to fifteen years show Tuvaluans that there have been changes to the sea levels.

Because of the low elevation, the islands that make up this nation are threatened by current and future sea level rise. The highest elevation is above sea level on Niulakita, which gives Tuvalu the second-lowest maximum elevation of any country (after the Maldives). However, the highest elevations are typically in narrow storm dunes on the ocean side of the islands which are prone to over topping in tropical cyclones, such as occurred on Funafuti with Cyclone Bebe.

Tuvalu is mainly composed of coral debris eroded from encircling reefs and pushed up onto the islands by winds and waves. Paul Kench at the University of Auckland in New Zealand and Arthur Webb at the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission in Fiji released a study in 2010 on the dynamic response of reef islands to sea level rise in the central Pacific. Tuvalu was mentioned in the study, and Webb and Kench found that seven islands in one of its nine atolls have spread by more than 3 per cent on average since the 1950s. One island, Funamanu, gained 0.44 hectares, or nearly 30 per cent of its previous area. In contrast, Tepuka Vili Vili has suffered a net loss in area of 22 percent since 1896. The shape and orientation of the reef has also changed over time.

Further research by Kench et al., published in 2018 identifies rising sea levels as creating an increased transfer of wave energy across the reef surfaces of the atolls of Tuvalu, which shifts sand, resulting in accretion to island shorelines. Over 4 decades, there had been a net increase in land area of the islets of 73.5 ha (2.9%), although the changes are not uniform, with 74% increasing and 27% decreasing in size. However, this process does not result in additional habitable land.

The storm surge resulting from a tropical cyclone can dramatically shift coral debris. In 1972 Funafuti was in the path of Cyclone Bebe. Tropical Cyclone Bebe was a pre-season tropical cyclone that impacted the Gilbert, Ellice Islands, and Fiji island groups. The storm surge created a wall of coral rubble along the ocean side of Fongafale and Funafala that was about long, and about thick at the bottom. The cyclone knocked down about 90% of the houses and trees on Funafuti and contaminated sources of drinking water as a result of the system&#x27;s storm surge and fresh water flooding.

Tuvalu is affected by perigean spring tide events which raise the sea level higher than a normal high tide. The highest peak tide recorded by the Tuvalu Meteorological Service was on 24 February 2006 and again on 19 February 2015. As a result of historical sea level rise, the king tide events lead to flooding of low-lying areas, which is compounded when sea levels are further raised by La Niña effects or local storms and waves. In the future, sea level rise may threaten to submerge the nation entirely as it is estimated that a sea level rise of in the next 100 years could make Tuvalu uninhabitable.

Tuvalu experiences westerly gales and heavy rain from October to March – the period that is known as &quot;Tau-o-lalo&quot;; with tropical temperatures moderated by easterly winds from April to November. Drinking water is mostly obtained from rainwater collected on roofs and stored in tanks; these systems are often poorly maintained, resulting in lack of water. Aid programs of Australia and the European Union have been directed to improving the storage capacity on Funafuti and in the outer islands.

===Borrow Pits Remediation (BPR) project===
When the airfield, which is now Funafuti International Airport, was constructed during World War II. The coral base of the atoll was used as fill to create the runway. The resulting borrow pits impacted the fresh-water aquifer. In the low areas of Funafuti the sea water can be seen bubbling up through the porous coral rock to form pools with each high tide. Since 1994 a project has been in development to assess the environmental impact of transporting sand from the lagoon to fill all the borrow pits and low-lying areas on Fongafale. In 2013 a feasibility study was carried out and in 2014 the Tuvalu Borrow Pits Remediation (BPR) project was approved, so that all ten borrow pits would be filled, leaving Tafua Pond, which is a natural pond. The New Zealand Government funded the BPR project. The project was carried out in 2015 with 365,000 sqm of sand being dredged from the lagoon to fill the holes and improve living conditions on the island. This project increased the usable land space on Fongafale by eight per cent.

===Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project (TCAP)===
The Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project (TCAP) was launched in 2017 for the purpose on enhancing the resilience of the islands of Tuvalu to meet the challenges resulting from higher sea levels. Tuvalu was the first country in the Pacific to access climate finance from Green Climate Fund, with the support of the UNDP. In December 2022, work on the Funafuti reclamation project commenced. The project is to dredge sand from the lagoon to construct a platform on Fongafale, Funafuti that is meters long and meters wide, giving a total area of approximately 7.8 ha. (19.27 acres), which is designed to remain above sea level rise and the reach of storm waves beyond the year 2100. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) also provided funding for the TCAP. Further projects that are part of TCAP are capital works on the outer islands of Nanumea and Nanumaga aimed at reducing exposure to coastal damage resulting from storms.

===Topographic and Bathymetric Survey===
In May 2019, TCAP signed an agreement with Fugro, for it to carry out an airborne LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) survey across the nine islands of Tuvalu. LIDAR is a remote sensing method that uses light in the form of a pulsed laser that will produce high quality mapping of the reef and lagoon bathymetry (sea floor mapping to 50-meter depths) and accurate topography (land elevation data). This aerial survey will provide high quality baseline data to assess the relationship between water levels and wave dynamics and their impact on the islands of Tuvalu. The survey will also provide baseline data for shoreline monitoring, coastal vulnerability assessment and planning.

===Controls on plastic waste and recycling of domestic waste===
From 1 August 2019, specific single-use plastic items are subject to a ban on importation into Tuvalu, an importation levy was also imposed on specific items, such as refrigerators and vehicles, to raise money to pay for their recycling or shipment out of the country when they cease to be usable. The new rules are contained in two regulations: the Waste Management (Prohibition on the Importation of Single-Use Plastic) Regulation 2019 and the Waste Management (Levy Deposit) Regulation 2019, which regulations are made under the Waste Operations and Services Act 2009.

===Environment – international agreements===
Tuvalu is a party to:
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling
&lt;br&gt;&quot;signed, but not ratified:&quot; none

Tuvalu signed the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in 1992, and ratified it in December 2002.

Tuvalu signed the Pacific Islands Cetaceans Memorandum of Understanding on 9 September 2010.

Tuvalu is a party to the Waigani Convention that bans the importation into forum island countries of hazardous and radioactive wastes and to control the transboundary movement and management of hazardous wastes within the south pacific region and is also a party to the Minamata Convention on Mercury, Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. Tuvalu is in the process of completing its accession to the Basel Convention to protect human health and the environment against the adverse effects that may result from the generation, transboundary movements and management of hazardous and other wastes.

==Funafuti atoll==
===Structure of Funafuti atoll===
Funafuti atoll consists of a narrow sweep of land between wide, encircling a large lagoon (&quot;Te Namo&quot;) of about long and wide. The average depth in the Funafuti lagoon is about . With a surface of , it is by far the largest lagoon in Tuvalu. The northern part of the lagoon has a deep basin (maximum depth recorded of 54.7 m) basin, and the southern part of the lagoon has very narrow shallow basin. The land area of the 33 islets aggregates to , less than one percent of the total area of the atoll.

The boreholes on Fongafale islet at the site now called &quot;Darwin&#x27;s Drill&quot;, are the result of drilling conducted by the Royal Society of London for the purpose of investigating the formation of coral reefs to determine whether traces of shallow water organisms could be found at depth in the coral of Pacific atolls. This investigation followed the work on The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs conducted by Charles Darwin in the Pacific. Drilling occurred in 1896, 1897 and 1898. Professor Edgeworth David of the University of Sydney was a member of the 1896 &quot;Funafuti Coral Reef Boring Expedition of the Royal Society&quot;, under Professor William Sollas and lead the expedition in 1897. However, the geologic history of atolls is more complex than Darwin (1842) and Davis (1928) envisioned. The survey of the atoll published in 1970 described its structure as being:

===Aquifer salinization of Fongafale Islet, Funafuti===
The investigation of groundwater dynamics of Fongafale Islet, Funafuti, show that tidal forcing results in salt water contamination of the surficial aquifer during spring tides. The degree of aquifer salinization depends on the specific topographic characteristics and the hydrologic controls in the sub-surface of the atoll. About half of Fongafale islet is reclaimed swamp that contains porous, highly permeable coral blocks that allow the tidal forcing of salt water. There was extensive swamp reclamation during World War II to create the air field that is now the Funafuti International Airport. As a consequence of the specific topographic characteristics of Fongafale, unlike other atoll islands of a similar size, Fongafale does not have a thick freshwater lens. The narrow fresh water and brackish water sheets in the sub-surface of Fongafale islet results in the taro swamps and the fresh groundwater resources of the islet being highly vulnerable to salinization resulting from the rising sea-level.

In addition to the increased risk of salinized by the sea-level rise, the freshwater lens is at risk from over extraction due to the large population that now occupies Fongafale islet; the increased extraction can be exacerbated by a decrease of the rainfall recharge rate associated with the climate change. Water pollution is also a chronic problem, with domestic wastewater identified as the primary pollution source. Approximately 92% of households on Fongafale islet have access to septic tanks and pit toilets. However, these sanitary facilities are not built as per the design specifications or they are not suitable for the geophysical characteristics, which results in seepage into the fresh water lens and run off into coastal waters.

On Funafuti and on the other islands, rainwater collected off the corrugated iron roofs of buildings is now the primary source of fresh water. On Funafuti a desalination unit that was donated by Japan in 2006 also provides fresh water. In response to the 2011 drought, Japan funded the purchase of a 100 m3/d desalination plant and two portable 10 m3/d plants as part of its Pacific Environment Community (PEC) program. Aid programs from the European Union and Australia also provided water tanks as part of the longer-term solution for the storage of available fresh water.

===Aquifer salinization and the impact on Pulaka production===
Swamp taro (&quot;Cyrtosperma merkusii&quot;), known in Tuvalu as &quot;Pulaka&quot;, is grown in large pits of composted soil below the water table, Pulaka has been the main source for carbohydrates, it is similar to taro, but &quot;with bigger leaves and larger, coarser roots&quot;.

In recent years the Tuvaluan community have raised concerns over increased salinity of the groundwater in pits that are used to cultivate pulaka. Pits on all islands of Tuvalu (except Niulakita) were surveyed in 2006. Nukulaelae and Niutao each had one pit area in which salinity concentrations thought to be too high for successful swamp taro growth. However, on Fongafale in Funafuti all pits surveyed were either too saline or very marginal for swamp taro production, although a more salt tolerant species of taro (&quot;Colocasia esculenta&quot;) was being grown in Fongafale.

The extent of the salinization of the aquifer on Fongafale Islet is the result of both man-made changes to the topography that occurred when the air field was built in World War II by reclaiming swamp land and excavating coral rock from other parts of the islet. These topographic changes are exacerbated by the groundwater dynamics of the islet, as tidal forcing pushes salt water into the surficial aquifer during spring tides.

The freshwater lens of each atoll is a fragile system. Tropical cyclones and other storm events also result in wave wash over and extreme high water also occurs during spring tides. These events can result in salt water contamination of the fresh groundwater lens. Periods of low rainfall can also result in contraction of the freshwater lens as the coconut trees and other vegetation draw up the water at a greater than recharge than it can be recharged. The over extraction of ground water to supply human needs has a similar result as drought conditions.

==See also==

==References==
==Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4" end="19" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Western Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="20" end="32" title="archipelagic" label="archipelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="43" end="49" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="114" end="123" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="175" end="181" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q148839" start="213" end="231" title="Santa Cruz Islands" label="Santa Cruz Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="250" end="258" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomons"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="274" end="279" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="290" end="298" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="308" end="315" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="330" end="335" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="340" end="357" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="371" end="375" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="396" end="410" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="470" end="493" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q128913" start="568" end="585" title="islands of Tuvalu" label="islands of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="604" end="608" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="625" end="631" title="atolls" label="atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="845" end="851" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="1017" end="1023" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="1274" end="1276" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395337" start="1525" end="1530" title="mulch" label="mulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q128913" start="1579" end="1593" title="List of islands of Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="1750" end="1759" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q330640" start="2316" end="2329" title="Enele Sopoaga" label="Enele Sopoaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="2804" end="2811" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="2813" end="2819" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="2859" end="2863" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="2885" end="2891" title="atolls" label="atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2905" end="2918" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="2969" end="2977" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391389" start="2981" end="2983" title="5th parallel south" label="5°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390214" start="2987" end="2996" title="10th parallel south" label="10° south"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="3001" end="3010" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669339" start="3014" end="3018" title="176th meridian east" label="176°"/>
<link wikidata="Q838283" start="3022" end="3026" title="180th meridian" label="180°"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="3040" end="3063" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="3066" end="3088" title="Geographic coordinates" label="Geographic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="3111" end="3118" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3275" end="3289" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="3488" end="3511" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="3756" end="3763" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="3768" end="3774" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059267" start="3805" end="3814" title="Tabiteuea" label="Tabiteuea"/>
<link wikidata="Q944319" start="3816" end="3822" title="Tamana, Kiribati" label="Tamana"/>
<link wikidata="Q698352" start="3827" end="3833" title="Arorae" label="Arorae"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="3837" end="3845" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q213488" start="3875" end="3884" title="geodesics" label="geodesics"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4494" end="4507" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="4570" end="4579" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="4639" end="4645" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801129" start="4751" end="4757" title="Lakena" label="Lakena"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="4758" end="4763" title="islet" label="islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="4765" end="4772" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895913" start="4795" end="4801" title="Niuoko" label="Niuoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q128654" start="4809" end="4819" title="Nukulaelae" label="Nukulaelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="4843" end="4852" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801129" start="4875" end="4881" title="Lakena" label="Lakena"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="4889" end="4896" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="5357" end="5364" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q157124" start="5402" end="5410" title="hibiscus" label="hibiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="5445" end="5451" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q471914" start="5481" end="5489" title="pandanus" label="pandanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702446" start="5541" end="5557" title="Scaevola taccada" label="Scaevola taccada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888249" start="5572" end="5591" title="Premna serratifolia" label="Premna serratifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234690" start="5605" end="5617" title="Tournefortia" label="Tournefortia"/>
<link wikidata="Q772689" start="5653" end="5671" title="Guettarda speciosa" label="Guettarda speciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q675926" start="5694" end="5711" title="Cordia subcordata" label="Cordia subcordata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469349" start="5757" end="5767" title="Terminalia (plant)" label="Terminalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311471" start="5839" end="5861" title="Calophyllum inophyllum" label="Calophyllum inophyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="5940" end="5947" title="Coconut" label="Coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="6129" end="6136" title="Coconut" label="Coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251914" start="6254" end="6272" title="Rhizophora stylosa" label="Rhizophora stylosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520573" start="6324" end="6343" title="Lumnitzera" label="Lumnitzera littorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="6522" end="6538" title="forest" label="broadleaf forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="6561" end="6569" title="Littoral zone" label="littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817834" start="6588" end="6597" title="Mangrove forest" label="mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508708" start="6796" end="6822" title="Funafuti Conservation Area" label="Funafuti Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="6876" end="6884" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959332" start="6992" end="7006" title="Charles Hedley" label="Charles Hedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409973" start="7074" end="7092" title="Samoan plant names" label="Samoan plant names"/>
<link wikidata="Q471914" start="7137" end="7145" title="Pandanus" label="Pandanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701380" start="7201" end="7210" title="Hernandia" label="Hernandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311468" start="7253" end="7274" title="Barringtonia asiatica" label="Barringtonia asiatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q311471" start="7310" end="7332" title="Calophyllum inophyllum" label="Calophyllum inophyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="7368" end="7373" title="Ficus" label="Ficus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15768656" start="7478" end="7496" title="Hibiscus tiliaceus" label="Hibiscus tiliaceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245746" start="7538" end="7545" title="Wedelia" label="Wedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q147299" start="7590" end="7599" title="Cardamine" label="Cardamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135685" start="7646" end="7656" title="Polypodium" label="Polypodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736890" start="7702" end="7717" title="Asplenium nidus" label="Asplenium nidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q715739" start="7794" end="7812" title="Thespesia populnea" label="Thespesia populnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702446" start="7872" end="7888" title="Scaevola taccada" label="Scaevola taccada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310464" start="7944" end="7951" title="Pemphis" label="Pemphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q234238" start="8021" end="8039" title="Morinda citrifolia" label="Morinda citrifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383292" start="8071" end="8086" title="Pisonia grandis" label="Pisonia grandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222419" start="8118" end="8125" title="Dioclea (plant)" label="Dioclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q139732" start="8188" end="8196" title="Psilotum" label="Psilotum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065214" start="8274" end="8300" title="Heliotropium foertherianum" label="Heliotropium foertherianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613405" start="8357" end="8377" title="Rhizophora mucronata" label="Rhizophora mucronata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223667" start="8440" end="8450" title="Triumfetta" label="Triumfetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411131" start="8567" end="8584" title="Premna tahitensis" label="Premna tahitensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q311471" start="8720" end="8742" title="Calophyllum inophyllum" label="Calophyllum inophyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245878" start="8777" end="8795" title="Gardenia taitensis" label="Gardenia taitensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q772689" start="8828" end="8846" title="Guettarda speciosa" label="Guettarda speciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q683353" start="8865" end="8871" title="Crinum" label="Crinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q33133744" start="8880" end="8902" title="Donald Gilbert Kennedy" label="Donald Gilbert Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050859" start="8963" end="8989" title="Gilbert and Ellice Islands" label="Gilbert and Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q772689" start="9091" end="9109" title="Guettarda speciosa" label="Guettarda speciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q675926" start="9135" end="9152" title="Cordia subcordata" label="Cordia subcordata"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="9279" end="9286" title="Coconut" label="Coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="9329" end="9334" title="Ficus" label="Ficus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="9358" end="9365" title="Coconut" label="Coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q471914" start="9422" end="9430" title="Pandanus" label="Pandanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15768656" start="9514" end="9532" title="Hibiscus tiliaceus" label="Hibiscus tiliaceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701380" start="9619" end="9628" title="Hernandia" label="Hernandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310464" start="9691" end="9698" title="Pemphis" label="Pemphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q715739" start="9740" end="9758" title="Thespesia populnea" label="Thespesia populnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613405" start="9797" end="9817" title="Rhizophora mucronata" label="Rhizophora mucronata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411131" start="9865" end="9882" title="Premna tahitensis" label="Premna tahitensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613405" start="9917" end="9937" title="Rhizophora mucronata" label="Rhizophora mucronata"/>
<link wikidata="Q234238" start="9976" end="9994" title="Morinda citrifolia" label="Morinda citrifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311471" start="10038" end="10060" title="Calophyllum inophyllum" label="Calophyllum inophyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245878" start="10095" end="10113" title="Gardenia taitensis" label="Gardenia taitensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q772689" start="10150" end="10168" title="Guettarda speciosa" label="Guettarda speciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411131" start="10209" end="10226" title="Premna tahitensis" label="Premna tahitensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q683353" start="10239" end="10245" title="Crinum" label="Crinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223667" start="10292" end="10302" title="Triumfetta" label="Triumfetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q234238" start="10348" end="10366" title="Morinda citrifolia" label="Morinda citrifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065214" start="10403" end="10429" title="Heliotropium foertherianum" label="Heliotropium foertherianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411131" start="10470" end="10487" title="Premna tahitensis" label="Premna tahitensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q139732" start="10533" end="10541" title="Psilotum" label="Psilotum"/>
<link wikidata="Q147299" start="10585" end="10594" title="Cardamine" label="Cardamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245746" start="10650" end="10657" title="Wedelia" label="Wedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="10859" end="10866" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="10871" end="10878" title="La Niña" label="La Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="10959" end="10966" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="11019" end="11027" title="cyclones" label="cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="11035" end="11042" title="La Niña" label="La Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="11319" end="11326" title="La Niña" label="La Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="11432" end="11448" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672736" start="11845" end="11852" title="Iridium satellite constellation" label="Iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="12023" end="12031" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q98549593" start="12113" end="12125" title="Edward H. M. Davis" label="Edward Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006346" start="12357" end="12369" title="Cyclone Bebe" label="Cyclone Bebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="12394" end="12402" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001566" start="12414" end="12450" title="1972–73 South Pacific cyclone season" label="1972–73 South Pacific cyclone season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701406" start="12468" end="12484" title="Pukasavilivili" label="Tepuka Vili Vili"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="12485" end="12490" title="islet" label="islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160649" start="12509" end="12521" title="Cyclone Meli" label="Cyclone Meli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198797" start="12607" end="12620" title="Cyclone Gavin" label="Cyclone Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048861" start="12773" end="12777" title="Cyclone Hina" label="Hina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198838" start="12782" end="12786" title="Cyclone Keli" label="Keli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198852" start="12818" end="12829" title="Cyclone Ofa" label="Cyclone Ofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="12903" end="12910" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="13057" end="13063" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="13065" end="13068" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q128654" start="13073" end="13083" title="Nukulaelae" label="Nukulaelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="13268" end="13276" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q19567333" start="13864" end="13875" title="Cyclone Pam" label="Cyclone Pam"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="13916" end="13923" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q592866" start="14152" end="14166" title="Prime Minister of Tuvalu" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q330640" start="14167" end="14180" title="Enele Sopoaga" label="Enele Sopoaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="14210" end="14217" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q367027" start="14219" end="14228" title="Nanumanga" label="Nanumanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="14233" end="14239" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q128654" start="14461" end="14471" title="Nukulaelae" label="Nukulaelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="14499" end="14502" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="14617" end="14624" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="14629" end="14638" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260330" start="15134" end="15141" title="Vasafua" label="Vasafua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508708" start="15161" end="15187" title="Funafuti Conservation Area" label="Funafuti Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q84267506" start="15352" end="15364" title="Cyclone Tino" label="Cyclone Tino"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="15478" end="15481" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="15595" end="15608" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783" start="15631" end="15643" title="Ring of Fire" label="Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="15670" end="15677" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15688" end="15730" title="2007 Solomon Islands earthquake#Tectonic summary" label="earthquake activity in the Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="15838" end="15851" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="15876" end="15890" title="Indo-Australian Plate" label="Indo-Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050177" start="15892" end="15900" title="Woodlark Plate" label="Woodlark"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="16690" end="16694" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="16716" end="16722" title="atolls" label="atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="16754" end="16760" title="atolls" label="atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q367027" start="16963" end="16971" title="Nanumaga" label="Nanumaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="16973" end="16979" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="16981" end="16990" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="16995" end="16999" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="17036" end="17044" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="17046" end="17053" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q547997" start="17055" end="17058" title="Nui (atoll)" label="Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="17060" end="17069" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q128654" start="17071" end="17081" title="Nukulaelae" label="Nukulaelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="17086" end="17093" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="17095" end="17103" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="17119" end="17124" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="17141" end="17145" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="17802" end="17811" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508708" start="18405" end="18431" title="Funafuti Conservation Area" label="Funafuti Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130432" start="19348" end="19365" title="Discoplax rotunda" label="Discoplax rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717280" start="19398" end="19416" title="Cardisoma carnifex" label="Cardisoma carnifex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495491" start="19453" end="19473" title="Grapsus albolineatus" label="Grapsus albolineatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q390024" start="19530" end="19539" title="Coenobita" label="Coenobita"/>
<link wikidata="Q206070" start="19595" end="19607" title="Coconut crab" label="Birgus latro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697750" start="19671" end="19679" title="Melampus (gastropod)" label="Melampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q541357" start="19710" end="19714" title="Lei (garland)" label="leis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013258" start="19725" end="19748" title="Art of Tuvalu" label="traditional handicrafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="20757" end="20771" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="20817" end="20826" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="20909" end="20917" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="21095" end="21103" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006346" start="21109" end="21121" title="Cyclone Bebe" label="Cyclone Bebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q492467" start="21264" end="21286" title="University of Auckland" label="University of Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568102" start="21325" end="21368" title="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission" label="South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="21372" end="21376" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508730" start="21665" end="21673" title="Funamanu" label="Funamanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701406" start="21754" end="21770" title="Tepuka Vili Vili" label="Tepuka Vili Vili"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="22420" end="22436" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006346" start="22510" end="22522" title="Cyclone Bebe" label="Cyclone Bebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="22563" end="22579" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="22598" end="22605" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="22607" end="22621" title="Tuvalu" label="Ellice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="22627" end="22631" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="22718" end="22727" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423894" start="22732" end="22740" title="Funafala" label="Funafala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168469" start="23001" end="23021" title="perigean spring tide" label="perigean spring tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="23076" end="23085" title="high tide" label="high tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867903" start="23125" end="23154" title="Tuvalu Meteorological Service" label="Tuvalu Meteorological Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303867" start="23256" end="23265" title="king tide" label="king tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="23368" end="23375" title="La Niña" label="La Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327938" start="24167" end="24197" title="Funafuti International Airport" label="Funafuti International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232202" start="24317" end="24327" title="borrow pit" label="borrow pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="24354" end="24361" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="24663" end="24672" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q123454466" start="25217" end="25250" title="Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project" label="Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075923" start="25480" end="25498" title="Green Climate Fund" label="Green Climate Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="25524" end="25528" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="25673" end="25682" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="25684" end="25692" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055310" start="25905" end="25944" title="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade" label="Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="26069" end="26076" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q367027" start="26081" end="26089" title="Nanumaga" label="Nanumaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="26282" end="26317" title="Lidar" label="LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128913" start="26341" end="26358" title="islands of Tuvalu" label="islands of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="26371" end="26385" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q810826" start="26501" end="26511" title="bathymetry" label="bathymetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="26564" end="26574" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="27587" end="27599" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="27601" end="27615" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="27617" end="27646" title="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol" label="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="27648" end="27663" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="27665" end="27679" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="27681" end="27703" title="Ozone Layer Protection" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q259130" start="27705" end="27719" title="Ship Pollution" label="Ship Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="27721" end="27728" title="Whaling" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="27801" end="27835" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Convention on Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122514" start="27904" end="27957" title="Pacific Islands Cetaceans Memorandum of Understanding" label="Pacific Islands Cetaceans Memorandum of Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590745" start="28005" end="28023" title="Waigani Convention" label="Waigani Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862837" start="28250" end="28280" title="Minamata Convention on Mercury" label="Minamata Convention on Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q82908" start="28282" end="28335" title="Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants" label="Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q686455" start="28337" end="28392" title="Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer" label="Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="28401" end="28418" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q775865" start="28523" end="28539" title="Basel Convention" label="Basel Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="28773" end="28781" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="28782" end="28787" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="29301" end="29310" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="29417" end="29440" title="Royal Society of London" label="Royal Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="29478" end="29502" title="formation of coral reefs" label="formation of coral reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="29589" end="29594" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767074" start="29654" end="29699" title="The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs" label="The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="29713" end="29727" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q498915" start="29796" end="29811" title="Edgeworth David" label="Edgeworth David"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="29819" end="29839" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q547384" start="29943" end="29967" title="William Johnson Sollas" label="Professor William Sollas"/>
<link wikidata="Q731947" start="30283" end="30292" title="Fongafale" label="Fongafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="30300" end="30308" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q223325" start="30320" end="30333" title="tidal force" label="tidal forcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646113" start="30377" end="30394" title="surficial aquifer" label="surficial aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168469" start="30402" end="30414" title="Perigean spring tide" label="spring tides"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="30475" end="30486" title="topographic" label="topographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="30511" end="30521" title="hydrologic" label="hydrologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327938" start="30807" end="30837" title="Funafuti International Airport" label="Funafuti International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449157" start="30992" end="31007" title="Lens (hydrology)" label="freshwater lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="31111" end="31115" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="31999" end="32007" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622662" start="32251" end="32263" title="2011 Tuvalu drought" label="2011 drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515765" start="32653" end="32673" title="Cyrtosperma merkusii" label="Cyrtosperma merkusii"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048875" start="32707" end="32713" title="Pulaka" label="Pulaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="32821" end="32833" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="32853" end="32857" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q632489" start="33106" end="33115" title="Niulakita" label="Niulakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q128654" start="33140" end="33150" title="Nukulaelae" label="Nukulaelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="33155" end="33161" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="33299" end="33307" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="33434" end="33438" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="33615" end="33625" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449157" start="33939" end="33954" title="Lens (hydrology)" label="freshwater lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="33990" end="34006" title="Tropical cyclone" label="Tropical cyclone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30230" wikidata="Q3044350" url="?curid=30230" title="Demographics of Tuvalu">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Tuvalu include the age structure, ethnicity, education level, life expectancy, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

==Summary==
The population of Tuvalu is predominately of Polynesian ethnicity with approximately 5.6% of the population being Micronesian. Tuvaluans are ethnically related to the people of Samoa and Tonga. There is evidence for a dual genetic origin of Pacific Islanders in Asia and Melanesia, which results from an analysis of Y chromosome (NRY) and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) markers. There is also evidence of Fiji playing a pivotal role in west-to-east expansion within Polynesia. The pattern of settlement believed to have occurred is that the Polynesians spread out from the Samoan Islands into the Tuvaluan atolls, with Tuvalu providing a stepping stone to migration into the Polynesian Outlier communities in Melanesia and Micronesia.

The vast majority of Tuvaluans belong to the Church of Tuvalu, a Protestant denomination. Their ancestors were converted by Christian missionaries in the 19th century.

Infant mortality in Tuvalu was 25 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2012, with an under-five mortality rate of 30 deaths per 1,000 live births. There has been a consistent decline in the under-five mortality rate since 1990.

School attendance at school is 10 years for males and 11 years for females (2001). Adult literacy rate is 99.0% (2002).

* Primary school enrollment (2006): 100%
* Secondary school enrollment (2001): 79.5%

Life expectancy for women in Tuvalu is 68.41 years and 64.01 years for men (2015 est.).

The population of Tuvalu is recorded by the Central Statistics Department (CSD) of Tuvalu in the census information:

The net migration rate is estimated at -6.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2015 est.). The threat of global warming in Tuvalu is not a dominant motivation for migration as Tuvaluans appear to prefer to continue living on the islands for reasons of lifestyle, culture and identity.

The Census Monograph on Migration, Urbanization and Youth provides an analysis of the 2012 census and reported:
* A total of 1,200 people were listed as being out of country on census night with more males (57%) than females (43%) absent. The high proportion in range of ages 15 to 29 years (37% of the total) is described as indicating the significance of overseas tertiary education and training.
==Population==
===Structure of the population===



==Vital statistics==
===Registered births and deaths ===

==Ethnic groups==
*Polynesian 96%
*Micronesian 4%

==Languages==
*Tuvaluan (official)
*English (official)
*Samoan
*Ikiribati language (on the island of Nui)

==Religion==
* Church of Tuvalu 97%
* Seventh-day Adventist Church 1.4%
* Baháʼí 1%
* all other faiths or denominations ≈ 1%

==Migration==
===Emigration===
====New Zeland====
The 2013 Census of New Zealand reported 3,537 Tuvaluans, an increase of 80% from the 1,965 reported in the 2001 census. In the 2013 census, only about 40% (1,419) had been born in Tuvalu. The high proportion of Tuvaluans who are New Zealand born illustrates the significance of New Zealand as a long term destination for Tuvaluan migrants.
====Australia====
The Tuvaluan community in Australia is recorded in the 2011 Australian Census as 228 people who put Tuvaluan as their first response to a question on ‘ancestry’; of these 120 were born in Tuvalu.
The islands of Nanumea, Nanumaga, Nukufetau and Niutao had relatively high net migration losses, with most being internal migrants to Funafuti. Vaitupu had the largest net migration gain, although this is attributed to the location of Motufoua Secondary School on Vaitupu and the movement of students from the other islands.

== See also ==

* Women in Tuvalu
* History of Tuvalu
* Religion in Tuvalu
* Geography of Tuvalu
* Princess Margaret Hospital

==References==
* Central Statistics Division – Government of Tuvalu
*CIA World Factbook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="42" end="48" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="76" end="85" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="104" end="119" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311246" start="121" end="143" title="Religion in Tuvalu" label="religious affiliations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="239" end="248" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="308" end="319" title="Micronesians" label="Micronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="321" end="327" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="371" end="376" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="381" end="386" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="456" end="460" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="465" end="474" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="510" end="522" title="Y chromosome" label="Y chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="533" end="550" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="594" end="598" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="762" end="767" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179917" start="864" end="894" title="Polynesian outliers" label="Polynesian Outlier communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="898" end="907" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="912" end="922" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q447977" start="970" end="986" title="Church of Tuvalu" label="Church of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="990" end="1000" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="1049" end="1058" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018888" start="1385" end="1392" title="Women in Tuvalu" label="females"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018888" start="1545" end="1560" title="women in Tuvalu" label="women in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133493" start="1832" end="1856" title="global warming in Tuvalu" label="global warming in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="2541" end="2551" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="2557" end="2568" title="Micronesian people" label="Micronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34055" start="2588" end="2596" title="Tuvaluan language" label="Tuvaluan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2609" end="2616" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="2629" end="2635" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="2637" end="2655" title="Ikiribati language" label="Ikiribati language"/>
<link wikidata="Q447977" start="2695" end="2711" title="Church of Tuvalu" label="Church of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="2718" end="2746" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="2754" end="2760" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="2875" end="2886" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3240" end="3249" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174618" start="3425" end="3432" title="Nanumea" label="Nanumea"/>
<link wikidata="Q367027" start="3434" end="3442" title="Nanumaga" label="Nanumaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q745924" start="3444" end="3453" title="Nukufetau" label="Nukufetau"/>
<link wikidata="Q475219" start="3458" end="3464" title="Niutao" label="Niutao"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="3544" end="3552" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="3554" end="3561" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15256609" start="3645" end="3670" title="Motufoua Secondary School" label="Motufoua Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018888" start="3754" end="3769" title="Women in Tuvalu" label="Women in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q240796" start="3772" end="3789" title="History of Tuvalu" label="History of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311246" start="3792" end="3810" title="Religion in Tuvalu" label="Religion in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q897500" start="3813" end="3832" title="Geography of Tuvalu" label="Geography of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956832" start="3835" end="3861" title="Princess Margaret Hospital (Funafuti)" label="Princess Margaret Hospital"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30233" wikidata="Q542001" url="?curid=30233" title="Telecommunications in Tuvalu">
<text>Telecommunications in Tuvalu cover Tuvalu&#x27;s 6 atolls and 3 reef islands. The islands of Tuvalu rely on satellite dishes for communication and internet access.

The Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation (TTC), a state-owned enterprise, provides fixed line telephone communications to subscribers on each island and mobile phone services on Funafuti, Vaitupu and Nukulaelae. TTC is a distributor of Fiji Television service (Sky Pacific satellite television service).

== Telephones ==
Telephones - main lines in use:
900 (2005)

Telephones - mobile cellular:
1300 (2005)

Telephone system:
&quot;domestic:&quot;
radiotelephone communications between islands
&quot;international:&quot;
country code - 688; international calls can be made by satellite

== Radio and television ==
Radio broadcast stations:
AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0 (2011) - The Tuvalu Media Department of the Government of Tuvalu operates &quot;Radio Tuvalu&quot;, which broadcasts on the AM frequency. In 2011 the Japanese government provided financial support to construct a new AM broadcast studio. The new AM radio transmitter on Funafuti replaced the FM radio service to the outer islands and freed up satellite bandwidth for mobile services.

Radios:
4,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations:
TTC is a distributor of Fiji Television service (Sky Pacific satellite television service).

Televisions:
unknown number.

== Internet Service Providers (ISPs) ==

Country code (Top level domain): TV (see .tv)

&quot;Tuvalu.tv&quot; is the sole provider of Internet access in Tuvalu. The ISP is operated by the ICT (Information and Communications Technology) Department of the Government of Tuvalu.

In 2012 the available bandwidth was only 512 kbit/s uplink, and 1.5 Mbit/s downlink. Throughout Tuvalu are more than 900 subscribers who want to use the satellite service, with demand slowing down the speed of the entire system. TTC currently operates satellite internet services with less than 20 Mbit/s of capacity. In June 2014 TTC signed a five-year agreement with Kacific Broadband Satellites for the supply of provide high speed bandwidth to the islands of Tuvalu.

From 2017 the service was provided by the Kacific-1 satellite - Ka band High-throughput satellite (HTS) provided by Kacific Broadband Satellites which provided TTC with increased levels of capacity over the period. 

In July 2020, the Government of Tuvalu signed a five-year agreement with Kacific for 400 Mbps to 600 Mbps of satellite capacity. the agreement provides a comprehensive turnkey service including sixty 1.2 metre VSAT terminals (satellite dishes) for schools, medical clinics, government agencies and small businesses, forty outdoor WiFi access points to support community connectivity with WiFi hotspots, three maritime antennae to connect ferry services, and one Ka-band antennae to provide trunking and backhaul services for the mobile phone network.

As of February 2022, the delivered satellite capacity into Tuvalu was a combined capacity of 510 mbps split between Agility Beyond Space (ABS) (Ku Band) and Kacific (Ka band). The average download of data per device is about 9 GB/user/month, with 95% of devices in use being 4G/ LTE capable. Also, Tuvalu has 5,915 active broadband users (the largest base of users is on Funafuti), with dedicated satellite and hotspot users on the outer islands, each of which has 3 to 5 hotspots.

==Tuvalu Telecommunications and ICT Development Project==

In January 2019 the World Bank approved a US$29 million grant for the Tuvalu Telecommunications and ICT Development Project which is intended to boost internet connectivity in Tuvalu, including to the country&#x27;s outer islands. The project will also support investments in an international optical fiber submarine cable to provide faster, lower-cost internet bandwidth. 

The project will include reforms of the Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation (TCC) to redevelop the government-run entity as a public-private partnership (PPP) in cooperation with an experienced international telecommunications operator, which will be selected using a competitive process.

The project will involve the government of Tuvalu using a submarine cable system to connect Funafuti atoll to the international optical fibre network. The private sector partner in the PPP will be responsible for the design, installation and operation of the cable and network. The preferred option is to connect to the proposed Southern Cross NEXT optical fibre project at Nukunonu, Tokelau. As of October 2023, further planning will be carried out to determine the exact cable route and landing site in Funafuti as described in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q542001" start="0" end="28" title="Telecommunications in Tuvalu" label="Telecommunications in Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="35" end="41" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="51" end="57" title="atolls" label="atolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="64" end="68" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q128913" start="82" end="99" title="islands of Tuvalu" label="islands of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155768" start="169" end="206" title="Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation" label="Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="344" end="352" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q632495" start="354" end="361" title="Vaitupu" label="Vaitupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q128654" start="366" end="376" title="Nukulaelae" label="Nukulaelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448144" start="402" end="417" title="Fiji Television" label="Fiji Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962833" start="427" end="438" title="Sky Pacific" label="Sky Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="488" end="497" title="Telephone" label="Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="781" end="786" title="Radio" label="Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="807" end="809" title="AM broadcasting" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="813" end="815" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="819" end="828" title="shortwave radio" label="shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q513491" start="844" end="867" title="Tuvalu Media Corporation" label="Tuvalu Media Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="1237" end="1247" title="Television" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="1432" end="1444" title="Country codes" label="Country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q40373" start="1473" end="1476" title=".tv" label=".tv"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084813" start="2037" end="2065" title="Kacific Broadband Satellites" label="Kacific Broadband Satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q967772" start="2204" end="2211" title="Ka band" label="Ka band"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625019" start="2212" end="2237" title="High-throughput satellite" label="High-throughput satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434308" start="2567" end="2581" title="Very-small-aperture terminal" label="VSAT terminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q306639" start="3053" end="3060" title="Ku Band" label="Ku Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q967772" start="3075" end="3082" title="Ka band" label="Ka band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="3471" end="3481" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="3744" end="3757" title="optical fiber" label="optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="3758" end="3773" title="Submarine communications cable" label="submarine cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155768" start="3866" end="3903" title="Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation" label="Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="3954" end="3980" title="public-private partnership" label="public-private partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q34126" start="4210" end="4218" title="Funafuti" label="Funafuti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4447" end="4466" title="Southern Cross Cable#Southern Cross NEXT" label="Southern Cross NEXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q656709" start="4492" end="4500" title="Nukunonu" label="Nukunonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="4502" end="4509" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30245" wikidata="Q2164069" url="?curid=30245" title="Traveller (role-playing game)">
<text>Traveller is a science fiction role-playing game first published in 1977 by Game Designers&#x27; Workshop. Marc Miller designed &quot;Traveller&quot; with help from Frank Chadwick, John Harshman, and Loren Wiseman. Editions were published for &quot;GURPS&quot;, d20, and other role-playing game systems. From its origin and in the currently published systems, the game relied upon six-sided dice for random elements. &quot;Traveller&quot; has been featured in a few novels and at least two video games.

&quot;Traveller&quot; is a tabletop game where characters journey through star systems, engaging in exploration, ground and space battles, and interstellar trading. The game is influenced by various literary works and emphasizes commerce, sociological stratification, and a mix of low and high technology. The setting is centered around the human-dominated Third Imperium, a feudalistic interstellar empire. Despite the focus on humans, the &quot;Traveller&quot; universe is cosmopolitan and features various other sophont peoples. The game&#x27;s history also features the Ancients, a highly advanced race that left behind ruins and artifacts scattered throughout the universe.

&quot;Traveller&quot; has been published in various editions since 1977. The original version, known as &quot;Classic Traveller&quot;, was published by Game Designers&#x27; Workshop (GDW). Throughout the years, the game has evolved, with notable editions including &quot;MegaTraveller&quot;, &quot;Traveller: The New Era&quot;, &quot;Marc Miller&#x27;s Traveller&quot;, &quot;GURPS Traveller&quot;, &quot;Traveller20&quot;, &quot;Traveller Hero&quot;, &quot;Mongoose Traveller&quot;, and &quot;Traveller5&quot;. The current rulesets are &quot;Traveller5&quot; and &quot;Mongoose Traveller 2nd Ed.&quot;, both of which draw from the original &quot;Traveller&quot; rules and rely on six-sided dice. Each edition presents different settings, timelines, and mechanics, showcasing the game&#x27;s adaptability and enduring popularity.

&quot;Traveller&quot; is highly regarded for its production value, sophisticated character generation system, and consistent rules. It has received positive reviews across various editions, with some critics calling it the best science-fiction RPG. &quot;Traveller&quot; has won multiple Origins Awards and was inducted into the Origins Hall of Fame in 1996. While the game has faced some criticism, such as slow character growth and anachronistic weapons, it remains a classic in the role-playing hobby. Some video games and software have been based on the &quot;Traveller&quot; universe, including &quot;The Imperial Data Recovery System&quot;, &quot;MegaTraveller 1: The Zhodani Conspiracy&quot;, and &quot;MegaTraveller 2: Quest for the Ancients&quot;.

== Design ==

Traveller is a tabletop role-playing game. Characters journey between star systems, engaging in exploration, ground and space battles, and interstellar trading. One player, the game master or referee, oversees task attempts and guides events as the players explore the setting.

Characters are defined not by the need to increase native skill and ability but by achievements, discoveries, wealth, and so on.

===Influences and inspiration===
Marc Miller lists a number of books that influenced &quot;Traveller&quot; and provided its key features:

* &quot;Dorsai&quot;, Gordon R. Dickson, 1960
* &quot;Dumarest of Terra&quot; saga, Edwin Charles Tubb, 1967-2008
* &quot;Envoy to New Worlds&quot;, Keith Laumer, 1963
* &quot;Hammer&#x27;s Slammers&quot;, David Drake, 1979
* &quot;Retief&#x27;s Peace&quot;, Keith Laumer, William H. Keith, 2005
* &quot;Space Viking&quot;, H. Beam Piper, 1963
* &quot;The Cosmic Computer&quot;, H. Beam Piper, 1963

===Key features===
Some of these key features include:

* Commerce: Commerce is the major driving force of civilization.
* Human-centric but cosmopolitan: The core rules focus on human characters, but there is support for using and playing aliens.
* Limited communication: There is no faster-than-light information transfer – meaning no ansible, subspace radio, or similar. Communication is limited to the speed of travel. Decisions are made on the local level rather than by a remote authority.
* Morals and mortality: People remain people and continue to show courage, wisdom, honesty and justice, along with cowardice, deceit, and criminal behavior.
* Sociological: Interstellar society is socially stratified (high, mid, and low passage; SOC (Social Status) is a primary character attribute). Affairs are often managed by independent nobility, who make use of classic titles such as Baron, Duke and Archduke.

=== Characters ===
&quot;Traveller&quot; uses a lifepath-style system for character generation. Characters get skills and experience in a mini-game where the player makes career choices determining the character&#x27;s life up to the point before adventuring begins.

A character can be human, robot, alien, or of a genetically engineered species. A character can be civilian, military, or noble, a young cadet, or a tried-and-true veteran, each with strengths and weaknesses. Death during character generation is possible in some editions, a mechanic that became infamous.

Characters have six primary characteristics, generated by a roll of two six-sided dice. Other characteristics also exist to add nuance to alien characters.

Some characters have extra-sensory perception, telekinesis, telepathy, and other psychic abilities, which are organized and standardized into &quot;psionics&quot;.

=== Equipment ===

Equipment emphasizes wilderness exploration, hazardous environments, and combat. As a result, equipment lists are heavy on vehicles, sensor equipment, communicators, rations, personal armor, and weapons.

; Low-technology: Since primitive worlds exist near technological worlds, primitive weapons such as swords, shields, pikes, and bows are included. Characters often have some sort of blade skill for close combat.
; High-technology: Cybernetics and non-sentient robots also show up in equipment lists, as do artifacts from ancient civilizations.
; Hard Sci-fi Flavor: Along with energy weapons, there is also a strong presence of slug-throwing weapons such as rifles and pistols. The prevailing theory is that (usually) the most efficient way to stop someone is with kinetic energy (e.g. bullets).

=== Starships ===
Starships range from small one-person scouts, to giant planetoid colony ships. Design rules balance power, life support, and defenses for consistent ships. GDW published several board games allowing &quot;Traveller&quot; space battles to be played out as games in their own right - &quot;Mayday&quot;, &quot;Brilliant Lances&quot; and &quot;Battle Rider&quot; for example.

=== Worlds ===
Worlds range from barren planetoid moons to large gas giant worlds, from uncolonized territories to planets with billions of people. The world generation rules produce a random mix of worlds.

== Setting ==
Early in the adventures and supplements, a default setting emerged, based on in-house play tests done for the game. In this setting, the human-dominated Third Imperium is the largest interstellar empire in charted space, a feudalistic union of worlds, where local nobility operate largely free from oversight and restricted by convention and feudal obligations.

=== Sophonts ===
The setting features descendants of humanity who are collectively called &quot;Humaniti&quot;. These include the &quot;Solomani&quot;, humans emigrated from Earth within the last few thousand years, the &quot;Vilani&quot;, humans transplanted from Earth tens of thousands of years ago by the Ancients (see below) who founded the First Imperium, and the &quot;Zhodani&quot;, psychic humans ruled by psionically-gifted nobles.

Despite the thematic dominance of the human race, with most adventures taking place in human space, the &quot;Traveller&quot; universe is cosmopolitan and contains many technologically advanced &quot;sophonts&quot;, a term borrowed from earlier science fiction material. The setting principally concerns itself with six &quot;major races&quot; that developed faster-than-light travel independently. In addition to Humaniti, the standard list of major races includes the honor-bound catlike &quot;Aslan&quot;, the winged lizard-like &quot;Droyne&quot;, the sixfold-symmetric and manipulative &quot;Hivers&quot;, the centaur-like militant vegetarian &quot;K&#x27;kree&quot;, and the wolf-hybrid &quot;Vargr&quot;.

Additional minor races are numerous. An early publication from GDW notes that &quot;The minor races, of which there are hundreds within the area of known space, will be largely left up to individual referees.&quot; GDW&#x27;s quarterly publication, the &quot;Journal of the Travellers Aid Society&quot; designed by Loren K. Wiseman, sketched out about one race per quarter, starting with the Aslan in Issue 7. Taken together with aliens casually mentioned or introduced in separate scenarios or adventures—often arbitrarily—there is therefore no indication that the number of minor races is limited in any sense.

=== Ancients ===
The &quot;Ancients&quot; were a major race in the distant past; their ruins dot planets throughout charted space and their artifacts are more technically advanced than those of any existing civilization. For unknown reasons, they transplanted humans from Earth to dozens of worlds, uplifted Terran wolves to create the Vargr and transplanted them to another world, and undertook many megascale engineering projects before destroying their civilization in a catastrophic civil war.

== Publishing history ==
=== Format ===

The original gamebooks were black and digest-sized (known as the &quot;little black books&quot;) produced by Game Designers&#x27; Workshop (GDW). The main rules were detailed in three such booklets, sold as a boxed set while the same format was used for early support material, such as the adventures, supplements and further books. Later supplements and updated versions of the main game system introduced full sized booklets, complete re-writes of the game system and significant changes to the Third Imperium.

=== Editions ===

&quot;Mongoose Traveller 2nd Ed.&quot; and &quot;Traveller5&quot; are the current rulesets. Both rely on six-sided dice and both draw from the original &quot;Traveller&quot; rules. Nearly all older versions of &quot;Traveller&quot; are available in PDF format.

==== Mongoose &quot;Traveller&quot;====
Mongoose Publishing published this version both in a traditional format and as an open gaming SRD around which other games may be built.

A second edition was published in 2016 and updated in 2022. It uses a full color production style while resembling the original &quot;Traveller&quot; rules in scope.

==== &quot;Traveller5&quot; ====
A new set of rules made by re-working and integrating concepts from earlier rulesets.

The current version, v5.10, was printed in 2019 as three distinct books: &quot;Characters and Combat&quot;, &quot;Starships&quot;, and &quot;Worlds and Adventures&quot;. This edition uses Uncertain checks in which one of the dice in certain situations is rolled in secret by the gamemaster.

==== &quot;Traveller Hero&quot; ====
A port of the &quot;Traveller&quot; setting to the &quot;Hero System&quot;, produced under license by Comstar Games in 2006.

==== &quot;GURPS Traveller: Interstellar Wars&quot;====
In 2006, Steve Jackson Games released &quot;GURPS Traveller: Interstellar Wars&quot; (&quot;GTISW&quot;, sometimes &quot;GTIW&quot;) for the 4th edition of GURPS from 2004. The timeline was rolled back to 2170, which is several millennia earlier than the usual &quot;Traveller&quot; setting, to the early days of Earth&#x27;s presence in space at the time when Earth first started to send out interstellar ships to include the period just after the Third Interstellar War between the Terran Confederation (Earth) and the gigantic &quot;Ziru Sirka Empire (Vland)&quot;.

==== &quot;Traveller20&quot; ====
Published by QuickLink Interactive (QLI) in 2002, this version uses the d20 System as its base and is set at the time of the Solomani Rim War around Imperial year 990, about a century before the era depicted in the original game. The preferred setting is the &quot;Gateway Domain&quot; region of the Imperium. After the company&#x27;s license to the &quot;Traveller&quot; brand and setting lapsed, the purely mechanical elements of this game were republished as the generic &quot;SciFi20&quot; system.

==== &quot;GURPS Traveller&quot; ====

Designed by Loren K. Wiseman and published in 1998, &quot;GURPS Traveller&quot; uses the third edition of the &quot;GURPS&quot; system and takes place in an alternate timeline in which no Rebellion occurred and Virus was never released.

==== &quot;Marc Miller&#x27;s Traveller&quot; ====
T4 is set in the early days of the Third Imperium (&quot;Milieu 0&quot;), with the small, newly formed empire surrounded by regressed or barbaric worlds.

==== &quot;Traveller: The New Era&quot; ====
Set in the former territory of the Third Imperium after interstellar government and society had largely collapsed. &quot;TNE&quot; introduced &quot;Virus&quot;, a silicon-chip life form that infected and took over computers. The game mechanics used GDW&#x27;s house system, derived from &quot;, 2nd Ed&quot;.

==== &quot;MegaTraveller&quot; ====
The game was set during a rebellion which shattered the Imperium. Supplements and magazines produced during this era detailed the progression of the rebellion from the initial assassination of the Emperor in 1116 to the collapse of large-scale interstellar trade in roughly 1124 (the beginning of the supplement &quot;Hard Times&quot;).

==== &quot;Traveller&quot; ====
The original version was designed and published by GDW in 1977. The core rules originally came as a box set of three black digest-sized books, and were later compiled into a single volume rulebook. This edition is also sometimes called by the retronym &quot;Classic Traveller&quot;.

==Reception==
In the April–May 1978 edition of &quot;White Dwarf&quot; (Issue #6), Don Turnbull gave a strong recommendation for the new game, saying, &quot;Altogether, what is here is very satisfactory and much of it is stimulating. The presentation is exemplary, the detail impressive, the treatment exacting and the inventiveness inspired.&quot;

In the September 1978 edition of &quot;Dragon&quot; (Issue 18), Tony Watson complimented the game on the high production value of its components, saying, &quot;Physically, &quot;Traveller&quot; is first class, a tradition with Game Designer&#x27;s Workshop. The box lid and covers of the three booklets are done in a simple but highly effective combination of red and white lettering on a black background. The interior layout and printing is also of the best quality; the printing is an entirely professional job.&quot; Watson liked that experience points were not emphasized in gameplay: &quot;It is refreshing to see that the adventures and color of the game&#x27;s play is reward enough and the players are not channeling their energy into the rather silly chase of ethereal experience points. Too often, this chase becomes more important than actual play itself!&quot; He concluded with a strong recommendation, saying, &quot;&quot;Traveller&quot; is a unique SF game and probably the best of the role-playing variety. It offers a colorful but consistent future for players to adventure in.&quot;

In the inaugural edition of &quot;Ares&quot; (March 1980), David Ritchie was enthusiastic about &quot;Traveller&quot;, giving it an above average rating of 8 out of 9 and commenting, &quot;This game starts off where &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; left off, but, if there is any justice, will end up being more popular than that venerable relic. For one thing, the &quot;Traveller&quot; rules are fairly consistent (moreso than is usual for such games).&quot;

In the May–June 1980 edition of &quot;The Space Gamer&quot; (Issue No. 28), Forrest Johnson gave a good review, saying, &quot;&quot;Traveller&quot; is the best game of its type, recommended for the sophisticated science fiction gamer.&quot;

In the November 1980 edition of &quot;Ares&quot; (Issue #5), Eric Goldberg called &quot;Traveller&quot; &quot;a most impressive achievement from a design standpoint... This mark of distinction is the main reason why I consider &quot;Traveller&quot; the finest commercially available role-playing game.&quot; Goldberg didn&#x27;t consider it perfect, criticizing the game&#x27;s lack of imaginary vision of technology of the future. Although he liked the &quot;sophisticated and elegant&quot; character generation system, he felt that &quot;All too often, a player will have to spend an entire afternoon rolling dice before he gains a reasonable character.&quot; Goldberg concluded with a positive recommendation: &quot;If you have at least a casual interest in science fiction and role-playing, you should definitely invest in a copy of &quot;Traveller&quot;&quot;

In the 1980 book &quot;The Complete Book of Wargames&quot;, game designer Jon Freeman commented, &quot;&quot;Traveller&quot; is the only serious attempt to provide a really comprehensive set of role-playing rules for science fiction: interstellar travel, exploration, trade, combat at all levels, and so on.&quot; Freeman warned potential players, &quot;Considering the territory it seeks to cover, &quot;Traveller&quot; is necessarily complex, and it presumes on the part of the potential referee considerable familiarity with other role-playing games and the literature of science fiction.&quot; Freeman gave this game an Overall Evaluation of &quot;Good&quot;, concluding, &quot;For experienced players wishing a truly open-ended, science fiction, role-playing campaign, there is no real alternative.&quot;

In the October–November 1981 edition of &quot;White Dwarf&quot;, Andy Slack reviewed the &quot;Deluxe Traveller Edition&quot;, a compilation of the three original rules booklets, plus &quot;Book 0 - An Introduction to Traveller&quot;, and an adventure, &quot;The Imperial Fringe&quot;. Slack thought this edition was better laid out, and &quot;typos have been rectified.&quot; Because he believed that this edition was not substantially different than the original set, he only rated this edition a 4 out of 10 for experienced players who already owned the original rule booklets; but for new players, he rated it a perfect 10 out of 10.

In the inaugural edition of &quot;Games International&quot; (October 1988), Jake Thornton gave &quot;MegaTraveller&quot; an above-average rating of 4 out of 5, saying, &quot;Although there are some typos and omissions, overall, &quot;MegaTraveller&quot; is a success. If you like your SF on a grand, starspanning scale [...] then &quot;MegaTraveller&quot; is the system for you.&quot;

In his 1990 book &quot;The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games&quot;, game critic Rick Swan called this science fiction role-playing game &quot;the standard by which all others are measured ... a brilliant design of remarkable scope ... and a milestone in the hobby.&quot; Swan felt this game&#x27;s popularity stemmed from two reasons: &quot;First, many of the &quot;Traveller&quot; concepts are so inventive and revolutionary that they continue to ripple through the RPG industry ... Second, the sheer volume of &quot;Traveller&quot; material ... ensures that the game will continue to attract attention.&quot; Swan concluded by giving the game his top rating of 4 out of 4.

Chris W. McCubbin reviewed &quot;Traveller: The New Era&quot; for &quot;Pyramid&quot; #2 (July/Aug. 1993) and concluded that, despite some complaints he had about the new version, &quot;&quot;Traveller&quot;&#x27;s still around and that&#x27;s good. I hope it always will be.&quot;

In the August 1997 edition of &quot;Dragon&quot; (Issue 238), Rick Swan reviewed the fourth edition of &quot;Traveller&quot;, and called it &quot;a masterful effort... the best science-fiction RPG I&#x27;ve ever played.&quot; On the downside, Swan thought that &quot;The inclusion of anachronistic weapons like swords and crossbows can turn combat into a bad episode of &quot;Star Trek&quot;.&quot; He also pointed out that character growth in the game is very slow: &quot;PCs acquire new skills and abilities about as fast as a tree trunk acquires new growth rings.&quot; He also wanted to see more setting information. But he concluded that the fourth edition of &quot;Traveller&quot; was close to perfect, giving it a top rating of 6 out of 6 and saying, &quot;Time-tested and buffed to a sheen, &quot;Traveller&quot; will endure as long there&#x27;s enough plastic to manufacture six-sided dice.&quot;

In a 1996 reader poll by &quot;Arcane&quot; magazine to determine the 50 most popular roleplaying games of all time, &quot;Traveller&quot; (as either &quot;Traveller&quot;, &quot;MegaTraveller&quot;, or &quot;Traveller: The New Era&quot;) was ranked 3rd. The magazine&#x27;s editor Paul Pettengale commented: &quot;Although originally intended as a generic science fiction system, &quot;Traveller&quot; quickly became linked with the Imperium campaign background developed by GDW... This background offers a great degree of freedom for individual referees to run campaigns of their own devising, while providing enough basic groundwork to build from, and has proved to be immensely successful. Everything from political intrigue to action-packed mercenary actions, trading or scientific exploration is possible, and a lot more besides... &quot;Traveller&quot; [is] one of the true classics of the roleplaying hobby&quot;.

Scott Taylor for &quot;Black Gate&quot; in 2013 rated &quot;Traveller&quot; as #2 in the top ten role-playing games of all time, saying &quot;Packaged in a plain black jacket with some simple bars of color, there is nothing inherently fancy about Traveller, and yet it has remained a viable source of entertainment to gamers through ten editions and six gaming companies that have controlled its license.&quot;

In a review of the Mongoose version of &quot;Traveller&quot; in &quot;Black Gate&quot;, M Harold Page compared it to what came before and said &quot;The new &quot;Mongoose Traveller Core Rule Book&quot; is a worthy successor to this tradition.&quot;

In his 2023 book &quot;Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground&quot;, RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, &quot;&quot;Traveller&quot; is the first RPG that feels like a distinct game, free of &quot;D&amp;D&quot;″s direct influence on its design ... The original &quot;Traveller&quot; still stands as one of the most significant traditional sci-fi RPGs, thanks in part, to its proximity to the dawn of the hobby, but also to both its scope and the crisp simplicity of its systems. Any game since that involves complex technology ... builds on a foundation established by &quot;Traveller&quot;.&quot;

==Awards==
&quot;Traveller: The New Era&quot; won the 1993 Origins Award for &quot;Best Roleplaying Rules&quot;.

&quot;Traveller: The New Era&quot; won the 1994 Origins Award for &quot;Best Roleplaying Rules&quot;.

In 1996, &quot;Traveller&quot; was inducted into the Origins Hall of Fame.

== In other media ==
=== Software ===
&quot;The Imperial Data Recovery System&quot; is a computer program published by FASA in 1981 as a play aid to speed up bookkeeping for &quot;Traveller&quot;, and assist with game aspects such as sector maps, records of characters and ships, and in-game encounters. John M. Morrison reviewed &quot;The Imperial Data Recovery System&quot; in &quot;The Space Gamer&quot; No. 50. Morrison commented that &quot;I would seriously recommend that FASA take this off the market and re-write it from the ground up. There&#x27;s definitely room for a &quot;Traveller&quot; aid program on the market, but not this one.&quot;

GDW licensee Paragon produced two video games based on the &quot;Traveller&quot; universe:
* &quot;MegaTraveller 1: The Zhodani Conspiracy&quot; (1990) for Amiga, Atari ST, and MS-DOS
* &quot;MegaTraveller 2: Quest for the Ancients&quot; (1991) for Amiga and MS-DOS

TravellerMap is an interactive map detailing the primary setting for Traveller. While it was originally fan-made, it has been made canon by reference, which reference states that what appears in real life on that site is what appears in-universe to users of a certain widely used stellar navigational tool.

=== Novels ===
Several novels have been specifically set in the various &quot;Traveller&quot; universes:

* Gregory P. Lee&#x27;s &quot;The Laughing Lip&quot; series acknowledges the influence of &quot;Traveller&quot; in the development of the three novels published to date. Lee also wrote the &quot;Gamelords&quot; supplement &quot;Lee&#x27;s Guide to Interstellar Adventure&quot; in the early 1980s.
* Jefferson P. Swycaffer has written several novels set in the &quot;Concordat&quot; fictional universe he originally developed for his &quot;Traveller&quot; campaign.
* There are two different Backwards Mask books in the &quot;Death of Wisdom&quot; trilogy. The manuscript by the original author (&quot;Brunette&quot;) was lost until shortly after the replacement manuscript (by Carson) was published. The original was then published for those who wanted it, and Carson&#x27;s serves as an alternate end to the trilogy.

=== Periodicals ===
Gaming magazine &quot;White Dwarf&quot; ran a comic strip called &quot;The Travellers&quot; by Mark Harrison from 1983 to 1986. The strip spoofed &quot;Traveller&quot; and other space opera settings.

The Traveller newsletter Imperiallines was created to showcase Traveller5 features. 

The Traveller fanzine Xboat was created and printed for Kickstarter fans in 2019. 

=== Music ===
The concept album &quot;Traveller&quot; by heavy metal band The Lord Weird Slough Feg is based on the game.

== Related role-playing games ==

=== &quot;Traveller: 2300&quot; or &quot;2300 AD&quot;===
Originally published by GDW as an updated replacement for &quot;Traveller&quot;, eschewing classic space opera to take inspiration from the grittier contemporary hard science fiction media of the 1980s. The first edition was named &quot;Traveller: 2300&quot;, which incited both confusion and criticism since the game carried over neither the rules nor setting of its namesake. The second edition was renamed &quot;2300 AD&quot;, and added some cyberpunk rules and adventures. It is presented as a future extrapolation of the speculative World War III of GDW&#x27;s popular military role-playing game &quot;Twilight: 2000&quot;. In the &quot;2300 AD&quot; setting, interstellar travel is relatively new, Earth is still divided into nation-states, and the most powerful nations are competitively exploring and colonizing the fifty light-year sphere of surrounding space. Mongoose Publishing released a sourcebook for the setting in 2012 that adapted it to their version of the &quot;Traveller&quot; rules.

== Cultural impact ==

Computer programs have been created to model and predict starship combat using &quot;Traveller&quot; rules. The most famous case involved Douglas Lenat applying his &quot;Eurisko&quot; heuristic learning program to the scenario in the &quot;Traveller&quot; adventure &quot;Trillion Credit Squadron&quot;, which contains rules for resolving large space battles statistically. Eurisko exploited corner-case features and built unusual fleets that won the 1981 and 1982 championships. The sponsor stated that if Lenat entered and won the next year they would stop the sponsorship, so Lenat stopped attending.

== See also ==
* Striker (miniatures game)

== References==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Far Future Enterprises
* &quot;GURPS Traveller&quot;
* &quot;Mongoose Traveller&quot;
* &quot;Traveller&quot; wiki
* &quot;TravellerMap&quot;: (a map of the official setting)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="31" end="48" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054486" start="76" end="105" title="Game Designers&amp;#x27; Workshop" label="Game Designers&amp;#x27; Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845378" start="107" end="118" title="Marc Miller (game designer)" label="Marc Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935801" start="165" end="179" title="Frank Chadwick" label="Frank Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379713" start="181" end="194" title="John Harshman" label="John Harshman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680437" start="200" end="213" title="Loren Wiseman" label="Loren Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047814" start="249" end="254" title="GURPS" label="GURPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q284471" start="262" end="265" title="D20 system" label="d20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056981" start="3343" end="3349" title="Dorsai" label="Dorsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q446941" start="3357" end="3374" title="Gordon R. Dickson" label="Gordon R. Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313628" start="3389" end="3406" title="Dumarest of Terra" label="Dumarest of Terra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003235" start="3419" end="3437" title="Edwin Charles Tubb" label="Edwin Charles Tubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q724395" start="3484" end="3496" title="Keith Laumer" label="Keith Laumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645591" start="3511" end="3533" title="Hammer&amp;#x27;s Slammers" label="Hammer&amp;#x27;s Slammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q736343" start="3541" end="3552" title="David Drake" label="David Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q724395" start="3594" end="3606" title="Keith Laumer" label="Keith Laumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010470" start="3608" end="3624" title="William H. Keith" label="William H. Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572545" start="3639" end="3651" title="Space Viking" label="Space Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364100" start="3659" end="3672" title="H. Beam Piper" label="H. Beam Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364100" start="3714" end="3727" title="H. Beam Piper" label="H. Beam Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643754" start="4020" end="4058" title="Superluminal communication" label="faster-than-light information transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333833" start="4072" end="4079" title="ansible" label="ansible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332178" start="4081" end="4095" title="Subspace (Star Trek)" label="subspace radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073735" start="4723" end="4743" title="Character creation" label="character generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q485027" start="5740" end="5754" title="personal armor" label="personal armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997094" start="6673" end="6679" title="Mayday (game)" label="Mayday"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="7245" end="7253" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="7323" end="7329" title="feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296206" start="8759" end="8796" title="Journal of the Travellers Aid Society" label="Journal of the Travellers Aid Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808853" start="9515" end="9536" title="megascale engineering" label="megascale engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480302" start="9692" end="9704" title="digest-sized" label="digest-sized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054486" start="9763" end="9792" title="Game Designers&amp;#x27; Workshop" label="Game Designers&amp;#x27; Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q394970" start="9863" end="9872" title="boxed set" label="boxed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868661" start="10038" end="10049" title="Role-playing game system" label="game system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575373" start="10488" end="10507" title="Mongoose Publishing" label="Mongoose Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096376" start="10570" end="10581" title="open gaming" label="open gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091693" start="10582" end="10585" title="System Reference Document" label="SRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q930701" start="11192" end="11202" title="gamemaster" label="gamemaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613765" start="11299" end="11310" title="Hero System" label="Hero System"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11468" end="11502" title="GURPS Traveller: Interstellar Wars" label="GURPS Traveller: Interstellar Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047814" start="11580" end="11585" title="GURPS" label="GURPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q284471" start="12100" end="12110" title="d20 System" label="d20 System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047814" start="12686" end="12691" title="GURPS" label="GURPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q97163892" start="13723" end="13733" title="Hard Times (Traveller)" label="Hard Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130239" start="14018" end="14026" title="retronym" label="retronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="14112" end="14123" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293634" start="14142" end="14154" title="Don Turnbull (game designer)" label="Don Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789074" start="15546" end="15550" title="Ares (magazine)" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018567" start="15571" end="15584" title="David J. Ritchie" label="David Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="15734" end="15756" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118748" start="16014" end="16029" title="The Space Gamer" label="The Space Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18686386" start="16279" end="16292" title="Eric Goldberg (game designer)" label="Eric Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393393" start="17107" end="17136" title="The Complete Book of Wargames" label="The Complete Book of Wargames"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270735" start="17158" end="17169" title="Jon Freeman (game designer)" label="Jon Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q868628" start="18568" end="18587" title="Games International" label="Games International"/>
<link wikidata="Q122850319" start="18943" end="18983" title="The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games" label="The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154713" start="19003" end="19012" title="Rick Swan" label="Rick Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926067" start="19671" end="19678" title="Pyramid (magazine)" label="Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154713" start="19944" end="19953" title="Rick Swan" label="Rick Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="20258" end="20267" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666226" start="21735" end="21745" title="Black Gate (magazine)" label="Black Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666226" start="22194" end="22204" title="Black Gate (magazine)" label="Black Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="22572" end="22579" title="D&amp;amp;D" label="D&amp;amp;D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386529" start="23386" end="23390" title="FASA" label="FASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134604" start="23933" end="23940" title="Paragon Software Corporation" label="Paragon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24019" end="24058" title="MegaTraveller 1: The Zhodani Conspiracy" label="MegaTraveller 1: The Zhodani Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="24076" end="24081" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="24083" end="24091" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="24097" end="24103" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24112" end="24151" title="MegaTraveller 2: Quest for the Ancients" label="MegaTraveller 2: Quest for the Ancients"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356976" start="24796" end="24805" title="Gamelords" label="Gamelords"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087699" start="24829" end="24871" title="Lee&amp;#x27;s Guide to Interstellar Adventure" label="Lee&amp;#x27;s Guide to Interstellar Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429180" start="24900" end="24922" title="Jefferson P. Swycaffer" label="Jefferson P. Swycaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="25462" end="25473" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="25486" end="25497" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767944" start="25535" end="25548" title="Mark Harrison (artist)" label="Mark Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051165" start="25843" end="25864" title="Traveller (Slough Feg album)" label="&amp;quot;Traveller&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051165" start="25885" end="25910" title="Slough Feg" label="The Lord Weird Slough Feg"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="26125" end="26136" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q725757" start="26188" end="26208" title="hard science fiction" label="hard science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="26471" end="26480" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q363" start="26564" end="26577" title="World War III" label="World War III"/>
<link wikidata="Q559334" start="27193" end="27206" title="Douglas Lenat" label="Douglas Lenat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060518" start="27226" end="27233" title="Eurisko" label="Eurisko"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27328" end="27352" title="Traveller Adventure 5: Trillion Credit Squadron" label="Trillion Credit Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623868" start="27678" end="27703" title="Striker (miniatures game)" label="Striker (miniatures game)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30247" wikidata="Q1528025" url="?curid=30247" title="Tracking shot">
<text>In cinematography, a tracking shot is any shot where the camera follows backward, forward or moves alongside the subject being recorded. Mostly the camera’s position is parallel to the character, creating a sideway motion, tracking the character. Tracking shots (also called travel shots) differ in motion from dolly shots, where the camera follows behind or before the character resulting in either an inward or an outward movement. Often the camera is mounted on a camera dolly which rides on rails similar to a railroad track; in this case, the shot is referred to as a dolly shot. A handheld steadycam or gimbal may also be used for smaller scale productions. The camera is then pushed along the track while the scene is being filmed, or moved manually when using a handheld rig. The effect can be used to create a sense of movement, to follow a character or object, or a sense of immersion to draw the viewer into the action.

The technique is often used to follow a subject that would otherwise leave the frame (thus also called a following shot), such as an actor or vehicle in motion. A handheld or Steadicam mounted camera following a similar trajectory is called a tracking shot as well. In fact a tracking shot can use any manual or motorized conveyance, and may include careful planning for passing the camera between vehicles or modes. While the core idea is that the camera moves parallel to its subject, a tracking shot may move in a circular or semi-circular fashion, rotating around its subject while remaining equidistant.

This kind of shot, in which the camera itself moves along with the subject or in relationship to it, should not be confused with panning, in which the camera remains stationary but pivots right or left on its axis.

==Terminology==
A tracking shot is a blanket term used to refer to any camera shot with movement, with &quot;trucking shot&quot; and &quot;dolly shot&quot; being tracking shot variations. Generally, a &quot;dolly shot&quot; refers to a specific variation of tracking shot in which the camera moves forwards or backwards with respect to the subject. 
The term &quot;trucking shot&quot; is less common but usually specifically refers to a shot in which the camera moves left or right in respect to the subject. 

==Variant==
A variant of the tracking shot is the onride video, also known as a phantom ride, where the camera films during a ride on a train, an amusement ride (especially a roller coaster) or another vehicle. Such videos may be used to document the route, and the camera may be fixed to the vehicle or held by a person in the vehicle.

==Use in sporting events==
The &quot;rail cam&quot; made a public debut in the NHL on November 20, 2006 in the Colorado Avalanche/Dallas Stars hockey game. The Versus cable television network used the camera during the game to test it out for a live use on a nationally broadcast program. The camera was fastened to a rail system that ran on the top of the glass on one side of the ice rink. As the play shifted from end to end, the motorized mount allowed the camera to follow the action, sliding rapidly down the side of the ice. The system was developed by Fletcher Chicago. The experiment was short-lived, and the &quot;rail-cam&quot; is no longer used in NHL hockey games.

For live TV broadcast of sporting events, a remote stabilized camera head is often mounted on a cable suspended system or a vehicle to track the athletes. 

==See also==
*Walk and talk, a film technique which makes use of the tracking shot
*Steadicam
*Process trailer, a trailer designed to be used as a camera platform and/or to carry a car during a tracking shot
*Dolly zoom, moving the camera while zooming to adjust the angle of view

==References==



==External links==

* Newton stabilized camera systems</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="3" end="17" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528025" start="21" end="34" title="Tracking shot" label="tracking shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q260899" start="42" end="46" title="Shot (filmmaking)" label="shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q335095" start="57" end="63" title="film camera" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235811" start="467" end="479" title="camera dolly" label="camera dolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528025" start="573" end="583" title="Tracking shot" label="dolly shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528025" start="1037" end="1051" title="Tracking shot" label="following shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q744618" start="1107" end="1116" title="Steadicam" label="Steadicam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931170" start="1282" end="1298" title="Long take" label="careful planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116837" start="1671" end="1678" title="Panning (camera)" label="panning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084909" start="2349" end="2361" title="phantom ride" label="phantom ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="2686" end="2689" title="NHL" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="2718" end="2736" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="2737" end="2749" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334262" start="2767" end="2773" title="Versus (TV channel)" label="Versus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="2774" end="2790" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="2925" end="2936" title="Rail tracks" label="rail system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="2989" end="2997" title="ice rink" label="ice rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374241" start="3382" end="3404" title="Cable-suspended camera system" label="cable suspended system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413251" start="3457" end="3470" title="Walk and talk" label="Walk and talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q744618" start="3527" end="3536" title="Steadicam" label="Steadicam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247311" start="3538" end="3553" title="Process trailer" label="Process trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q619904" start="3652" end="3662" title="Dolly zoom" label="Dolly zoom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30248" wikidata="Q145874" url="?curid=30248" title="Justification (epistemology)">
<text>Justification (also called epistemic justification) is a property of beliefs that fulfill certain norms about what a person should believe. Epistemologists often identify justification as a component of knowledge distinguishing it from mere true opinion. They study the reasons why someone holds a belief. Epistemologists are concerned with various features of belief, which include the ideas of warrant (a proper justification for holding a belief), knowledge, rationality, and probability, among others.

Debates surrounding epistemic justification often involve the &quot;structure&quot; of justification, including whether there are foundational justified beliefs or whether mere coherence is sufficient for a system of beliefs to qualify as justified. Another major subject of debate is the sources of justification, which might include perceptual experience (the evidence of the senses), reason, and authoritative testimony, among others.

==Justification and knowledge==
&quot;Justification&quot; involves the reasons why someone holds a belief that one &quot;should&quot; hold based on one&#x27;s current evidence. Justification is a property of beliefs insofar as they are held blamelessly. In other words, a justified belief is a belief that a person is entitled to hold.

Many philosophers from Plato onward have treated &quot;justified true belief&quot; (JTB) as constituting knowledge. It is particularly associated with a theory discussed in his dialogues &quot;Meno&quot; and &quot;Theaetetus&quot;. While in fact Plato seems to disavow justified true belief as constituting knowledge at the end of &quot;Theaetetus&quot;, the claim that Plato unquestioningly accepted this view of knowledge stuck until the proposal of the Gettier problem.

The subject of justification has played a major role in the value of knowledge as &quot;justified true belief&quot;. Some contemporary epistemologists, such as Jonathan Kvanvig assert that justification isn&#x27;t necessary in getting to the truth and avoiding errors. Kvanvig attempts to show that knowledge is no more valuable than true belief, and in the process dismissed the necessity of justification due to justification not being connected to the truth.

==Conceptions of justification==
William P. Alston identifies two conceptions of justification. One conception is &quot;deontological&quot; justification, which holds that justification evaluates the obligation and responsibility of a person having only true beliefs. This conception implies, for instance, that a person who has made his best effort but is incapable of concluding the correct belief from his evidence is still justified. The deontological conception of justification corresponds to epistemic internalism. Another conception is &quot;truth-conducive&quot; justification, which holds that justification is based on having sufficient evidence or reasons that entails that the belief is at least likely to be true. The truth-conductive conception of justification corresponds to epistemic externalism.

==Theories of justification==
There are several different views as to what entails justification, mostly focusing on the question &quot;How sure do we need to be that our beliefs correspond to the actual world?&quot; Different theories of justification require different conditions before a belief can be considered justified. Theories of justification generally include other aspects of epistemology, such as defining knowledge.

Notable theories of justification include:
* FoundationalismBasic beliefs justify other, non-basic beliefs.
* Epistemic coherentismBeliefs are justified if they cohere with other beliefs a person holds, each belief is justified if it coheres with the overall system of beliefs.
* InfinitismBeliefs are justified by infinite chains of reasons.
* FoundherentismBoth fallible foundations and coherence are components of justification—proposed by Susan Haack.
* Internalism and externalismThe believer must be able to justify a belief through internal knowledge (internalism), or outside sources of knowledge (externalism).
* Reformed epistemologyBeliefs are warranted by proper cognitive function—proposed by Alvin Plantinga.
* EvidentialismBeliefs depend solely on the evidence for them.
* ReliabilismA belief is justified if it is the result of a reliable process.
* InfallibilismKnowledge is incompatible with the possibility of being wrong.
* FallibilismClaims can be accepted even though they cannot be conclusively proven or justified.
* Non-justificationismKnowledge is produced by attacking claims and refuting them instead of justifying them.
* SkepticismKnowledge is impossible or undecidable.

== Criticism of theories of justification ==
Robert Fogelin claims to detect a suspicious resemblance between the theories of justification and Agrippa&#x27;s five modes leading to the suspension of belief. He concludes that the modern proponents have made no significant progress in responding to the ancient modes of Pyrrhonian skepticism.

William P. Alston criticizes the very idea of a theory of justification. He claims: &quot;There isn&#x27;t any unique, epistemically crucial property of beliefs picked out by &#x27;justified&#x27;. Epistemologists who suppose the contrary have been chasing a will-o&#x27;-the-wisp. What has really been happening is this. Different epistemologists have been emphasizing, concentrating on, &quot;pushing&quot; different epistemic desiderata, different features of belief that are positively valuable from the standpoint of the aims of cognition.&quot;

==See also==
*Dream argument
*Regress argument (epistemology)
*Münchhausen trilemma

== References ==
== External links ==

* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Epistemology, 2. What is Justification?
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Internalist vs. Externalist Conceptions of Epistemic Justification
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Coherentist Theories of Epistemic Justification

===Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy===
* Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Epistemic Justification
* Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Epistemic Entitlement
* Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Internalism and Externalism in Epistemology
* Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Epistemic Consequentialism
* Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Coherentism in Epistemology
* Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Contextualism in Epistemology
* Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Knowledge-First Theories of Justification</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145874" start="0" end="13" title="Justification (epistemology)" label="Justification"/>
<link wikidata="Q145874" start="27" end="50" title="Justification (epistemology)" label="epistemic justification"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="69" end="75" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="140" end="155" title="Epistemology" label="Epistemologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="451" end="460" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="462" end="473" title="rationality" label="rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="479" end="490" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778809" start="684" end="693" title="coherentism" label="coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="842" end="863" title="perception" label="perceptual experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="894" end="900" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196258" start="920" end="929" title="testimony" label="testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="1045" end="1051" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610517" start="1338" end="1359" title="justified true belief" label="justified true belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q746253" start="1476" end="1480" title="Meno" label="Meno"/>
<link wikidata="Q846241" start="1497" end="1507" title="Theaetetus (dialogue)" label="Theaetetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059362" start="1739" end="1754" title="Gettier problem" label="Gettier problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273611" start="1917" end="1933" title="Jonathan Kvanvig" label="Jonathan Kvanvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q125879" start="2253" end="2270" title="William P. Alston" label="William P. Alston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2719" end="2740" title="Internalism and externalism#Epistemology#Internalism" label="epistemic internalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3012" end="3033" title="Internalism and externalism#Epistemology#Externalism" label="epistemic externalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355086" start="3512" end="3527" title="Foundationalism" label="Foundationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778809" start="3577" end="3598" title="Epistemic coherentism" label="Epistemic coherentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13569865" start="3747" end="3757" title="Infinitism" label="Infinitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8565011" start="3812" end="3826" title="Foundherentism" label="Foundherentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173010" start="3910" end="3921" title="Susan Haack" label="Susan Haack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185050" start="3925" end="3952" title="Internalism and externalism" label="Internalism and externalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307549" start="4089" end="4110" title="Reformed epistemology" label="Reformed epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q355201" start="4173" end="4188" title="Alvin Plantinga" label="Alvin Plantinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418363" start="4192" end="4205" title="Evidentialism" label="Evidentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348563" start="4255" end="4266" title="Reliabilism" label="Reliabilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028748" start="4333" end="4346" title="Infallibilism" label="Infallibilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192600" start="4411" end="4422" title="Fallibilism" label="Fallibilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q868608" start="4508" end="4528" title="Non-justificationism" label="Non-justificationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="4618" end="4628" title="Epistemological skepticism" label="Skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344409" start="4714" end="4728" title="Robert Fogelin" label="Robert Fogelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q365115" start="4813" end="4820" title="Agrippa the Sceptic" label="Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192313" start="4988" end="5009" title="Pyrrho" label="Pyrrhonian skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q125879" start="5012" end="5029" title="William P. Alston" label="William P. Alston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861080" start="5578" end="5592" title="Dream argument" label="Dream argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309531" start="5594" end="5625" title="Regress argument (epistemology)" label="Regress argument (epistemology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q949691" start="5627" end="5647" title="Münchhausen trilemma" label="Münchhausen trilemma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30249" wikidata="Q7309531" url="?curid=30249" title="Regress argument (epistemology)">
<text>In epistemology, the regress argument is the argument that any proposition requires a justification. However, any justification itself requires support. This means that any proposition whatsoever can be endlessly (infinitely) questioned, resulting in infinite regress. It is a problem in epistemology and in any general situation where a statement has to be justified.

The argument is also known as diallelus (Latin) or diallelon, from Greek &quot;di&#x27; allelon&quot; &quot;through or by means of one another&quot; and as the epistemic regress problem. It is an element of the Münchhausen trilemma.

==Structure==
Assuming that knowledge is justified true belief, then:
# Suppose that P is some piece of knowledge. Then P is a &quot;justified&quot; true belief.
# The only thing that can justify P is another statement – let&#x27;s call it P1; so P1 justifies P.
# But if P1 is to be a satisfactory justification for P, then we must &quot;know&quot; that P1 is true. 
# But for P1 to be known, it must also be a &quot;justified&quot; true belief.
# &quot;That&quot; justification will be another statement - let&#x27;s call it P2; so P2 justifies P1.
# But if P2 is to be a satisfactory justification for P1, then we must &quot;know&quot; that P2 is true
# But for P2 to count as knowledge, it must itself be a &quot;justified&quot; true belief.
# &quot;That&quot; justification will in turn be another statement - let&#x27;s call it P3; so P3 justifies P2.
# and so on, &quot;ad infinitum&quot;.

== Responses ==
Throughout history many responses to this problem have been generated. The major counter-arguments are
* some statements do not need justification, 
* the chain of reasoning loops back on itself, 
* the sequence never finishes, 
* belief cannot be justified as beyond doubt.

===Foundationalism===

Perhaps the chain begins with a belief that is justified, but which is not justified by another belief. Such beliefs are called basic beliefs. In this solution, which is called foundationalism, all beliefs are justified by basic beliefs. Foundationalism seeks to escape the regress argument by claiming that there are some beliefs for which it is improper to ask for a justification. (See also &quot;a priori&quot;.)

Foundationalism is the belief that a chain of justification begins with a belief that is justified, but which is not justified by another belief. Thus, a belief is justified if and only if:
# it is a basic/foundational belief, or 
# it is justified by a basic belief
# it is justified by a chain of beliefs that is ultimately justified by a basic belief or beliefs.

Foundationalism can be compared to a building. Ordinary individual beliefs occupy the upper stories of the building; basic, or foundational beliefs are down in the basement, in the foundation of the building, holding everything else up. In a similar way, individual beliefs, say about economics or ethics, rest on more basic beliefs, say about the nature of human beings; and those rest on still more basic beliefs, say about the mind; and in the end the entire system rests on a set of basic beliefs which are not justified by other beliefs.

===Coherentism===
Alternatively, the chain of reasoning may loop around on itself, forming a circle. In this case, the justification of any statement is used, perhaps after a long chain of reasoning, in justifying itself, and the argument is circular. This is a version of coherentism.

Coherentism is the belief that an idea is justified if and only if it is part of a coherent system of mutually supporting beliefs (i.e., beliefs that support each other). In effect Coherentism denies that justification can only take the form of a chain. Coherentism replaces the chain with a holistic web.

The most common objection to naïve Coherentism is that it relies on the idea that circular justification is acceptable. In this view, P ultimately supports P, begging the question. Coherentists reply that it is not just P that is supporting P, but P along with the totality of the other statements in the whole system of belief.

Coherentism accepts any belief that is part of a coherent system of beliefs. In contrast, P can cohere with P1 and P2 without P, P1 or P2 being true. Instead, Coherentists might say that it is very unlikely that the whole system would be both untrue and consistent, and that if some part of the system was untrue, it would almost certainly be inconsistent with some other part of the system.

A third objection is that some beliefs arise from experience and not from other beliefs. An example is that one is looking into a room which is totally dark. The lights turn on momentarily and one sees a white canopy bed in the room. The belief that there is a white canopy bed in this room is based entirely on experience and not on any other belief. Of course other possibilities exist, such as that the white canopy bed is entirely an illusion or that one is hallucinating, but the belief remains well-justified. Coherentists might respond that the belief which supports the belief that there is a white canopy bed in this room is that one saw the bed, however briefly. This appears to be an immediate qualifier which does not depend on other beliefs, and thus seems to prove that Coherentism is not true because beliefs can be justified by concepts other than beliefs. But others have argued that the experience of seeing the bed is indeed dependent on other beliefs, about what a bed, a canopy and so on, actually look like.

Another objection is that the rule demanding &quot;coherence&quot; in a system of ideas seems to be an unjustified belief.

===Infinitism===
Infinitism argues that the chain can go on forever. Critics argue that this means there is never adequate justification for any statement in the chain.

=== Skepticism ===

Skeptics reject the three above responses and argue that beliefs cannot be justified as beyond doubt. Note that many skeptics do not deny that things may appear in a certain way. However, such sense impressions cannot, in the skeptical view, be used to find beliefs that cannot be doubted. Also, skeptics do not deny that, for example, many laws of nature give the appearance of working or that doing certain things give the appearance of producing pleasure/pain or even that reason and logic seem to be useful tools. Skepticism is in this view valuable since it encourages continued investigation.

== Synthesized approaches ==

===Common sense===

The method of common sense espoused by such philosophers as Thomas Reid and G. E. Moore points out that whenever we investigate anything at all, whenever we start thinking about some subject, we have to make assumptions. When one tries to support one&#x27;s assumptions with reasons, one must make yet more assumptions. Since it is inevitable that we will make some assumptions, why not assume those things that are most obvious: the matters of common sense that no one ever seriously doubts.

&quot;Common sense&quot; here does not mean old adages like &quot;Chicken soup is good for colds&quot; but statements about the background in which our experiences occur. Examples would be &quot;Human beings typically have two eyes, two ears, two hands, two feet&quot;, or &quot;The world has a ground and a sky&quot; or &quot;Plants and animals come in a wide variety of sizes and colors&quot; or &quot;I am conscious and alive right now&quot;. These are all the absolutely most obvious sorts of claims that one could possibly make; and, said Reid and Moore, these are the claims that make up &quot;common sense&quot;.

This view can be seen as either a version of foundationalism, with common sense statements taking the role of basic statements, or as a version of Coherentism. In this case, commonsense statements are statements that are so crucial to keeping the account coherent that they are all but impossible to deny.

If the method of common sense is correct, then philosophers may take the principles of common sense for granted. They do not need criteria in order to judge whether a proposition is true or not. They can also take some justifications for granted, according to common sense. They can get around Sextus&#x27; problem of the criterion because there is no infinite regress or circle of reasoning, because the principles of common sense ground the entire chain of reasoning.

===Critical philosophy===

Another escape from the diallelus is critical philosophy, which denies that beliefs should ever be &quot;justified&quot; at all. Rather, the job of philosophers is to subject all beliefs (including beliefs about truth criteria) to &quot;criticism&quot;, attempting to discredit them rather than justifying them. Then, these philosophers say, it is rational to act on those beliefs that have best withstood criticism, whether or not they meet any specific criterion of truth. Karl Popper expanded on this idea to include a &quot;quantitative&quot; measurement he called verisimilitude, or truth-likeness. He showed that even if one could never justify a particular claim, one &quot;can&quot; compare the verisimilitude of two competing claims by criticism to judge which is superior to the other.

===Pragmatism===

The pragmatist philosopher William James suggests that, ultimately, everyone settles at some level of explanation based on one&#x27;s personal preferences that fit the particular individual&#x27;s psychological needs. People select whatever level of explanation fits their needs, and things other than logic and reason determine those needs. In &quot;The Sentiment of Rationality&quot;, James compares the philosopher, who insists on a high degree of justification, and the boor, who accepts or rejects ideals without much thought:

==See also==
* 
* 
* Plato&#x27;s 
* 
*Justification (epistemology)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="3" end="15" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309531" start="21" end="37" title="Regress argument (epistemology)" label="regress argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="63" end="74" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q145874" start="86" end="99" title="Theory of justification" label="justification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662395" start="251" end="267" title="infinite regress" label="infinite regress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="288" end="300" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="411" end="416" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="437" end="442" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309531" start="530" end="555" title="Regress argument (epistemology)" label="epistemic regress problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q949691" start="581" end="601" title="Münchhausen trilemma" label="Münchhausen trilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610517" start="645" end="666" title="justified true belief" label="justified true belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640920" start="1481" end="1493" title="ad infinitum" label="ad infinitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867020" start="1945" end="1957" title="basic belief" label="basic belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355086" start="1994" end="2009" title="foundationalism" label="foundationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178161" start="2217" end="2225" title="A priori and a posteriori" label="a priori"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="2409" end="2423" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="3388" end="3396" title="circular argument" label="circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778809" start="3419" end="3430" title="coherentism" label="coherentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="3485" end="3499" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q219429" start="3899" end="3919" title="begging the question" label="begging the question"/>
<link wikidata="Q13569865" start="5635" end="5645" title="Infinitism" label="Infinitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="5808" end="5816" title="Philosophical skepticism" label="Skeptics"/>
<link wikidata="Q316347" start="6518" end="6529" title="Thomas Reid" label="Thomas Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q295386" start="6534" end="6545" title="G. E. Moore" label="G. E. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="7361" end="7370" title="Consciousness" label="conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662395" start="8232" end="8248" title="infinite regress" label="infinite regress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789540" start="8415" end="8434" title="critical philosophy" label="critical philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="8853" end="8864" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="9197" end="9207" title="pragmatism" label="pragmatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q125249" start="9220" end="9233" title="William James" label="William James"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="9747" end="9752" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q145874" start="9765" end="9793" title="Justification (epistemology)" label="Justification (epistemology)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30252" wikidata="Q6317277" url="?curid=30252" title="Justification for the state">
<text>The justification of the state refers to the source of legitimate authority for the state or government. Typically, such a justification explains why the state should exist, and to some degree scopes the role of government – what a legitimate state should or should not be able to do.

There is no single, universally accepted justification of the state. In fact, anarchists believe that there is no justification for the state at all, and that human societies would be better off without it. However, most political ideologies have their own justifications, and thus their own vision of what constitutes a legitimate state. Indeed, a person&#x27;s opinions regarding the role of government often determine the rest of their political ideology. Thus, discrepancy of opinion in a wide array of political matters is often directly traceable back to a discrepancy of opinion in the justification for the state.

The constitutions of various countries codify views as to the purposes, powers, and forms of their governments, but they tend to do so in rather vague terms, which particular laws, courts, and actions of politicians subsequently flesh out. In general, various countries have translated vague talk about the purposes of their governments into particular state laws, bureaucracies, enforcement actions, etc.

The following are just a few examples.

== Transcendent sovereignty ==
In feudal Europe the most widespread justification of the state was the emerging idea of the divine right of kings, which stated that kings derived their authority from God and could not therefore be held accountable for their actions by any earthly authority such as a parliament. The legitimacy of the state&#x27;s lands derived from the lands being the personal possession of the monarch. The divine-right theory, combined with primogeniture, became a theory of hereditary monarchy in the nation states of the early modern period. The Holy Roman Empire was not a state in that sense, and was not a true theocracy, but rather a federal entity.

The political ideas current in China at that time involved the idea of the mandate of heaven. It resembled the theory of divine right in that it placed the ruler in a divine position, as the link between Heaven and Earth, but it differed from the divine right of kings in that it did not assume a permanent connection between a dynasty and the state. Inherent in the concept was that a ruler held the mandate of heaven only as long as he provided good government. If he did not, heaven would withdraw its mandate and whoever restored order would hold the new mandate. This is true theocracy; the power and wisdom to govern is granted by a higher power, not by human political schemes, and can be equally removed by heaven. This has similarities to the idea presented in the Judeo-Christian Bible from the time when Israel requests &quot;a king like the nations&quot; through to Christ himself telling his contemporary leaders that they only had power because God gave it to them. The classic Biblical example comes in the story of King Nebuchadnezzar, who according to the Book of Daniel ruled the Babylonian empire because God ordained his power, but who later ate grass like an ox for seven years because he deified himself instead of acknowledging God. Nebuchadnezzar is restored when he again acknowledges God as the true sovereign.

== Self-aggrandizement ==
In Renaissance Italy, contemporary theoreticians saw the primary purpose of the less-overtly monarchical Italian city-states as civic glory.

== The social contract ==
In the period of the eighteenth century, usually called the Enlightenment, a new justification of the European state developed. Jean-Jacques Rousseau&#x27;s social contract theory states that governments draw their power from the governed, its &#x27;sovereign&#x27; people (usually a certain ethnic group, and the state&#x27;s limits are legitimated theoretically as that people&#x27;s lands, although that is often not, rarely exactly, the case), that no person should have absolute power, and that a &quot;legitimate&quot; state is one which meets the needs and wishes of its citizens. These include security, peace, economic development and the resolution of conflict. Also, the social contract requires that an individual gives up some of his natural rights in order to maintain social order via the rule of law. Eventually, the divine right of kings fell out of favor and this idea ascended; it formed the basis for modern democracy.

==Public goods==
While a market system may allow self-interested firms to create and allocate many goods optimally, there exists a class of &quot;collective&quot; – or &quot;public goods&quot; that are not produced adequately in a market system, such as infrastructure or social services. Market forces may not be sufficient to incentivize rational individuals to adequately produce these public goods; therefore, coercive institutions must intervene and guarantee the production of such public goods, whether by assuming their production under the state (e.g., the building of public roads) or by introducing market forces to incentivize their production in the private sector (e.g., providing subsidies for electric vehicles).

==Political ideologies==
It is on those questions that one can find the differences between conservatism, socialism, liberalism, libertarianism, fascism, especially the latter, and other political ideologies. There are also two ideologiesanarchism and communismwhich argue that the existence of the state is ultimately unjustified and harmful. For this reason, the kind of society they aim to establish would be stateless.

=== Arguments against a State ===
Anarchism claims that the community of those fighting to create a new society must themselves constitute a stateless society. Communism wishes to immediately or eventually replace the communities, unities and divisions that things such as work, money, exchange, borders, nations, governments, police, religion, and race create with the universal community possible when these things are replaced.

State socialism states that the degree to which a state is working class is the degree to which it fights government, class, work, and rule. The degree to which it wins such a fight is held to be the degree to which it is communist instead of capitalist, socialist, or the state. Anarcho-capitalism argues that taxes are theft, that government and the business community complicit in governance is organized crime and is equivalent to the criminal underworld, and that defense of life and property is just another industry, which must be privatized. Anarcho-communism and anarcho-collectivism says that taxes, being theft, are just property, which is also theft, and that the state is inherently capitalist and will never result in a transition to communism, and says that those fighting against capitalism and the state to produce a communist society must themselves already form such a community. However, the majority of viewpoints agree that the existence of &quot;some&quot; kind of government is morally justified. What they disagree about is the proper role and the proper form of that government.

There are several ways to conceive of the differences between these different political views. For example, one might ask &quot;in what areas&quot; should the government have jurisdiction, to &quot;what extent&quot; it may intervene in those areas, or even what constitutes &quot;intervention&quot; in the first place. Some institutions can be said to exist only because the government provides the framework for their existence; for instance, Marxists argue that the institution of private property only exists due to government. The intervention debate can be framed in terms of big government versus small government.

==See also==

* Anarchism
* Consequentialist justifications of the state
* Constitutional economics
* Monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force
* Rechtsstaat
* Rule of law
* Rule according to higher law
* Philosophy of law
* Political philosophy
* Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant
==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Public Goods and the Justification for the State&quot;, from &quot;Humane Studies Review&quot; Vol. 7, No. 2 – Dan Garrett&#x27;s review of David Schmidtz&#x27;s &quot;The Limits of Government: An Essay on the Public Goods Argument&quot; (Boulder: Westview Press, 1991) on the Wayback Machine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6317277" start="4" end="30" title="Justification for the state" label="justification of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q207982" start="55" end="75" title="legitimacy (political science)" label="legitimate authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="84" end="89" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="93" end="103" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317277" start="204" end="222" title="Justification for the state" label="role of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="364" end="374" title="anarchism" label="anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="517" end="527" title="ideology" label="ideologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="913" end="925" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1397" end="1403" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="1480" end="1501" title="divine right of kings" label="divine right of kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="1818" end="1831" title="primogeniture" label="primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="1852" end="1871" title="hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="1879" end="1891" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="1900" end="1912" title="early modern" label="early modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1925" end="1942" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="1993" end="2002" title="theocracy" label="theocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2065" end="2070" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="2109" end="2126" title="mandate of heaven" label="mandate of heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="2362" end="2369" title="dynasty" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364799" start="2749" end="2755" title="tian" label="heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="2824" end="2829" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="2952" end="2958" title="leader" label="leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="3070" end="3084" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16159105" start="3107" end="3121" title="Daniel 4" label="Book of Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="3401" end="3418" title="Renaissance Italy" label="Renaissance Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="3622" end="3639" title="the Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="3723" end="3745" title="social contract theory" label="social contract theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="4494" end="4503" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="5328" end="5340" title="conservatism" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="5342" end="5351" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="5353" end="5363" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="5365" end="5379" title="libertarianism" label="libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="5381" end="5388" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="5474" end="5483" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="5488" end="5497" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="5694" end="5703" title="Anarchism" label="Anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="5764" end="5771" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708603" start="5801" end="5818" title="stateless society" label="stateless society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="5820" end="5829" title="Communism" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="6092" end="6107" title="State socialism" label="State socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="6372" end="6390" title="Anarcho-capitalism" label="Anarcho-capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="6490" end="6505" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q188670" start="6642" end="6659" title="Anarcho-communism" label="Anarcho-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223178" start="6664" end="6684" title="anarcho-collectivism" label="anarcho-collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="6695" end="6700" title="taxes" label="taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="6724" end="6732" title="property" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="6788" end="6798" title="Capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="7642" end="7650" title="Marxism" label="Marxists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="7681" end="7697" title="property" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985410" start="7779" end="7793" title="big government" label="big government"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="7801" end="7817" title="small government" label="small government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="7836" end="7845" title="Anarchism" label="Anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162896" start="7848" end="7892" title="Consequentialist justifications of the state" label="Consequentialist justifications of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489796" start="7895" end="7919" title="Constitutional economics" label="Constitutional economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508788" start="7922" end="7970" title="Monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force" label="Monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209223" start="7973" end="7984" title="Rechtsstaat" label="Rechtsstaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="7987" end="7998" title="Rule of law" label="Rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q113161979" start="8001" end="8029" title="Rule according to higher law" label="Rule according to higher law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="8032" end="8049" title="Philosophy of law" label="Philosophy of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="8052" end="8072" title="Political philosophy" label="Political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225058" start="8075" end="8112" title="Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant" label="Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q648266" start="8432" end="8447" title="Wayback Machine" label="Wayback Machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30253" wikidata="Q188645" url="?curid=30253" title="Tertiary">
<text>Tertiary ( ) is an obsolete term for the geologic period from 66 million to 2.6 million years ago. 
The period began with the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, at the start of the Cenozoic Era, and extended to the beginning of the Quaternary glaciation at the end of the Pliocene Epoch. The time span covered by the Tertiary has no exact equivalent in the current geologic time system, but it is essentially the merged Paleogene and Neogene periods, which are informally called the Early Tertiary and the Late Tertiary, respectively.

==Historical use of the term==
The term Tertiary was first used by Giovanni Arduino during the mid-18th century. He classified geologic time into primitive (or primary), secondary, and tertiary periods based on observations of geology in Northern Italy. Later a fourth period, the Quaternary, was applied.

In the early development of the study of geology, the periods were thought by scriptural geologists to correspond to the Biblical narrative, the rocks of the Tertiary being thought to be associated with the Great Flood.

In 1833, Charles Lyell incorporated a Tertiary Period into his own, far more detailed system of classification, based on fossil mollusks he collected in Italy and Sicily in 1828–1829. He subdivided the Tertiary Period into four epochs according to the percentage of fossil mollusks resembling modern species found in those strata. He used Greek names: Eocene, Miocene, Older Pliocene, and Newer Pliocene.

Although these divisions seemed adequate for the region to which the designations were originally applied (parts of the Alps and plains of Italy), when the same system was later extended to other parts of Europe and to America, it proved to be inapplicable. Therefore, the use of mollusks was abandoned from the definition and the epochs were renamed and redefined.

For much of the time during which the term &#x27;Tertiary&#x27; was in formal use, it referred to the span of time between 65 and 1.8 million years ago. The end date of the Cretaceous and the start date of the Quaternary were subsequently redefined at c. 66 and 2.6 million years ago respectively.

==Modern equivalents==
The Tertiary period lies between the Mesozoic Era and the Quaternary Period, although it is no longer recognized as a formal unit by the International Commission on Stratigraphy.

The span of the Tertiary is subdivided into the Paleocene (66–56 million years BP), the Eocene (56–33.9 million years BP), the Oligocene (33–23.9 million years BP), the Miocene (23–5.3 million years BP) and the Pliocene (5.3–2.6 million years BP), extending to the first stage of the Pleistocene, the Gelasian Stage.
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="0" end="8" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="41" end="56" title="Period (geology)" label="geologic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="148" end="153" title="bird" label="avian"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="154" end="162" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="171" end="208" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="230" end="242" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="281" end="302" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="Quaternary glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="321" end="335" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="414" end="427" title="geologic time" label="geologic time"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="469" end="478" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="483" end="490" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734064" start="652" end="668" title="Giovanni Arduino (geologist)" label="Giovanni Arduino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="823" end="837" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="866" end="876" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017844" start="970" end="990" title="scriptural geologist" label="scriptural geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="1099" end="1110" title="Flood myth" label="Great Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="1122" end="1135" title="Charles Lyell" label="Charles Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="1234" end="1240" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="1241" end="1248" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="1436" end="1442" title="stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1452" end="1457" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="1639" end="1643" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="2245" end="2257" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="2266" end="2283" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q402104" start="2345" end="2385" title="International Commission on Stratigraphy" label="International Commission on Stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="2436" end="2445" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="2467" end="2469" title="Before Present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="2476" end="2482" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="2515" end="2524" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="2557" end="2564" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="2599" end="2607" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="2672" end="2683" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q428579" start="2689" end="2697" title="Gelasian" label="Gelasian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30262" wikidata="Q262359" url="?curid=30262" title="Tamara E. Jernigan">
<text>Tamara Elizabeth &quot;Tammy&quot; Jernigan (born May 7, 1959) is an American astrophysicist and former NASA astronaut. During her career she completed five Space Shuttle program missions (three on &quot;Columbia&quot; and one each on &quot;Endeavour&quot; and &quot;Discovery&quot;), logging over 1512 hours in space. Jernigan left NASA in 2001, and is Deputy Principal Associate Director in the Weapons and Complex Integration (WCI) organization at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

==Early life and education==
Tamara Elizabeth Jernigan was born on May 7, 1959, in Chattanooga, Tennessee, to Mary and Terry Jernigan. She attended Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe Springs, California, graduating in 1977. Jernigan attended Stanford University, where she played varsity volleyball. She earned a B.S. degree in physics in 1981 and an M.S. in engineering science in 1983. At the University of California, Berkeley, she received an M.S. in astronomy in 1985. In 1988, she was awarded a Ph.D. in space physics and astronomy from Rice University. Her research focused on the modeling of high-velocity outflows in regions of star formation, gamma-ray bursters, and the study of radiation produced by interstellar shock waves.

==NASA career==
Jernigan began working for NASA in June 1981 at the Ames Research Center while earning her degrees at Stanford and Berkeley. She worked in the Theoretical Studies Branch as a research scientist until June 1985 when she was among the 13 people selected as astronaut candidates.

She entered the NASA Astronaut Corps in July 1986. Her first trip to space was on June 5, 1991. She flew on five Space Shuttle program missions (three on &quot;Columbia&quot; and one each on &quot;Endeavour&quot; and &quot;Discovery&quot;) and logged over 1512 hours in space. In her last mission on &quot;Discovery&quot; in 1999, she performed an extra-vehicular activity for 7 hours and 55.5 minutes.

Jernigan has served as Deputy Chief of the Astronaut Office, assisting with the management of both military and civilian astronauts and support personnel and as Deputy for the Space Station program where she developed and advocated Astronaut Office positions on the design and operation of the International Space Station. She also represented NASA management on the U.S. negotiating team in Moscow during technical interchange meetings designed to resolve crew training, crew rotation, and operational issues.

Jernigan retired from NASA in 2001 and currently serves as Deputy Principal Associate Director in the Weapons and Complex Integration (WCI) organization at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

== Awards ==
Jernigan is the recipient of the NASA Distinguished Service Medal and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.

==Personal==
She currently resides in Pleasanton, California. She is married to former astronaut Peter Wisoff and has two children, Jeffrey Wisoff and Michael Wisoff. Both Peter and Jeffrey currently work at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

==References==
==External links==
* NASA Biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q262359" start="0" end="16" title="Tamara E. Jernigan" label="Tamara Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q262359" start="23" end="28" title="Tamara E. Jernigan" label="Tammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q262359" start="35" end="43" title="Tamara E. Jernigan" label="Jernigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="104" end="108" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="109" end="118" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775296" start="157" end="178" title="Space Shuttle program" label="Space Shuttle program"/>
<link wikidata="Q54383" start="204" end="212" title="Space Shuttle Columbia" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182508" start="241" end="250" title="Space Shuttle Endeavour" label="Endeavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q54384" start="267" end="276" title="Space Shuttle Discovery" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="451" end="489" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="575" end="597" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419530" start="640" end="660" title="Santa Fe High School (California)" label="Santa Fe High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q948045" start="664" end="692" title="Santa Fe Springs, California" label="Santa Fe Springs, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="732" end="751" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q770766" start="849" end="868" title="engineering science" label="engineering science"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="885" end="919" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="1033" end="1048" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="1127" end="1141" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247" start="1143" end="1158" title="gamma-ray burst" label="gamma-ray burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499888" start="1215" end="1226" title="Shock waves in astrophysics" label="shock waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q181052" start="1297" end="1317" title="Ames Research Center" label="Ames Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1539" end="1543" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775296" start="1636" end="1657" title="Space Shuttle program" label="Space Shuttle program"/>
<link wikidata="Q54383" start="1683" end="1691" title="Space Shuttle Columbia" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182508" start="1720" end="1729" title="Space Shuttle Endeavour" label="Endeavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q54384" start="1746" end="1755" title="Space Shuttle Discovery" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340868" start="1807" end="1819" title="STS-96" label="last mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="1871" end="1895" title="extra-vehicular activity" label="extra-vehicular activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="2221" end="2248" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="2595" end="2633" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286902" start="2682" end="2714" title="NASA Distinguished Service Medal" label="NASA Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286908" start="2723" end="2756" title="NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal" label="NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q747444" start="2797" end="2819" title="Pleasanton, California" label="Pleasanton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333261" start="2856" end="2868" title="Peter Wisoff" label="Peter Wisoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="2971" end="3009" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30263" wikidata="Q677734" url="?curid=30263" title="Problem of other minds">
<text>The problem of other minds is a philosophical problem traditionally stated as the following epistemological question: &quot;Given that I can only observe the behavior of others, how can I know that others have minds?&quot; The problem is that knowledge of other minds is always indirect. The problem of other minds does not negatively impact social interactions due to people having a &quot;theory of mind&quot; – the ability to spontaneously infer the mental states of others – supported by innate mirror neurons, a theory of mind mechanism, or a tacit theory. There has also been an increase in evidence that behavior results from cognition which in turn requires consciousness and the brain.

It is a problem of the philosophical idea known as solipsism: the notion that for any person only one&#x27;s own mind is known to exist. The problem of other minds maintains that no matter how sophisticated someone&#x27;s behavior is, that does not reasonably guarantee that someone has the presence of thought occurring within them as when oneself engages in behavior. Phenomenology studies the subjective experience of human life resulting from consciousness. The specific subject within phenomenology studying other minds is intersubjectivity.

In 1953, Karl Popper suggested that a test for the other minds problem is whether one would seriously argue with the other person or machine: &quot;This, I think, would solve the problem of &#x27;other minds&#x27;...In arguing with other people (a thing which we have learnt from other people), for example about other minds, we cannot but attribute to them intentions, and this means mental states. We do not argue with a thermometer.&quot;

Philosophers such as Christian List have argued that there exists a connection between the problem of other minds and Benj Hellie&#x27;s vertiginous question, i.e. why people exist as themselves and not as someone else. List argues that there exists a &quot;quadrilemma&quot; for metaphysical consciousness theories where at least one of the following must be false: &#x27;first-person realism&#x27;, &#x27;non-solipsism&#x27;, &#x27;non-fragmentation&#x27;, and &#x27;one world&#x27;. List proposes a philosophical model he calls the &quot;many-worlds theory of consciousness&quot; in order to reconcile the subjective nature of consciousness without lapsing into solipsism. Caspar Hare has argued for similar ideas with the concept of egocentric presentism, in which other persons can be conscious, but their experiences are simply not in the way one&#x27;s own current experience is. A related concept is perspectival realism, in which things within perceptual awareness have a defining intrinsic property that exists absolutely and not relative to anything.

==See also==

* Animal consciousness
* Binding problem
* Boltzmann brain
* Brain in a vat
* Chinese room
* Dream argument
* Ethics of uncertain sentience
* Explanatory gap
* Hard problem of consciousness
* Mind–body problem
* Open individualism
* Philosophical skepticism
* Philosophical zombie
* Philosophy of mind
* Psychophysics
* Qualia
* Theory of mind
* Turing test
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q677734" start="4" end="26" title="Problem of other minds" label="problem of other minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="32" end="45" title="Philosophy" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="92" end="107" title="Epistemology" label="epistemological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="158" end="166" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="210" end="214" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="243" end="252" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="342" end="361" title="social interactions" label="social interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q639219" start="391" end="405" title="theory of mind" label="theory of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q309082" start="499" end="512" title="mirror neuron" label="mirror neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="633" end="642" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="688" end="693" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q181020" start="747" end="756" title="solipsism" label="solipsism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914894" start="1066" end="1079" title="Phenomenology (psychology)" label="Phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q583467" start="1224" end="1241" title="intersubjectivity" label="intersubjectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="1253" end="1264" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712127" start="1708" end="1722" title="Christian List" label="Christian List"/>
<link wikidata="Q18455813" start="1824" end="1844" title="vertiginous question" label="vertiginous question"/>
<link wikidata="Q735590" start="2073" end="2080" title="Philosophical realism" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011806" start="2424" end="2445" title="egocentric presentism" label="egocentric presentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130985" start="2595" end="2615" title="perspectival realism" label="perspectival realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764931" start="2766" end="2786" title="Animal consciousness" label="Animal consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q863678" start="2789" end="2804" title="Binding problem" label="Binding problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q646419" start="2807" end="2822" title="Boltzmann brain" label="Boltzmann brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q852947" start="2825" end="2839" title="Brain in a vat" label="Brain in a vat"/>
<link wikidata="Q304726" start="2842" end="2854" title="Chinese room" label="Chinese room"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861080" start="2857" end="2871" title="Dream argument" label="Dream argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q97959409" start="2874" end="2903" title="Ethics of uncertain sentience" label="Ethics of uncertain sentience"/>
<link wikidata="Q631794" start="2906" end="2921" title="Explanatory gap" label="Explanatory gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178207" start="2924" end="2953" title="Hard problem of consciousness" label="Hard problem of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="2956" end="2973" title="Mind–body problem" label="Mind–body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760788" start="2976" end="2994" title="Open individualism" label="Open individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="2997" end="3021" title="Philosophical skepticism" label="Philosophical skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664539" start="3024" end="3044" title="Philosophical zombie" label="Philosophical zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="3047" end="3065" title="Philosophy of mind" label="Philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q500096" start="3068" end="3081" title="Psychophysics" label="Psychophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="3084" end="3090" title="Qualia" label="Qualia"/>
<link wikidata="Q639219" start="3093" end="3107" title="Theory of mind" label="Theory of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q189223" start="3110" end="3121" title="Turing test" label="Turing test"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30265" wikidata="Q105167" url="?curid=30265" title="Tom Clancy">
<text>Thomas Leo Clancy Jr. (April 12, 1947 – October 1, 2013) was an American novelist. He is best known for his technically detailed espionage and military-science storylines set during and after the Cold War. Seventeen of his novels have been bestsellers and more than 100 million copies of his books have been sold. His name was also used on screenplays written by ghostwriters, nonfiction books on military subjects occasionally with co-authors, and video games. He was a part-owner of his hometown Major League Baseball team, the Baltimore Orioles, and vice-chairman of their community activities and public affairs committees.

Originally an insurance agent, Clancy launched his literary career in 1984 when he sold his first military thriller novel &quot;The Hunt for Red October&quot; for $5,000 published by the small academic Naval Institute Press of Annapolis, Maryland.
&quot;The Hunt for Red October&quot;, &quot;Patriot Games&quot; (1987), &quot;Clear and Present Danger&quot; (1989), and &quot;The Sum of All Fears&quot; (1991) have been turned into commercially successful films. Tom Clancy&#x27;s works also inspired games such as the &quot;Ghost Recon&quot;, &quot;Rainbow Six&quot;, &quot;The Division&quot;, and &quot;Splinter Cell&quot; series. Since Clancy&#x27;s death in 2013, the Jack Ryan series has been continued by his family estate through a series of authors.

== Early life and education ==
Clancy was born on April 12, 1947, at Franklin Square Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland, and grew up in the Northwood neighborhood in northeast Baltimore. The family was Irish-American. He was the second of three children to Thomas Leo Clancy (1918–1995), who worked for the United States Postal Service, and Catherine Mary Clancy (née Langan; 1918–2001), who worked in a store&#x27;s credit department. He was a member of Troop 624 of the Boy Scouts of America. Clancy&#x27;s siblings are Patrick and Margaret.

Clancy&#x27;s mother worked to send him to Loyola High School in Towson, Maryland, a private Catholic secondary school taught by the Jesuit religious order (Society of Jesus). He graduated from Loyola High School in 1965. He then attended the associated Loyola College (now Loyola University Maryland) in Baltimore. Clancy began his college career as a physics major. Due to poor grades, he later changed his concentration to English since, &quot;...it was an easy major.&quot; Despite the academic change, he continued to be an indifferent student spending a majority of his time reading books on military and naval history instead of tending to his studies. Clancy graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in English Literature in 1969 receiving a 1.9/4.0 GPA. While at Loyola College, he was president of the chess club. He joined the Army Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps; however, he was ineligible to serve due to his myopia (nearsightedness), which required him to wear thick eyeglasses.

After graduating, Clancy earned certifications in business and insurance and worked for an insurance company in Hartford, Connecticut.

In 1973, Clancy joined the O. F. Bowen Agency, a small insurance agency based in Owings, Maryland, founded by his wife&#x27;s grandfather. In 1980, he purchased the insurance agency from his wife&#x27;s grandmother and wrote novels in his spare time. While working at the insurance agency, he wrote his debut novel, &quot;The Hunt for Red October&quot; (1984).

== Career ==
Clancy&#x27;s literary career began in 1982 when he started writing &quot;The Hunt for Red October&quot;, which in 1984 he sold for publishing to the Naval Institute Press for $5,000. The publisher was impressed with the work; Deborah Grosvenor, the Naval Institute Press editor who read through the book, said later that she convinced the publisher: &quot;I think we have a potential best seller here, and if we don&#x27;t grab this thing, somebody else would.&quot; She believed Clancy had an &quot;innate storytelling ability, and his characters had this very witty dialogue&quot;. Clancy, who had hoped to sell 5,000 copies, ended up selling over 45,000. After publication, the book received praise from President Ronald Reagan, who called the work &quot;the best yarn&quot;, subsequently boosting sales to 300,000 hardcover and two million paperback copies of the book, making it a national bestseller. The book was critically praised for its technical accuracy, which led to Clancy&#x27;s meeting several high-ranking officers in the U.S. military, as well as Steve Pieczenik, and to inspiration for recurring characters in his works. Clancy&#x27;s novels focus on the hero, most notably Jack Ryan and John Clark, both Irish Catholics like himself. He repeatedly uses the formula whereby the heroes are &quot;highly skilled, disciplined, honest, thoroughly professional, and only lose their cool when incompetent politicians or bureaucrats get in their way. Their unambiguous triumphs over evil provide symbolic relief from the legacy of the Vietnam War.&quot;

The Cold War epic &quot;Red Storm Rising&quot; (1986) was co-written (according to Clancy in the book&#x27;s foreword) with fellow military-oriented author Larry Bond. The book was published by Putnam and sold almost a million copies within its first year. Clancy became the cornerstone of a publishing list by Putnam, which emphasized authors like Clancy who would produce annually. His publisher, Phyllis E. Grann, called these &quot;repeaters.&quot;

===Finances===
Clancy has author status on the cover of dozens of books. Seventeen of his novels made it to the top of the &quot;New York Times&quot; best seller list. He co-authored memoirs of top generals, and produced numerous guided tours of the elite aspects of the American military. Andrew Bacevich states:

Clancy did for military pop-lit what Starbucks did for the preparation of caffeinated beverages: he launched a sprawling, massively profitable industrial enterprise that simultaneously serves and cultivates an insatiable consumer base. Whether the item consumed provides much in terms of nourishment is utterly beside the point. That it tastes yummy going down more than suffices to keep customers coming back.

By 1988, Clancy had earned $1.3 million for &quot;The Hunt for Red October&quot; and had signed a $3 million contract for his next three books. In 1992, he sold North American rights to &quot;Without Remorse&quot; for $14 million, a record for a single book. By 1997, Penguin Putnam Inc. (part of Pearson Education) paid Clancy $50 million for world rights to two new books and another $25 million to Red Storm Entertainment for a four-year book/multimedia deal. Clancy followed this up with an agreement with Penguin&#x27;s Berkley Books for 24 paperbacks to tie in with the ABC television miniseries &quot;Tom Clancy&#x27;s Net Force&quot;, which aired in the fall/winter of 1998. The Op-Center universe has laid the ground for the series of books written by Jeff Rovin, which was in an agreement worth $22 million, bringing the total value of the package to $97 million.

In 1993, Clancy joined a group of investors that included Peter Angelos, and bought the Baltimore Orioles from Eli Jacobs. In 1998, he tentatively reached an agreement to purchase the Minnesota Vikings, but had to abandon the deal because of a divorce settlement cost.

The first NetForce novel, titled &quot;Net Force&quot; (1999), was adapted as a 1999 TV movie starring Scott Bakula and Joanna Going. The first Op-Center novel (&quot;Tom Clancy&#x27;s Op-Center&quot; published in 1995) was released to coincide with a 1995 NBC television miniseries of the same name starring Harry Hamlin and a cast of stars. Though the miniseries did not continue, the book series did, but later had little in common with the first TV miniseries other than the title and the names of the main characters.

Clancy wrote several nonfiction books about various branches of the U.S. Armed Forces (see nonfiction listing, in the bibliography article). He also branded several lines of books and video games with his name that are written by other authors, following premises or storylines generally in keeping with Clancy&#x27;s works.

With the release of &quot;The Teeth of the Tiger&quot; (2003), Clancy introduced Jack Ryan&#x27;s son and two nephews as main characters; those characters continued in his last four novels, &quot;Dead or Alive&quot; (2010), &quot;Locked On&quot; (2011), &quot;Threat Vector&quot; (2012), and &quot;Command Authority&quot; (2013).

In 2008, the French video game manufacturer Ubisoft purchased the use of Clancy&#x27;s name for an undisclosed sum. It has been used in conjunction with video games and related products such as movies and books. Based on his interest in private spaceflight and his investment in the launch vehicle company Rotary Rocket,
Clancy was interviewed in 2007 for the documentary film &quot;Orphans of Apollo&quot; (2008).

== Political views ==
A long-time proponent of conservative and Republican views, Clancy dedicated books to American conservative political figures, including Ronald Reagan. A week after the September 11 attacks, Clancy suggested on &quot;The O&#x27;Reilly Factor&quot; that American left-wing politicians were partly responsible for the failure to prevent the attacks due to their &quot;gutting&quot; of the Central Intelligence Agency.

On September 11, 2001, Clancy was interviewed by Judy Woodruff on CNN. During the interview, he noted that orthodox &quot;Islam does not permit suicide.&quot; Among other observations during this interview, Clancy cited discussions he had with military experts on the lack of planning to deal with a hijacked plane being used in a suicide attack and criticized the news media&#x27;s treatment of the United States Intelligence Community. Clancy appeared again on PBS&#x27;s &quot;Charlie Rose&quot;, to discuss the implications of the day&#x27;s events with Richard Holbrooke, &quot;New York Times&quot; journalist Judith Miller, and Senator John Edwards, among others. Clancy was interviewed on those shows because his book &quot;Debt of Honor&quot; (1994) included a scenario wherein a disgruntled Japanese airline pilot crashes a fueled Boeing 747 into the U.S. Capitol dome during an address by the President to a joint session of Congress, killing the President and most of Congress. In the book, Clancy also implies that Japan&#x27;s prosperity is due primarily to unequal trading terms. In the book&#x27;s sequel &quot;Executive Orders&quot; (1996), the president announces a new foreign policy doctrine, under which the United States will hold personally accountable any foreign leader who orders attacks on U.S. citizens, territory, or possessions in the future.

Numerous scholars have examined the political dimensions of Clancy&#x27;s books, especially in the context of the Cold War. Historian Walter Hixson has argued that Clancy&#x27;s novels, especially &quot;The Hunt for Red October&quot; and &quot;Red Storm Rising,&quot; were &quot;popular representations of Reagan-era Cold War values. They reflect both popular perceptions of Soviet behavior and the predominant national security values of the Reagan era.&quot;

== Personal life ==
Clancy&#x27;s first wife, Wanda Thomas King, was a nurse. They married in 1969 and had four children. The couple separated briefly in 1995, and they permanently separated in December 1996. Wanda Clancy filed for divorce in November 1997, which became final in January 1999. As part of the divorce, she and Clancy split his minority stake in the Baltimore Orioles.

On June 26, 1999, Clancy married freelance journalist Alexandra Marie Llewellyn, whom he had met in 1997. Llewellyn is the daughter of J. Bruce Llewellyn and a family friend of Colin Powell, who originally introduced the couple to each other. They remained together until Clancy&#x27;s death in October 2013. They had one daughter.

Clancy was a Roman Catholic. The plot of his novel &quot;Red Rabbit&quot; revolves around John Paul II. In a June 27, 1993, interview with &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, he was quoted as saying, &quot;I&#x27;ve had [sex scenes] in my books before, but you had to look real fast because, you know, I&#x27;m a married Catholic and I don&#x27;t do that.&quot; In a 2002 interview with Lev Grossman for &quot;Time&quot; magazine, Clancy lamented what he perceived as society&#x27;s double standard in the way Catholics are viewed by some people in society in relation to other demographic segments: &quot;You can&#x27;t hate black people any more, of course, and you can&#x27;t hate homosexuals any more, but you can hate all the Catholics you want.&quot;

=== Property ===
Clancy&#x27;s 80-acre estate, which was once a summer camp, is located in Calvert County, Maryland. It has a panoramic view of the Chesapeake Bay. The stone mansion, which cost $2 million, has 24 rooms and features a shooting range in the basement. The property also features a World War II–era M4 Sherman tank, a Christmas gift from his first wife.

Clancy also purchased a 17,000-square-foot penthouse condominium in the Ritz-Carlton, in Baltimore&#x27;s Inner Harbor, for $16 million. Clancy and his wife combined four units to create the apartment.

His Chesapeake Bay estate sold for $4.9 million in 2020.

== Death ==
Clancy died of heart failure on October 1, 2013, at Johns Hopkins Hospital, near his Baltimore home. John D. Gresham, a co-author and researcher with Clancy on several books, said Clancy had been suffering heart problems for some time prior: &quot;Five or six years ago Tom suffered a heart attack and he went through bypass surgery. It wasn&#x27;t that he had another heart attack, his heart just wore out.&quot;

The &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; quoted Pulitzer Prize–winning film critic and author Stephen Hunter as saying, &quot;When he published &quot;The Hunt for Red October&quot;, he redefined and expanded the genre, and as a consequence of that, many people were able to publish such books who had previously been unable to do so.&quot;

On March 31, 2014, the Orioles honored Clancy with a video tribute during their home opener, and the team wore a tribute patch on their jerseys through the season.

== Achievements and awards ==
* Clancy was one of only three authors to sell two million copies on a first printing in the 1990s (the others were John Grisham and J. K. Rowling). Clancy&#x27;s novel &quot;Clear and Present Danger&quot; (1989) sold 1,625,544 hardcover copies, making it the #1 bestselling novel of the 1980s.
* Clancy received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1988. Clancy was the Host of the 1995 Achievement Summit in Colonial Williamsburg and the 1997 Achievement Summit in Baltimore.
* Clancy received an honorary doctorate in humane letters and delivered the commencement address at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1992, and had since worked a reference to the school into many of his main works.
* Clancy was an honorary Yeoman Warder of the Tower of London and received the title &quot;Supernumerary Yeoman&quot;; he had been arrested for scaling the walls in his younger years.
* Clancy received the Alfred Thayer Mahan Award for Literary Achievement from the Navy League of the United States in 1990.

== Works ==
== Film, TV and video game adaptations ==

===Films===

===Short films===

* &quot;Ghost Recon: Alpha&quot; (2012)
* &quot;The Division: Agent Origins&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Ghost Recon Wildlands: War Within the Cartel&quot; (2017)

===Television series===

=== Video games ===
Officially licensed games based on &quot;The Hunt for Red October&quot; and &quot;Red Storm Rising&quot; were released in the late 1980s and early 1990s for various 8-bit home computers such as the Commodore 64 and ZX Spectrum. Those included a submarine combat simulation (based on the book) and an action game (based on the film).

More recently, Ubisoft has made many video game series based on Tom Clancy&#x27;s books, or which were endorsed by Clancy and use his name in the series&#x27; titles.
== References ==
==Further reading==
* Baiocco, Richard ed. &quot;Readings on Tom Clancy&quot; (2003), a guide to Clancy
* Greenberg, Martin. H. &quot;The Tom Clancy Companion&quot; (1992) excerpt; also online free to borrow
* Keene, Ann T. &quot;Clancy, Tom (12 April 1947–01 October 2013)&quot; &quot;American National Biography&quot; (2015) online

::Scholarly studies
* Blouin, Michael J. &quot;Mass-Market Fiction and the Crisis of American Liberalism, 1972–2017&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 2018), Chapter 5: &quot;Tom Clancy and the Liberal Family Tree&quot; pp. 147–175. argues that liberal critics misinterpret his &quot;conservatism&quot; excerpt
* Gallagher, Mark. &quot;Action figures: Men, action films, and contemporary adventure narratives&quot; (Springer, 2006).
* Garson, Helen S. &quot;Tom Clancy: A critical companion&quot; (1996) online free to borrow
* Griffin, Benjamin. &quot;The good guys win: Ronald Reagan, Tom Clancy, and the transformation of national security&quot; (MA thesis, U of Texas, 2015). online
* Hicks, Heather J. &quot;&quot;Sleeping Beauty&quot;: Corporate Culture, Race, and Reality in Michael Crichton&#x27;s Rising Sun and Tom Clancy&#x27;s Debt of Honor.&quot; in Hicks, &quot;The Culture of Soft Work&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 2009) pp. 139–163. excerpt
* Hixson, Walter L. &quot;&quot;Red Storm Rising&quot;: Tom Clancy Novels and the Cult of National Security.&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 17.4 (1993): 599–614. online
* Outlaw, Leroy B. &quot;Red Storm Rising-A Primer for a Future Conventional War in Central Europe&quot;&quot; (Army War College, 1988). online 
* Payne, Matthew Thomas. &quot;Playing war: Military video games after 9/11&quot; (NYU Press, 2016).
* Terdoslavich, William. &quot;The Jack Ryan Agenda: Policy and Politics in the Novels of Tom Clancy: An Unauthorized Analysis&quot; (Macmillan, 2005). excerpt

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105167" start="0" end="21" title="Tom Clancy" label="Thomas Leo Clancy Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q192386" start="143" end="159" title="military science" label="military-science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="196" end="204" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q103076" start="340" end="350" title="screenplay" label="screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="363" end="374" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="498" end="519" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="530" end="547" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="643" end="658" title="insurance agent" label="insurance agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q908667" start="727" end="744" title="military thriller" label="military thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255573" start="757" end="781" title="The Hunt for Red October" label="The Hunt for Red October"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890797" start="831" end="852" title="Naval Institute Press" label="Naval Institute Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="856" end="875" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q396204" start="921" end="934" title="Patriot Games" label="Patriot Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196642" start="955" end="979" title="Clear and Present Danger" label="Clear and Present Danger"/>
<link wikidata="Q259168" start="1004" end="1024" title="The Sum of All Fears" label="The Sum of All Fears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422301" start="1153" end="1164" title="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s Ghost Recon" label="Ghost Recon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800442" start="1178" end="1189" title="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s Rainbow Six" label="Rainbow Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q13431312" start="1203" end="1215" title="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s The Division" label="The Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514735" start="1233" end="1246" title="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s Splinter Cell" label="Splinter Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068314" start="1300" end="1309" title="Jack Ryan (character)" label="Jack Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804938" start="1456" end="1480" title="MedStar Franklin Square Medical Center" label="Franklin Square Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="1484" end="1493" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q113456234" start="1524" end="1533" title="Northwood, Baltimore" label="Northwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="1691" end="1719" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="1748" end="1751" title="birth name" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="1856" end="1877" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694537" start="1972" end="1990" title="Loyola Blakefield" label="Loyola High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q755615" start="1994" end="2010" title="Towson, Maryland" label="Towson, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2022" end="2030" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="2062" end="2068" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="2086" end="2102" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399470" start="2183" end="2197" title="Loyola University Maryland" label="Loyola College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="2613" end="2629" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="2633" end="2651" title="English Literature" label="English Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q18185" start="2680" end="2683" title="GPA" label="GPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794233" start="2760" end="2802" title="Army Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Army Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q168403" start="2851" end="2875" title="Myopia" label="myopia (nearsightedness)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="3014" end="3031" title="insurance company" label="insurance company"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="3035" end="3056" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q754934" start="3140" end="3156" title="Owings, Maryland" label="Owings, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255573" start="3508" end="3532" title="The Hunt for Red October" label="The Hunt for Red October"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890797" start="3584" end="3605" title="Naval Institute Press" label="Naval Institute Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q193955" start="4253" end="4262" title="hardcover" label="hardcover"/>
<link wikidata="Q193934" start="4279" end="4288" title="paperback" label="paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q61022630" start="4458" end="4465" title="officer" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499059" start="4500" end="4515" title="Steve Pieczenik" label="Steve Pieczenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068314" start="4628" end="4637" title="Jack Ryan (character)" label="Jack Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918366" start="4642" end="4652" title="John Clark (Tom Clancy character)" label="John Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4982" end="4993" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5006" end="5014" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581581" start="5026" end="5042" title="Red Storm Rising" label="Red Storm Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755947" start="5158" end="5168" title="Larry Bond" label="Larry Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093062" start="5313" end="5319" title="G. P. Putnam&amp;#x27;s Sons" label="Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q54009936" start="5401" end="5417" title="Phyllis E. Grann" label="Phyllis E. Grann"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="5579" end="5622" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; best seller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q933939" start="5746" end="5761" title="Andrew Bacevich" label="Andrew Bacevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533058" start="6375" end="6390" title="Without Remorse" label="Without Remorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093062" start="6451" end="6470" title="Penguin Putnam Inc." label="Penguin Putnam Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6420723" start="6480" end="6497" title="Pearson Education" label="Pearson Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q769354" start="6584" end="6607" title="Red Storm Entertainment" label="Red Storm Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374730" start="6693" end="6700" title="Penguin Group" label="Penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753848" start="6708" end="6721" title="Berkley Books" label="Berkley Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="6759" end="6762" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4307199" start="6791" end="6818" title="NetForce (film)" label="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s Net Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q571334" start="6944" end="6954" title="Jeff Rovin" label="Jeff Rovin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172537" start="7116" end="7129" title="Peter Angelos" label="Peter Angelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="7146" end="7163" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360247" start="7169" end="7179" title="Eli Jacobs" label="Eli Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="7242" end="7259" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386957" start="7338" end="7346" title="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s Net Force" label="NetForce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4307199" start="7408" end="7421" title="NetForce (film)" label="1999 TV movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q311699" start="7431" end="7443" title="Scott Bakula" label="Scott Bakula"/>
<link wikidata="Q446089" start="7448" end="7460" title="Joanna Going" label="Joanna Going"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815317" start="7466" end="7487" title="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s Op-Center (novel)" label="first Op-Center novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880217" start="7580" end="7627" title="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s Op Center (film)" label="1995 NBC television miniseries of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q567830" start="7637" end="7649" title="Harry Hamlin" label="Harry Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="7920" end="7937" title="United States Armed Forces" label="U.S. Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7943" end="7961" title="Tom Clancy bibliography#Non-fiction" label="nonfiction listing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521042" start="8204" end="8226" title="The Teeth of the Tiger" label="The Teeth of the Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015745" start="8374" end="8387" title="Dead or Alive (novel)" label="Dead or Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665391" start="8408" end="8417" title="Locked On (novel)" label="Locked On"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797192" start="8438" end="8451" title="Threat Vector (novel)" label="Threat Vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q15036439" start="8476" end="8493" title="Command Authority (novel)" label="Command Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q188273" start="8553" end="8560" title="Ubisoft" label="Ubisoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q44906" start="8746" end="8765" title="private spaceflight" label="private spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q444327" start="8815" end="8828" title="Rotary Rocket" label="Rotary Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234384" start="8892" end="8909" title="Orphans of Apollo" label="Orphans of Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="8972" end="8984" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8989" end="8999" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="9084" end="9097" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="9116" end="9136" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977646" start="9164" end="9188" title="The O&amp;#x27;Reilly Factor" label="The O&amp;#x27;Reilly Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="9334" end="9361" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304655" start="9413" end="9426" title="Judy Woodruff" label="Judy Woodruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="9430" end="9433" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9492" end="9515" title="Religious views on suicide#Islam" label="does not permit suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="9695" end="9709" title="suicide attack" label="suicide attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q786878" start="9764" end="9800" title="United States Intelligence Community" label="United States Intelligence Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="9827" end="9830" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q715515" start="9844" end="9856" title="Charlie Rose" label="Charlie Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q155649" start="9922" end="9939" title="Richard Holbrooke" label="Richard Holbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9947" end="9961" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q265810" start="9979" end="9992" title="Judith Miller (journalist)" label="Judith Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q217314" start="10006" end="10018" title="John Edwards" label="John Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300587" start="10095" end="10108" title="Debt of Honor" label="Debt of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="10204" end="10214" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="10224" end="10236" title="U.S. Capitol" label="U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q814169" start="10490" end="10506" title="Executive Orders" label="Executive Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300744" start="11043" end="11053" title="Reagan Era" label="Reagan-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104877" start="11719" end="11737" title="J. Bruce Llewellyn" label="J. Bruce Llewellyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q150851" start="11761" end="11773" title="Colin Powell" label="Colin Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11930" end="11944" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136077" start="11974" end="11984" title="Red Rabbit" label="Red Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="12007" end="12019" title="John Paul II" label="John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="12062" end="12081" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558063" start="12301" end="12313" title="Lev Grossman" label="Lev Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="12324" end="12328" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q603742" start="12397" end="12412" title="double standard" label="double standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q501277" start="12763" end="12787" title="Calvert County, Maryland" label="Calvert County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="12820" end="12834" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12967" end="12979" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="12984" end="12994" title="M4 Sherman" label="M4 Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="12995" end="12999" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q782200" start="13112" end="13124" title="Ritz-Carlton" label="Ritz-Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470296" start="13146" end="13158" title="Inner Harbor" label="Inner Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="13328" end="13341" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472068" start="13365" end="13387" title="Johns Hopkins Hospital" label="Johns Hopkins Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="13738" end="13753" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="13767" end="13781" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q983243" start="13813" end="13827" title="Stephen Hunter" label="Stephen Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="14083" end="14090" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q106465" start="14371" end="14383" title="John Grisham" label="John Grisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="14388" end="14401" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="14598" end="14629" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="14782" end="14800" title="honorary degree" label="honorary doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301216" start="14804" end="14818" title="Doctor of Humane Letters" label="humane letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49211" start="14861" end="14893" title="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute" label="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q597266" start="15004" end="15017" title="Yeomen Warders" label="Yeoman Warder"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="15025" end="15040" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715290" start="15185" end="15235" title="Alfred Thayer Mahan Award for Literary Achievement" label="Alfred Thayer Mahan Award for Literary Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982653" start="15245" end="15277" title="Navy League of the United States" label="Navy League of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="15774" end="15786" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="15791" end="15802" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188273" start="15925" end="15932" title="Ubisoft" label="Ubisoft"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30266" wikidata="Q2384764" url="?curid=30266" title="Tonyukuk">
<text>Tonyukuk (, , , born c. 646, died c. 726) was the baga-tarkhan (supreme commander) and adviser of four successive Göktürk khagans – Ilterish Qaghan, Qapaghan Qaghan, Inel Qaghan and Bilge Qaghan. He conducted victorious campaigns against various Turkic and non-Turkic steppe peoples, such as Tölis, Xueyantuo, Toquz Oguz, Yenisei Kyrgyz, Kurykans, Thirty Tatar, Khitan and Tatabi as well as the Tang dynasty. He was described as a kingmaker by historians such as E. P. Thompson and Peter Benjamin Golden.

== Name ==
The name is spelled as &quot;t1-o-ɲ-uq1-uq1&quot; () in the Old Turkic script, variously interpreted as &quot;Tunuquq&quot;, &quot;Tonuquq&quot;, &quot;Tuj-uquq&quot;, &quot; Toɲ Yuguq&quot;, &quot;Tujun-oq&quot;, &quot;Tojuquq&quot;, &quot;Tuɲoqoq&quot; with a number of suggestions for its etymology. According to Sertkaya, &quot;Tunuk&quot; means &quot;clear, pure, abyss, who reached the depth&quot; or &quot;pure, penetrative&quot;, and &quot;uq&quot; or &quot;oq&quot; means &quot;idea, wise, well-informed&quot;. Thus, Tonuquq is the owner of deep and pure idea. His title &quot;Bilge&quot; means wise or master. According to Klyashtorny, the element &quot;yuquq&quot; means &quot;hidden, protected thing, value, treasure, jewelry&quot;, which is derived from the verb &quot;yoq/yuq&quot; meaning &quot;to hide, to protect&quot; (used in Uyghur legal documents); meanwhile, the other &quot;ton&quot; means &quot;first&quot;; thus his Chinese name 元珍 &quot;Yuánzhēn&quot; is a calque of his Turkic name &quot;Tonyuquq&quot;, both meaning &quot;first treasure&quot; René M. Giraud read the name as &quot;tonïuquq&quot;, from &quot;ton&quot; &quot;dress, clothes&quot; with &quot;I&quot; possessive and &quot;yuquq&quot; (from the verb &quot;yuk-&quot; &quot;to stick&quot;) and meaning &quot;whose dress is blessed with oil&quot;; Likewise, Jean-Paul Roux explained the name as &quot;with oiled dress&quot; while discussing the culinary culture of the Mongols and suggesting that they had dirty and stained clothes.

== Life ==
=== Early years ===

He was born around 646, near Tuul River in Ashide tribe. He fled the Tang dynasty in 679 and joined Elteriš in 681.

Chinese sources state that Tonyuquq&#x27;s name was &quot;Yuanzhen,&quot; and he learned all Chinese traditions and was aware of the gaps in the borders and the Chinese wall. While he was supervising the surrendered clans in Chanyü military governorship, he was dismissed and jailed by the military governor Changshih.

=== During Elteriš&#x27;s reign ===
Although he lost early wars against Xue Rengui, he was formidable force in establishing Turkic Khaganate. In 687, another invasion of Tang by Elteriš and Ashide Yuanzhen began. Empress Dowager Wu commissioned the ethnically Baekje general Heichi Changzhi, assisted by Li Duozuo, to defend against Turkic attack and they were able to defeat Turk forces at Huanghuadui (modern day Shuozhou, Shanxi) causing Turk forces to flee.

=== During Qapγan&#x27;s reign ===

In 703, he was sent by qaγan for marriage proposal to the Wu Zhou dynasty. Wu Zetian accepted the proposal, in exchange Wu Yanxiu was released on khagan&#x27;s order. However, Emperor Zhongzhong&#x27;s accession changed political climate. Marriage was cancelled.

In 712, he commanded Tujue army during Battle of Bolchu which proved disastrous for Turgesh army.

=== During Inäl&#x27;s reign ===
He was not in active politics during Inäl&#x27;s reign and accepted him as a legitimate ruler. Although this did not cost him his life and was spared, perhaps because of his great authority and his age. Another reason would the fact that he was Bilge Qaghan&#x27;s father-in-law.

=== During Bilgä&#x27;s reign ===
In 716 he was appointed to be Master Strategist (Bagha Tarkhan) by his son-in-law Bilgä Qaγan.

Chinese sources state that Bilgä Qaγan wanted to convert to Buddhism, establish cities and temples. However, Tonyukuk discouraged him from this by pointing out that their nomadic lifestyle was what made them a greater military power when compared to Tang dynasty. While Turks&#x27; power rested on their mobility, conversion to Buddhism would bring pacifism among population. Therefore sticking to Tengriism was necessary to survive.

In 720 Tang chancellor Wang Jun proposed a plan to attack Bilgä Qaγan along with the Baximi, Xi, and Khitan. Emperor Xuanzong also recruited Qapγan Qaγan&#x27;s sons Bilgä Tegin and Mo Tegin, Yenisei Kyrgyz Qaγan Qutluğ Bilgä Qaγan and Huoba Guiren to fight against Tujue. Tonyukuk cunningly launched first attack on Baximi in 721 autumn, completely crushing them. Meanwhile Bilgä raided Gansu, taking much of the livestock. Later that year Khitans, next year Xi were also crushed.

He died around 726.

== Family ==
He was father to Eletmiš Bilgä Qatun and a father-in-law to Bilgä Qaγan, thus a grandfather to Yollïg and Teŋrï Qaγans.

== Legacy ==
His biography, achievements and advice for state administration were carved in the so-called Orkhon-Turkic script on two stele erected around 716 (before his death) at a site known as Bayn Tsokto, in Ulaanbaatar&#x27;s Nalaikh district. Yuan era Uyghur official Xie Wenzhi (楔文質), as well as Korean Gyeongju Seol clan claimed descent from Tonyukuk.

He was mentioned and remembered in some Uyghur Manichaean texts later in Qocho.

The Berlin Manichaean manuscript found in Qocho read as follows:

==In popular culture==
* Portrayed by Kim Seong-hun in the 2006-2007 KBS TV series &quot;Dae Jo-yeong&quot;.

== References ==
*E. Denison Ross, &quot;The Tonyukuk Inscription, Being a Translation of Professor Vilhelm Thomsen&#x27;s final Danish Rendering&quot;, Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies, University of London, 1930.
* Nathan Light. An 8th Century Turkic Narrative: Pragmatics, Reported Speech and Managing Information. Turkic languages. 10.2, 2006. pp 155–186.

==External links==
*Tonyukuk Inscriptions complete text
*Tonyukuk’s Memorial Complex, Language Committee of Ministry of Culture and Information of the Republic of Kazakhstan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2384764" start="0" end="8" title="Tonyukuk" label="Tonyukuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q205466" start="114" end="121" title="Göktürk" label="Göktürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187878" start="122" end="128" title="khagan" label="khagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q387151" start="132" end="147" title="Ilterish Qaghan" label="Ilterish Qaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325694" start="149" end="164" title="Qapaghan Qaghan" label="Qapaghan Qaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089938" start="166" end="177" title="Inel Qaghan" label="Inel Qaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q381125" start="182" end="194" title="Bilge Qaghan" label="Bilge Qaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="246" end="252" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163939" start="299" end="308" title="Xueyantuo" label="Xueyantuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772429" start="310" end="320" title="Toquz Oguz" label="Toquz Oguz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83142" start="322" end="336" title="Yenisei Kyrgyz" label="Yenisei Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4249093" start="338" end="346" title="Kurykans" label="Kurykans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317268" start="348" end="360" title="Tatar confederation" label="Thirty Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="362" end="368" title="Khitan people" label="Khitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q839879" start="373" end="379" title="Tatabi" label="Tatabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="395" end="407" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409583" start="431" end="440" title="kingmaker" label="kingmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q434160" start="463" end="477" title="E. P. Thompson" label="E. P. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q371760" start="482" end="503" title="Peter Benjamin Golden" label="Peter Benjamin Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058305" start="577" end="594" title="Old Turkic script" label="Old Turkic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005517" start="1863" end="1877" title="Jean-Paul Roux" label="Jean-Paul Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q643058" start="2100" end="2110" title="Tuul River" label="Tuul River"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559261" start="2114" end="2120" title="Ashide" label="Ashide"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="2140" end="2152" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q387151" start="2171" end="2178" title="Ilterish Qaghan" label="Elteriš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060003" start="2413" end="2441" title="Protectorate General to Pacify the North" label="Chanyü military governorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276933" start="2580" end="2590" title="Xue Rengui" label="Xue Rengui"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="2678" end="2682" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384764" start="2698" end="2713" title="Ashide Yuanzhen" label="Ashide Yuanzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9738" start="2721" end="2739" title="Wu Zetian" label="Empress Dowager Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28428" start="2768" end="2774" title="Baekje" label="Baekje"/>
<link wikidata="Q709326" start="2783" end="2798" title="Heichi Changzhi" label="Heichi Changzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q73020" start="2923" end="2931" title="Shuozhou" label="Shuozhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="2933" end="2939" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q835435" start="3065" end="3080" title="Zhou dynasty (690–705)" label="Wu Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9738" start="3082" end="3091" title="Wu Zetian" label="Wu Zetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9717" start="3183" end="3201" title="Emperor Zhongzong of Tang" label="Emperor Zhongzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005397" start="3310" end="3326" title="Battle of Bolchu" label="Battle of Bolchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277895" start="3355" end="3362" title="Turgesh" label="Turgesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089938" start="3440" end="3444" title="Inel Khagan" label="Inäl"/>
<link wikidata="Q381125" start="3800" end="3811" title="Bilge Khagan" label="Bilgä Qaγan"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="3874" end="3882" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="4064" end="4076" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q837605" start="4212" end="4221" title="Tengrism" label="Tengriism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967501" start="4272" end="4280" title="Wang Jun (Tang chancellor)" label="Wang Jun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985448" start="4334" end="4340" title="Basmyl" label="Baximi"/>
<link wikidata="Q839879" start="4342" end="4344" title="Kumo Xi" label="Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="4350" end="4356" title="Khitan people" label="Khitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9746" start="4358" end="4374" title="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang" label="Emperor Xuanzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325694" start="4390" end="4402" title="Qapaghan Qaghan" label="Qapγan Qaγan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83142" start="4441" end="4455" title="Yenisei Kyrgyz" label="Yenisei Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="4637" end="4642" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="4690" end="4697" title="Khitan people" label="Khitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q839879" start="4709" end="4711" title="Kumo Xi" label="Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q100323727" start="4783" end="4802" title="Po Beg" label="Eletmiš Bilgä Qatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q381125" start="4826" end="4837" title="Bilge Khagan" label="Bilgä Qaγan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014687" start="4861" end="4867" title="Yollıg Khagan" label="Yollïg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016974" start="4872" end="4884" title="Tengri Qaghan" label="Teŋrï Qaγans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058305" start="4993" end="5013" title="Orkhon-Turkic script" label="Orkhon-Turkic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q11327493" start="5084" end="5095" title="Bain Tsokto inscriptions" label="Bayn Tsokto"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="5100" end="5111" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282418" start="5119" end="5135" title="Nalaikh district" label="Nalaikh district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="5137" end="5145" title="Yuan era" label="Yuan era"/>
<link wikidata="Q16182259" start="5198" end="5216" title="Gyeongju Seol clan" label="Gyeongju Seol clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="5296" end="5306" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662180" start="5322" end="5327" title="Qocho" label="Qocho"/>
<link wikidata="Q498825" start="5465" end="5468" title="Korean Broadcasting System" label="KBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q483506" start="5485" end="5497" title="Dae Jo-yeong (TV series)" label="Dae Jo-yeong"/>
<link wikidata="Q171485" start="5606" end="5621" title="Vilhelm Thomsen" label="Vilhelm Thomsen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30267" wikidata="Q1362341" url="?curid=30267" title="Tyburn">
<text>Tyburn was a manor (estate) in London, Middlesex, England, one of two which were served by the parish of Marylebone. Tyburn took its name from the Tyburn Brook, a tributary of the River Westbourne. The name Tyburn, from Teo Bourne, means &#x27;boundary stream&#x27;.

The parish, and probably therefore also the manor, was bounded by Roman roads to the west (modern Edgware Road) and south (modern Oxford Street). The junction of these was the site of the famous Tyburn Gallows (known colloquially as the &quot;Tyburn Tree&quot;), now occupied by Marble Arch. So, for many centuries the name Tyburn was synonymous with capital punishment: it was the principal place for execution for London and Middlesex criminals and convicted traitors, including many religious martyrs. In the 18th century it was also known as &quot;God&#x27;s Tribunal&quot;. Hangings at Tyburn often included a sometimes raucous procession of the condemned from Newgate Gaol in the City—at the end of the 18th century, the hangings were moved to Newgate.

==History==
The manor of Tyburn, and the neighbouring Lisson, were recorded in the Domesday Book of 1086, and were together served by the parish of Marylebone, itself named after the stream. The original name of the parish was simply Marybourne, the stream of St Mary; the French &quot;le&quot; appeared in the 17th century, under the influence of names like Mary-le-Bow. Domesday showed that the manor was held, both before and after the Norman Conquest, by the Barking Abbey nunnery. The Domesday survey records it as having eight households, suggesting a population of around 40. In the 1230s and 1240s, the manor was held by Gilbert de Sandford, the son of John de Sandford, who had been the chamberlain to Eleanor of Aquitaine. In 1236, the City of London contracted with Sir Gilbert to draw water from Tyburn Springs, which he held, to serve as the source of the first piped water supply for the city. The water was supplied in lead pipes that ran from where Bond Street station stands today, 800 m east of Hyde Park, down to the hamlet of Charing (Charing Cross), along Fleet Street and over the Fleet Bridge, climbing Ludgate Hill (by gravitational pressure) to a public conduit at Cheapside. Water was supplied free to all comers.

The junction of the two Roman roads had significance from ancient times, and was marked by a monument known as &quot;Oswulf&#x27;s Stone&quot;, which gave its name to the Ossulstone Hundred of Middlesex. The stone was covered over in 1851 when Marble Arch was moved to the area, but it was shortly afterwards unearthed and propped up against the Arch. It has not been seen since it was stolen in 1869.

==Tyburn gallows==
Although executions took place elsewhere (notably on Tower Hill, generally related to treason by gentlemen), the Roman road junction at Tyburn became associated with the place of criminal execution for the City of London and Middlesex after most were moved here from Smithfield in the 1400s. In the 12th century, the Sheriff of London had been given the jurisdiction in Middlesex, as well as in the City of London. Prisoners were taken in public procession from Newgate Prison in the city, via St Giles in the Fields and Oxford Street (then known as Tyburn Road). From the late 18th century, when public executions were no longer carried out at Tyburn, they occurred at Newgate Prison itself and at Horsemonger Lane Gaol in Southwark.

The first recorded execution took place at a site next to the stream in 1196. William Fitz Osbert, a populist leader who played a major role in an 1196 popular revolt in London, was cornered in the church of St Mary-le-Bow. He was dragged naked behind a horse to Tyburn, where he was hanged.

In 1537, Henry VIII used Tyburn to execute the ringleaders of the Pilgrimage of Grace, including Sir Nicholas Tempest, one of the northern leaders of the Pilgrimage and the King&#x27;s own Bowbearer of the Forest of Bowland.

In 1571, the Tyburn Tree was erected near the junction of today&#x27;s Edgware Road, Bayswater Road and Oxford Street, 200 m west of Marble Arch. The &quot;Tree&quot; or &quot;Triple Tree&quot; was a form of gallows, consisting of a horizontal wooden triangle supported by three legs (an arrangement known as a &quot;three-legged mare&quot; or &quot;three-legged stool&quot;). Multiple criminals could be hanged at once, and so the gallows were used for mass executions, such as that on 23 June 1649 when 24 prisoners (23 men and 1 woman) were hanged simultaneously, having been conveyed there in eight carts.

After executions, the bodies would be buried nearby or in later times removed for dissection by anatomists. The crowd would sometimes fight over a body with surgeons, for fear that dismemberment could prevent the resurrection of the body on Judgement Day (see Jack Sheppard, Dick Turpin or William Spiggot).

The first victim of the &quot;Tyburn Tree&quot; was John Story on 1 June 1571. Story was a Roman Catholic who was tried for and convicted of treason. There is a plaque to the Catholic martyrs executed at Tyburn in the period 1535–1681 at 8 Hyde Park Place, the site of Tyburn convent. Among the more notable individuals suspended from the &quot;Tree&quot; in the following centuries were John Bradshaw, Henry Ireton and Oliver Cromwell, who were already dead but were disinterred and hanged at Tyburn in January 1661 on the orders of the Cavalier Parliament in an act of posthumous revenge for their part in the beheading of King Charles I.

The gallows seem to have been replaced several times, probably because of wear, but in general, the entire structure stood all the time in Tyburn. After some acts of vandalism, in October 1759 it was decided to replace the permanent structure with new moving gallows. These remained until the last execution in Tyburn, probably carried out in November 1783. On the night of Wednesday, 28 March 1759, part of the gallows was blown down. Further evidence of the fixed gallows&#x27;s disrepair was noted on Friday, 22 June 1759 with the execution of Katharine Knowland, &quot;When she came to Tyburn, all the crossbeams were pulled down; so she was tied up on the top of one of the upright posts, and hung with her back to it.&quot; One of the first mentions of the gallows being used again was on 7 October 1759, when four people were executed on the &quot;new moving gallows&quot; which afterwards was &quot;carried off in a cart&quot;.
The executions were public spectacles which attracted crowds of thousands. Spectator stands provided deluxe views for a fee. On one occasion, the stands collapsed, reportedly killing and injuring hundreds of people. A hanging as public spectacle was depicted by William Hogarth in his satirical print &quot;The Idle &#x27;Prentice Executed at Tyburn&quot; (1747).

Tyburn was commonly invoked in euphemisms for capital punishment: for instance, to &quot;take a ride to Tyburn&quot; (or simply &quot;go west&quot;) was to go to one&#x27;s hanging, &quot;Lord of the Manor of Tyburn&quot; was the public hangman, &quot;dancing the Tyburn jig&quot; was the act of being hanged. Convicts would be transported to the site in an open ox-cart from Newgate Prison. They were expected to put on a good show, wearing their finest clothes and going to their deaths with .

On 19 April 1779, clergyman James Hackman was hanged there following his 7 April murder of courtesan and socialite Martha Ray, the mistress of John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich. The Tyburn gallows were last used on 3 November 1783, when John Austin, a highwayman, was hanged; for the next eighty-five years, hangings were staged outside Newgate prison. Then, in 1868, due to public disorder during these public executions, it was decided to execute the convicts inside the prison.

The site of the gallows is now marked by three young oak trees that were planted in 2014 on a traffic island in the middle of Edgware Road at its junction with Bayswater Road. Between the trees is a roundel with the inscription &quot;The site of Tyburn Tree&quot;. It is also commemorated by the Tyburn Convent, a Catholic convent dedicated to the memory of martyrs executed there and in other locations for the Catholic faith.

Although most historical records and modern science agree that the Tyburn gallows were situated where Oxford Street meets Edgware Road and Bayswater Road, in the January 1850 issue of &quot;Notes and Queries&quot;, the book collector and musicologist Edward Francis Rimbault published a list of faults he had found in Peter Cunningham&#x27;s 1849 &quot;Handbook of London&quot;, in which he claimed that the correct site of the gallows is where 49 Connaught Square was later built, stating that &quot;in the lease granted by the Bishop of London, this is particularly mentioned&quot;.

== Process of executions ==
Tyburn was primarily known for its gallows, which functioned as the main execution site for London-area prisoners from the 16th through to the 18th centuries. For those found guilty of capital crimes who could not obtain a pardon, which accounted for about 40%, a probable destiny was to be hanged at Tyburn. Other contemporary methods of punishment that may have been used as alternatives to Tyburn included execution, followed by being hung in chains at the place where the crime was committed; or burning at the stake; and being drawn and quartered, of which the latter two were common in cases of treason.

The last days of the condemned were marked by religious events. On the Sunday before every execution, a sermon was preached in Newgate&#x27;s chapel, which those unaffiliated with the execution could pay to attend. Furthermore, the night before the execution, around midnight, the sexton of St Sepulchre&#x27;s church, adjacent to Newgate, recited verses outside the wall of the condemned. The following morning, the convicts heard prayers, and those who wished to do so received the sacrament.

On the day of execution, the condemned were transported to the Tyburn gallows from Newgate in a horse-drawn open cart. It was about from Newgate to Tyburn, but as the streets were often crowded with onlookers, the journey could last up to three hours. The cart usually stopped at the &quot;Bowl Inn&quot; public house in St Giles High Street. This was the &quot;halfway house&quot;. Here the condemned were allowed to drink strong liquors, wine or strong ale.

:&quot;Here Jack Ketch and the criminal who was about to expiate his offence on the scaffold were wont to stop on their way to the gallows for a &#x27;last glass&#x27;. Mr. W. T. Purkiss, the proprietor, however, was prevailed upon to stay the work of demolition for a time&quot;.

The draught itself was described in a 19th-century ballad as being of a &quot;nutty brown ale drunk from a &#x27;broad wooden bowl&#x27;&quot;. At various times the St Giles Bowl appears to have been administered at a number of inns (or perhaps one inn under a number of names) in St Giles, each successively being referred to as &quot;The Bowl&quot;. According to Walter Thornbury in his classic &quot;London Old and New&quot;, &quot;The Bowl&quot; would appear to have become associated with the &quot;Angel Inn&quot; on St Giles High Street. In 1873, the &quot;City Press&quot; feared that the Angel Inn, another memorial of ancient London, was about to pass away. The Angel was remodelled in 1898 and stands to this day.

Having arrived at Tyburn, the condemned found themselves in front of a crowded and noisy square; the wealthy paid to sit on the stands erected for the occasion, in order to have an unobstructed view. Before the execution, the condemned were allowed to say a few words; the authorities expected that most of the condemned, before commending their own souls to God, would admit their guilt. It is reported that the majority of the condemned did so. A noose was then placed around their neck and the cart pulled away, leaving them hanging.

Instances of pickpocketing have been reported in the crowds of executions, a mockery of the deterrent effect of capital punishment, which at the time was considered proper punishment for theft.

== Social aspects ==
Sites of public executions were significant gathering places and executions were public spectacles. Scholars have described the executions at Tyburn as &quot;carnivalesque occasion[s] in which the normative message intended by the authorities is reappropriated and inverted by an irreverent crowd&quot; that found them a source of &quot;entertainment as well as conflict.&quot; This analysis is supported by the presence of shouting street traders and food vendors and the erection of seating for wealthier onlookers. Additionally, a popular belief held that the hand of an executed criminal could cure cancers, and it was not uncommon to see mothers brushing their child&#x27;s cheek with the hand of the condemned. The gallows at Tyburn were sources of cadavers for surgeons and anatomists.

==Executioners==

* &quot;The hangman of London&quot;, Cratwell, – 1 September 1538
* Thomas Derrick, 
* Gregory Brandon, 1625 (or earlier) – ?, after whom the phrase the &quot;Gregorian tree&quot; was coined
* Robert Brandon – 1649, &quot;Young Gregory&quot; alongside his father at least part of the period
* Edward Dun
* Jack Ketch, 1663 – early 1686, reinstated briefly in late 1686
* Paskah Rose, 1686 – 28 May 1686
* Richard Pearse, (?) 1686–?
* Unknown or unknowns
* John Price, 1714–16
* William Marvell, 1716 – November 1717
* John Price, 1717–18
* William Marvell, (?) 1718
* Bailiff Banks, ?–1719
* Richard Arnet, 1719 – 
* John Hooper, ? – March 1735
* John Thrift March 1735 – May 1752
* Thomas Turlis, 1754– 6 February 1771
* Edward Dennis, 1771 – 21 November 1786

== Notable executions ==

==See also==
* Thomas Derrick, an executioner at Tyburn
* Carthusian Martyrs of London
* Last dying speeches
* Ordinary of Newgate&#x27;s Account

==Notes==
==References==
==References==

==External links==

* Connected Histories</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1362341" start="0" end="6" title="Tyburn" label="Tyburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="13" end="18" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="31" end="37" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q123634" start="105" end="115" title="Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910790" start="147" end="159" title="Tyburn Brook" label="Tyburn Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760573" start="180" end="196" title="River Westbourne" label="River Westbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021145" start="224" end="230" title="Bourne (stream)" label="Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047586" start="366" end="378" title="Edgware Road" label="Edgware Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q209714" start="398" end="411" title="Oxford Street" label="Oxford Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362341" start="463" end="477" title="Tyburn" label="Tyburn Gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q845529" start="547" end="558" title="Marble Arch" label="Marble Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="619" end="637" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="729" end="737" title="Treason" label="traitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="764" end="770" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822183" start="934" end="946" title="Newgate Gaol" label="Newgate Gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q122274" start="1082" end="1088" title="Lisson Grove" label="Lisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1111" end="1124" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="1166" end="1172" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q123634" start="1176" end="1186" title="Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301992" start="1387" end="1398" title="St Mary-le-Bow" label="Mary-le-Bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q808279" start="1491" end="1504" title="Barking Abbey" label="Barking Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265633" start="1689" end="1705" title="John de Sandford" label="John de Sandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q264323" start="1724" end="1735" title="Chamberlain (office)" label="chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q178525" start="1739" end="1759" title="Eleanor of Aquitaine" label="Eleanor of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q892189" start="1993" end="2012" title="Bond Street station" label="Bond Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="2041" end="2050" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q216185" start="2083" end="2096" title="Charing Cross" label="Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="2105" end="2117" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339242" start="2154" end="2166" title="Ludgate Hill" label="Ludgate Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068693" start="2218" end="2227" title="Cheapside" label="Cheapside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107544" start="2440" end="2450" title="Ossulstone" label="Ossulstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="2451" end="2458" title="Hundred (division)" label="Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="2462" end="2471" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q845529" start="2513" end="2524" title="Marble Arch" label="Marble Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q499565" start="2744" end="2754" title="Tower Hill" label="Tower Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="2897" end="2911" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="2916" end="2925" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182018" start="2958" end="2968" title="Smithfield, London" label="Smithfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495002" start="3008" end="3025" title="Sheriff of London" label="Sheriff of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822183" start="3153" end="3167" title="Newgate Prison" label="Newgate Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247922" start="3185" end="3207" title="St Giles, London" label="St Giles in the Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q209714" start="3212" end="3225" title="Oxford Street" label="Oxford Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822183" start="3361" end="3375" title="Newgate Prison" label="Newgate Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556400" start="3390" end="3411" title="Horsemonger Lane Gaol" label="Horsemonger Lane Gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="3415" end="3424" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763054" start="3505" end="3524" title="William Fitz Osbert" label="William Fitz Osbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301992" start="3635" end="3649" title="St Mary-le-Bow" label="St Mary-le-Bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="3711" end="3717" title="hanged" label="hanged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233121" start="3786" end="3805" title="Pilgrimage of Grace" label="Pilgrimage of Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950711" start="3909" end="3918" title="Bowbearer" label="Bowbearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406920" start="3926" end="3943" title="Forest of Bowland" label="Forest of Bowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047586" start="4017" end="4029" title="Edgware Road" label="Edgware Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892349" start="4031" end="4045" title="Bayswater Road" label="Bayswater Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q209714" start="4050" end="4063" title="Oxford Street" label="Oxford Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q845529" start="4079" end="4090" title="Marble Arch" label="Marble Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q243778" start="4154" end="4161" title="gallows" label="gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q116646" start="4639" end="4649" title="dissection" label="dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="4653" end="4663" title="anatomy" label="anatomists"/>
<link wikidata="Q636214" start="4817" end="4830" title="Jack Sheppard" label="Jack Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q977890" start="4832" end="4843" title="Dick Turpin" label="Dick Turpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22087103" start="4847" end="4862" title="William Spiggot" label="William Spiggot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259322" start="4918" end="4928" title="John Story (martyr)" label="John Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4957" end="4971" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634873" start="5254" end="5267" title="John Bradshaw (judge)" label="John Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q719724" start="5269" end="5281" title="Henry Ireton" label="Henry Ireton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="5286" end="5301" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925340" start="5404" end="5423" title="Cavalier Parliament" label="Cavalier Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="5496" end="5505" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q617224" start="5582" end="5586" title="wear" label="wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="5674" end="5683" title="vandalism" label="vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171344" start="6706" end="6721" title="William Hogarth" label="William Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="6840" end="6849" title="euphemism" label="euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200748" start="7334" end="7347" title="James Hackman" label="James Hackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q376924" start="7397" end="7406" title="courtesan" label="courtesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q512314" start="7411" end="7420" title="socialite" label="socialite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774525" start="7421" end="7431" title="Martha Ray" label="Martha Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q334953" start="7449" end="7483" title="John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich" label="John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219773" start="7544" end="7555" title="John Austin (highwayman)" label="John Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11242506" start="7559" end="7569" title="highwayman" label="highwayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q968975" start="7644" end="7651" title="Newgate" label="Newgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452193" start="7883" end="7897" title="traffic island" label="traffic island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049919" start="7988" end="7995" title="roundel" label="roundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129889" start="8408" end="8425" title="Notes and Queries" label="Notes and Queries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565796" start="8469" end="8492" title="Edward Francis Rimbault" label="Edward Francis Rimbault"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212531" start="8536" end="8559" title="Peter Cunningham (writer, born 1816)" label="Peter Cunningham&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q303848" start="8666" end="8682" title="Connaught Square" label="Connaught Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="9364" end="9383" title="Hanged, drawn and quartered" label="drawn and quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="9433" end="9440" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q968975" start="9570" end="9577" title="Newgate" label="Newgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495354" start="9734" end="9760" title="St Sepulchre-without-Newgate" label="St Sepulchre&amp;#x27;s church"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="9927" end="9936" title="Eucharist" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10260" end="10268" title="St Giles, London#History" label="St Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48967874" start="10387" end="10397" title="strong ale" label="strong ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q934881" start="10412" end="10422" title="Jack Ketch" label="Jack Ketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725773" start="10766" end="10775" title="brown ale" label="brown ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798451" start="10789" end="10818" title="Mazer (drinking vessel)" label="&amp;#x27;broad wooden bowl&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545857" start="11047" end="11063" title="George Walter Thornbury" label="Walter Thornbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q117706199" start="11180" end="11201" title="The Angel, St Giles High Street" label="&amp;quot;Angel Inn&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123381" start="11246" end="11256" title="City Press (London)" label="City Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="11767" end="11770" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q873750" start="11959" end="11972" title="pickpocketing" label="pickpocketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="12058" end="12076" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q464690" start="13042" end="13056" title="Thomas Derrick" label="Thomas Derrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484742" start="13267" end="13277" title="Edward Dun" label="Edward Dun"/>
<link wikidata="Q934881" start="13280" end="13290" title="Jack Ketch" label="Jack Ketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142192" start="13345" end="13356" title="Paskah Rose" label="Paskah Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253401" start="13430" end="13440" title="John Price (executioner)" label="John Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015201" start="13452" end="13467" title="William Marvell" label="William Marvell"/>
<link wikidata="Q464690" start="13777" end="13791" title="Thomas Derrick" label="Thomas Derrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389415" start="13820" end="13848" title="Carthusian Martyrs of London" label="Carthusian Martyrs of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001344" start="13851" end="13870" title="Last dying speeches" label="Last dying speeches"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585407" start="13873" end="13907" title="Ordinary of Newgate&amp;#x27;s Account" label="Ordinary of Newgate&amp;#x27;s Account"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30268" wikidata="Q2014543" url="?curid=30268" title="Tube map">
<text>The Tube map (sometimes called the London Underground map) is a schematic transport map of the lines, stations and services of the London Underground, known colloquially as &quot;the Tube&quot;, hence the map&#x27;s name. The first schematic Tube map was designed by Harry Beck in 1931. Since then, it has been expanded to include more of London&#x27;s public transport systems, including the Docklands Light Railway, London Overground, the Elizabeth line, Tramlink, the London Cable Car and Thameslink.

As a schematic diagram, it shows not the geographic locations but the relative positions of the stations, lines, the stations&#x27; connective relations and fare zones. The basic design concepts have been widely adopted for other such maps around the world and for maps of other sorts of transport networks and even conceptual schematics.

A regularly updated version of the map is available from the official Transport for London website. In 2006, the Tube map was voted one of Britain&#x27;s top 10 design icons which included Concorde, Mini, Supermarine Spitfire, K2 telephone box, World Wide Web and the AEC Routemaster bus. Since 2004, Art on the Underground has been commissioning artists to create covers for the pocket Tube map.

==History==
===Early maps===
As London&#x27;s early transport system was operated by a variety of independent companies, there were no complete maps of the network, just for the individual companies&#x27; routes. The maps were not typically schematic and were simply the line overlaid on a regular city map. There was no integration of the companies&#x27; services or any co-operation in advertising.

In 1907, &quot;The Evening News&quot; commissioned a pocket map, The Evening News London &quot;Tube Map&quot;. It was the first map to show all of the lines with equal weight being given to each line, and it was the first map to use a different colour for each line.

Another early combined map was published in 1908 by the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) in conjunction with four other underground railway companies that used the &quot;Underground&quot; brand as part of a common advertising factor.
The map showed eight routes – four operated by the UERL and one from each of the other four companies:
* UERL lines:
** Bakerloo Railway – brown
** Hampstead Railway – indigo
** Piccadilly Railway – yellow
** District Railway – green
* Other lines:
** Central London Railway – blue
** City and South London Railway – black
** Great Northern and City Railway – orange
** Metropolitan Railway – red

A geographical map presented restrictions since for sufficient clarity of detail in the crowded central area of the map required the extremities of the District and Metropolitan lines to be omitted and so a full network diagram was not provided. The problem of truncation remained for nearly half a century. Although all of the western branches of the District and Piccadilly lines were included for the first time in 1933 with Harry Beck&#x27;s first proper Tube map, the portion of the Metropolitan line beyond did not appear until 1938, and the eastern end of the District line did not appear until the mid-1950s.

The route map continued to be developed and was issued in various formats and artistic styles until 1920, when, for the first time, the geographic background detail was omitted in a map designed by MacDonald Gill. That freed the design to enable greater flexibility in the positioning of lines and stations. The routes became more stylised but the arrangement remained, largely, geographic in nature. The 1932 edition was the last geographic map to be published before Beck&#x27;s diagrammatic map was introduced.

===Beck&#x27;s maps===
The first diagrammatic map of London&#x27;s rapid transit network was designed by Harry Beck in 1931. He was a London Underground employee who realised that because the railway ran mostly underground, the physical locations of the stations were largely irrelevant to the traveller wanting to know how to get from one station to another; only the topology of the route mattered. That approach is similar to that of electrical circuit diagrams although they were not the inspiration for Beck&#x27;s map. His colleagues pointed out the similarities, however, and he once produced a joke map with the stations replaced by electrical circuit symbols and names, with terminology such as &quot;Bakerlite&quot; for the Bakerloo line.

To that end, Beck devised a simplified map with stations, straight-line segments connecting them, and the River Thames; and lines running only vertically, horizontally, or on 45° diagonals. To make the map clearer and to emphasise connections, Beck differentiated between ordinary stations, marked with tick marks, and interchange stations, marked with diamonds. London Underground was initially sceptical of his proposal since it was an uncommissioned spare-time project and was tentatively introduced to the public in a small pamphlet in 1933. However, it immediately became popular, and the Underground has used topological maps to illustrate the network ever since.

Despite the complexity of making the map, Beck was paid just ten guineas for the artwork and design of the card edition (five guineas for the poster). After its initial success, he continued to design the Tube map until 1960, a single (and unpopular) 1939 edition by Hans Scheger being the only exception. Meanwhile, as well as accommodating new lines and stations, Beck continually altered the design, such as changing the interchange symbol from a diamond to a circle and altering the line colours of the Central line from orange to red and of the Bakerloo line from red to brown. Beck&#x27;s final design, in 1960, bears a strong resemblance to the current map. Beck lived in Finchley, North London, and one of his maps is still preserved on the southbound platform at Finchley Central station, on the Northern line.

In 1997, Beck&#x27;s importance was posthumously recognised, and as of 2022, this statement is printed on every Tube map: &quot;This diagram is an evolution of the original design conceived in 1931 by Harry Beck&quot;.

===After Beck===
By 1960, Beck had fallen out with the Underground&#x27;s publicity officer, Harold Hutchison, who was not a designer himself but drafted his own version of the Tube map that year. It removed the smoothed corners of Beck&#x27;s design and created some highly cramped areas (most notably around Liverpool Street station), and the lines were generally less straight. However, Hutchison also introduced interchange symbols (circles for Underground-only, squares for connections with British Rail main line services) that were black and allowed multiple lines through them, as opposed to Beck, who used one circle for each line at an interchange, coloured according to the corresponding line.

In 1964, the design of the map was taken over by Paul Garbutt, who, like Beck, had produced a map in his spare time because of his dislike of the Hutchison design. Garbutt&#x27;s map restored curves and bends to the diagram but retained Hutchison&#x27;s black interchange circles, although squares were replaced with circles with a dot inside. Garbutt continued to produce Underground maps for at least another 20 years. Tube maps stopped bearing their designer&#x27;s name in 1986, when the elements of the map then had a very strong resemblance to today&#x27;s map.
While the standard Tube map avoided representing most mainline services, a new variant of the map issued in 1973, the &quot;London&#x27;s Railways&quot; map, was the first to depict Tube and above-ground mainline rail services in a diagrammatic style that closely matched Beck&#x27;s designs. That version was created by Tim Demuth of the London Transport publicity office and was jointly sponsored by British Rail and London Transport. Demuth&#x27;s map did not replace the standard Tube map but continued to be published as a supplementary resource, later known as the &quot;London Connections&quot; map.

=== Recent years ===
Some alterations have been made to the map over the years. More recent designs have incorporated changes to the network, such as the Docklands Light Railway and the extension to the Jubilee line. The map has also been expanded to include routes brought under Transport for London control such as TfL Rail and to note the Tube stops that connect with National Rail services, links to airports and River Services. In some cases, stations within short walking distance are now shown, often with the distance between them, such as &#x27;s distance from (an evolution of the pedestrian route between Bank and Monument stations, which was once prominently marked on the map). Further, step-free access notations are also incorporated in the current map. In addition, the fare zones have been added to help passengers judge the cost of a journey. 
One of the major changes to be made to the revision of the Tube map put out in September 2009 was the removal of the River Thames. The river had been omitted from official maps on several previous occasions (for example, according to David Leboff and Tim Demuth&#x27;s book, in 1907, 1908 and 1919), and from 1921 it was absent for several years on pocket maps designed by MacDonald Gill. The Thames-free 2009 version was the first time that the river did not appear on the Tube map since the Stingemore pocket map of 1926. The latest removal resulted in widespread international media attention, and general disapproval from most Londoners as well as from the then Mayor of London, Boris Johnson. Based on the reaction, the following edition of the diagram in December 2009 reinstated both the river and fare zones.

In more recent years, TfL has expanded its rail services, notably with the expansion of the London Overground network, which has taken over a number of National Rail lines and brought them into the TfL network, each of them being converted lines being added to the Tube map. Further additions have been made such as the London Cable Car and the boundaries of fare zones. Some commentators have suggested that Beck&#x27;s design should be replaced with a new design that can incorporate the new lines more comfortably.

=== Pocket map covers ===

Since 2004, Art on the Underground has commissioned various British and international artists to create a cover for the pocket map. These free maps are one of the largest public art commissions in the UK, with millions of copies printed. Over 35 different designs have been produced, from artists such as Rachel Whiteread, Yayoi Kusama, Tracey Emin and Daniel Buren.

==Technical aspects==
The designers of the map have tackled a variety of problems in showing information as clearly as possible and have sometimes adopted different solutions.

The font for the map, including station names, is Johnston, which uses perfect circles for the letter &#x27;O&#x27;. That is historic and the generic font for all TfL uses from station facades to bus destination blinds.

===Line colours===
The table below shows the changing use of colours since Beck&#x27;s first map. The current colours are taken from Transport for London&#x27;s colour standards guide, which defines the precise colours from the Pantone palette and also a colour naming scheme that is particular to TfL. Earlier maps were limited by the number of colours available that could be clearly distinguished in print. Improvements in colour printing technology have reduced that problem and the map has coped with the identification of new lines without great difficulty.
Pecked lines have at various times indicated construction, limited service, or sections closed for renovation.

===Station marks===
From the start, interchange stations were given a special mark to indicate their importance, but its shape has changed over the years. In addition, since 1960, marks were used to identify stations that offered connections with British Rail (now National Rail). The following shapes have been used:
* Circle (one for each line or station, where convenient) – standard default mark
* Circle (one for each station) – 1938 experimental map
* Diamond (one for each line) – early 1930s
* Square – interchange with British Railways, 1960–1964
* Circle with a dot inside – interchange with British Rail, 1964–1970

Since 1970 the map has used a reversed (red on white) British Rail &quot;double arrow&quot; beside the station name to indicate main line interchanges. Where the main line station has a different name from the Underground station that it connects with, since 1977 this has been shown in a box. The distance between the Tube station and the main line station is now shown.

Contemporary maps have marked stations offering step-free access with a blue circle containing a wheelchair symbol in white.

Stations with links to airports (Heathrow Terminals 2 &amp; 3, Terminal 4, and Terminal 5 for Heathrow Airport and the DLR station at City Airport) are shown with a black aeroplane symbol.

Since 2000, stations with a nearby interchange to river bus piers on the Thames have been marked with a small boat symbol to promote London River Services.

When Eurostar services used , the Eurostar logo was shown next to Waterloo station. In November 2007, the terminus was transferred to St Pancras International.

===Lines or services===
The Tube map aims to make the complicated network of services easy to understand, but it is not possible to have complete information about the services that operate on each line.

Limited-service routes have sometimes been identified with hatched lines, with some complications added to the map to show where peak-only services ran through to branches such as that to Chesham on the Metropolitan line. The number of routes with a limited service has declined in recent years, as patronage has recovered from its early-1980s low. As there are now fewer restrictions to show, most of the remaining ones are now indicated in the accompanying text, rather than by special line markings.

===Official versions===
The Tube map exists to help passengers navigate the London rapid transit network, and whether it should play a wider role in helping people navigate London itself has been questioned. The question has been raised as to whether mainline railways should be shown on the map, particularly those in Inner London. The Underground has largely resisted adding additional services to the standard Tube map and instead produces separate maps with different information, including:
* Standard Tube map: Shows all Underground, London Overground, DLR, Elizabeth line, Tramlink and Thameslink routes and stations, and fare zones.
* Large print Tube map : As above but with larger print.
* Walking distance map: Shows walking times between stations in the central London area.
* Toilet facilities map: Shows toilet facilities at stations.
* Bikes on trains map : Shows which routes allow bicycles to be taken on trains during peak times.
* Night Tube map: Shows Night Tube services.
* Step-free Tube Guide: Shows which stations have lifts, escalators or ramps to platforms.
* Tube Map Showing Tunnels: Shows sections of lines that are in tunnel. Designed to help users with claustrophobia or other anxiety conditions.
* London Connections map: Produced by the Association of Train Operating Companies (ATOC), this provided the same information as TfL&#x27;s Travelcard Zones map but extended further beyond fare zones 7–9. National Rail lines were emphasised by thicker lines and coloured according to their train operating company (TOC). This map was replaced by the Oyster Rail Services map.

Maps are produced in different sizes, the most common being Quad Royal (40 × 50 inches) poster size and Journey Planner pocket size. The maps showing all the National Rail routes provide useful additional information at the expense of considerably increased complexity, as they contain almost 700 stations.

===Non-London Underground lines on standard map===
Some non-Underground lines have appeared on the standard tube map:
* On the early maps that used a geographic background, mainline railways were shown as part of the background detail.
* Prior to its transfer to the London Underground in 1994, the Waterloo &amp; City line was operated by British Rail and its mainline predecessors but has appeared on most Tube maps since the mid-1930s.
* For a short period in the late 1930s to 1940, the section of the West London line linking Willesden Junction to the Metropolitan line&#x27;s Middle Circle route at Uxbridge Road was shown as a service operated by the Great Western Railway and the London, Midland and Scottish Railway. The service was removed when the line closed to passengers in 1940. This section of the line is today shown as part of the London Overground.
* The North London line was added to the map in 1977. Although run by British Rail and later by Silverlink, it was shown in British Rail/National Rail colours, but its appearance was intermittent and was omitted from some map editions over the years. In November 2007, the line was taken over by London Overground and changed to an orange double stripe. The semi-orbital route originally ran from Richmond to Broad Street and later Richmond to North Woolwich. The line runs now from Richmond to Stratford.
* The West London line, Watford DC line and Gospel Oak to Barking line (former British Rail/Silverlink lines) were all added to the standard map in 2007, when they were taken over by London Overground, and all are shown as an orange double stripe.
* The Northern City Line appeared on the original 1908 map as the Great Northern and City Railway. It later appeared as the Great Northern and City section of the Metropolitan Railway and then, from the late 1930s as part of the Northern line. The service was transferred to British Rail in 1975 and continued to appear until recently.
* Thameslink reopened in 1988 after it had been closed for many years. It offers some relief to the Northern line, as it connects King&#x27;s Cross St Pancras to London Bridge. Only the central sections between Kentish Town and London Bridge/Elephant &amp; Castle were shown. Its appearance on Tube maps had been intermittent since it had been omitted from some map editions over the years, before it was re-added to the official tube map in December 2020.
* The Docklands Light Railway, the automatic light rail system in the London Docklands area.
* The London Cable Car, linking Greenwich Peninsula and Royal Docks across the Thames, was added in December 2011.
* The first section of the Crossrail franchise, TfL Rail, was added in May 2015.
* Also in May 2015, the Chingford line, Enfield &amp; Cheshunt line, and Romford–Upminster line were added to the London Overground network on the tube map.
* Tramlink, shown in 2016 as London Trams, was included on the map from June 2016.
* The Elizabeth line was added to the map in May 2022.

When Transport for London expanded its London Overground service to include the East London line in 2010, the East London line, extended to Croydon, changed from a solid orange line to a double orange stripe. According to 2007 proposals, the addition of the South London line to London Overground was supposed to cause the southern loop to be added to future Tube maps in late 2010, and, as of May 2013, it is up and running.

===London Underground lines on geographically-accurate maps===
Like many other rapid transit maps, because the Tube map ignores geography, it may not accurately depict the relative orientation and distance between stations.

Transport for London formerly published several bus maps that depicted the approximate paths of tube routes relative to major streets and London bus routes. The maps also show locations of certain cultural attractions and geographic landmarks.

Internet mapping services such as Google Maps offer a &quot;Transit Layer&quot; showing actual routes superimposed on the standard street map. A map shows Underground, London Overground, Elizabeth line, DLR lines and National Rail stations within Zone 1–2.

==Spin-offs and imitations==

The &#x27;look&#x27; of the London Underground map (including 45° angles, evenly-spaced &#x27;stations&#x27; and some geographic distortion) has been emulated by many other underground railway systems around the world. While London Underground have been protective of their copyright they have also allowed their concepts to be shared with other transport operators (Amsterdam&#x27;s GVB even pays tribute on its map).

The success of the Tube map as a piece of information design has led to many imitations of its format. What is probably the earliest example is the Sydney Suburban and City Underground railway map of 1939. It follows Beck&#x27;s styling cues, and in size, design and layout, it is nearly a clone of the London map of the late 1930s, right down to the use of the Underground roundel.

In 2002, Transport for London launched a series of London Buses &quot;spider diagrams&quot; to display at bus stops around the city, conveying bus route information in a schematic style similar to Beck&#x27;s design, with straight lines and 45° angles depicting geographically distorted bus routes, coloured lines and numbers to differentiate services, and graphical markers to show bus stops. Tube and rail lines are not included, but interchanges are denoted with appropriate symbols by bus stop names, such as the Tube roundel. Unlike the traditional Tube map, the bus maps display services appropriate to specific transport hubs rather than a full network. Each map also contains a central rectangle of a simple geographically accurate street map to display the positions of bus stops; outside the rectangle, the only geographic feature to appear on the bus maps is the River Thames. The maps are also available for electronic download, with map collections ordered by London borough councils. The bus maps were designed for TfL by the cartographic design company T-Kartor group.

An isochrone map of the network was made available in 2007.

In 2009, British Waterways produced a map of London&#x27;s waterways in a Tube-style diagrammatic map, depicting the River Thames, the various canals and subterranean rivers in the city.

Attempts to create alternative versions to the official Tube map have continued. In June 2011, the British designer Mark Noad unveiled his vision for a more &#x27;geographically accurate&#x27; London Underground map. The map is an attempt to see if it is possible to create a geographically accurate representation of the Underground system and still retain some of the clarity of Beck&#x27;s original diagram. It uses similar principles, fixed-line angles (30° and 60°, instead of 45°) and shortens the extremities of the lines to make it more compact. In 2013, Dr Max Roberts, a psychology lecturer at the University of Essex with a particular interest in usability, information design and schematic mapping, issued his own version of the Tube map. His design, based on a series of concentric circles, emphasised the concept of the newly completed orbital loop surrounding Central London with radial lines. A map created to illustrate Tube-related articles on Wikipedia in 2014 was praised for its clarity and for including future developments such as Crossrail.

In July 2015, a map of the network displaying walking calorie burn information for each leg was published by Metro newspaper.

===Cultural references===
The design has become so widely known that it is now instantly recognisable as representing London. It has been featured on T-shirts, postcards and other memorabilia. In 2006, the design came second in a televised search for the most well-known British design icon. It is widely cited by academics and designers as a &#x27;design classic&#x27;, and those cultural associations make London Underground not usually permit the design to be used or altered for any other purpose. That has been officially sanctioned only on a few occasions:
* David Booth&#x27;s &quot;The Tate Gallery by Tube&quot; (1986) is one of a series of publicity posters for the Underground. His work showed the lines of the map squeezed out of tubes of paint (with the name of the gallery&#x27;s nearest station, Pimlico, on a paint-tube) and has since been used on the cover of the pocket map.
* In Tate Modern hangs &quot;The Great Bear&quot; by Simon Patterson, a subtle parody of the contemporary map design, first displayed in 1992 in which the station names on the Tube map have been replaced by those of famous figures.
* In 2003, to coincide with the publication of a book about tube maps from all over the world, the London Transport Museum released a &quot;World Metro Map&quot; poster that was strongly based on the London diagram and approved by TfL.
* &quot;Animals on the Underground&quot; is a collection of over 20 animal characters depicted using only lines, stations and interchange symbols on the London Underground map, created by illustrator Paul Middlewick in 1987. In 2003, the concept was used in a poster campaign by advertising agency McCann-Erickson to promote the London Zoo. In May 2010, a children&#x27;s storybook was released that used the characters, &quot;Lost Property&quot;. It is the story of an elephant called &quot;Elephant &amp; Castle&quot; who loses his memory and is helped by Angel the angel fish. The book was illustrated by Middlewick and written by Jon Sayers, and its official launch took place at the London Transport Museum.
* Albus Dumbledore, a central character in the Harry Potter series, has a scar just above his left knee that is in the shape of a Tube map.
* In 2006, &quot;The Guardian&quot; published a design based on the tube map, purporting to show the relationships between musicians and musical genres in the 20th century.
* On 11 January 2007, Lord Adonis unveiled a depiction of the map featuring the names of successful schools and students at GCSE level as part of the London Student Awards 2007.
* The Royal Shakespeare Company produced a map in 2007 linking Shakespearean characters according to their traits in a diagram that resembles the map for complexity.
* The game development studio Dinosaur Polo Club created the game &quot;Mini Metro&quot;, whose main mechanic is to efficiently connect stations in a strict Harry Beck style.

Stylistic aspects of the London diagram, such as the line colours and styles and the station ticks or interchange symbols, are also frequently used in advertising.

==See also==

* Paris Métro map
* New York City Subway map

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
*Kent, Alexander J. (2021). &quot;When Topology Trumped Topography: Celebrating 90 Years of Beck’s Underground Map&quot; &quot;The Cartographic Journal&quot; 58 (1) pp. 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1080/00087041.2021.1953765
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Tube maps from TfL
* Most recent official Tube map in PDF format.
* Mark Noad&#x27;s Underground diagram
* London Rail and Tube services map, successor to the comprehensive London Connections Map
* Mapping the Tube 1863-2023: Treasures of the Tube Map, video about exhibition in 2024</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2014543" start="4" end="12" title="Tube map" label="Tube map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014543" start="35" end="57" title="Tube map" label="London Underground map"/>
<link wikidata="Q4514647" start="64" end="73" title="schematic" label="schematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826720" start="74" end="87" title="transit map" label="transport map"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="131" end="149" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375468" start="267" end="277" title="Harry Beck" label="Harry Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q119100" start="339" end="377" title="transportation in London" label="London&amp;#x27;s public transport systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="393" end="416" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="418" end="435" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="441" end="455" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q786032" start="457" end="465" title="Tramlink" label="Tramlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337798" start="471" end="487" title="London Cable Car" label="London Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194990" start="492" end="502" title="Thameslink" label="Thameslink"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880" start="601" end="609" title="List of London Underground stations" label="stations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="611" end="616" title="London Underground#Lines" label="lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671098" start="662" end="672" title="London fare zones" label="fare zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="915" end="935" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="1034" end="1042" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="1044" end="1048" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="1050" end="1070" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q712868" start="1072" end="1088" title="Red telephone box" label="K2 telephone box"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="1090" end="1104" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q938552" start="1113" end="1128" title="AEC Routemaster" label="AEC Routemaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797273" start="1146" end="1168" title="Art on the Underground" label="Art on the Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973117" start="1210" end="1240" title="List of Art on the Underground Tube map covers" label="covers for the pocket Tube map"/>
<link wikidata="Q336371" start="1541" end="1549" title="city map" label="city map"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732654" start="1660" end="1676" title="The Evening News (London newspaper)" label="The Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502902" start="1969" end="2016" title="Underground Electric Railways Company of London" label="Underground Electric Railways Company of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849221" start="2289" end="2305" title="Baker Street and Waterloo Railway" label="Bakerloo Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q693285" start="2317" end="2334" title="Charing Cross, Euston and Hampstead Railway" label="Hampstead Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826027" start="2347" end="2365" title="Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway" label="Piccadilly Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283358" start="2378" end="2394" title="District Railway" label="District Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053892" start="2421" end="2443" title="Central London Railway" label="Central London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094056" start="2454" end="2483" title="City and South London Railway" label="City and South London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933886" start="2495" end="2526" title="Northern City Line" label="Great Northern and City Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q935025" start="2539" end="2559" title="Metropolitan Railway" label="Metropolitan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375468" start="2995" end="3005" title="Harry Beck" label="Harry Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891" start="3055" end="3072" title="Metropolitan line" label="Metropolitan line"/>
<link wikidata="Q211265" start="3134" end="3147" title="District line" label="District line"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997492" start="3383" end="3397" title="MacDonald Gill" label="MacDonald Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375468" start="3805" end="3815" title="Harry Beck" label="Harry Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="4069" end="4077" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045991" start="4148" end="4163" title="circuit diagram" label="circuit diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q146578" start="4410" end="4419" title="bakelite" label="Bakerlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892" start="4434" end="4447" title="Bakerloo line" label="Bakerloo line"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="4556" end="4568" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147171" start="4769" end="4788" title="interchange station" label="interchange station"/>
<link wikidata="Q573980" start="5065" end="5080" title="topological map" label="topological map"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="5186" end="5192" title="guinea (British coin)" label="guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q205355" start="5628" end="5640" title="Central line (London Underground)" label="Central line"/>
<link wikidata="Q150217" start="5800" end="5808" title="Finchley" label="Finchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q734547" start="5810" end="5822" title="North London" label="North London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416721" start="5893" end="5917" title="Finchley Central tube station" label="Finchley Central station"/>
<link wikidata="Q214793" start="5926" end="5939" title="Northern line" label="Northern line"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="6472" end="6496" title="Liverpool Street station" label="Liverpool Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="6658" end="6670" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="8198" end="8221" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6301879" start="8230" end="8239" title="Jubilee Line Extension" label="extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="8247" end="8259" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee line"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="8324" end="8344" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160926" start="8361" end="8369" title="TfL Rail" label="TfL Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="8415" end="8428" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q371343" start="8461" end="8475" title="London River Services" label="River Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q806704" start="8660" end="8686" title="Bank and Monument stations" label="Bank and Monument stations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8830" end="8840" title="London Underground ticketing#Fare zones" label="fare zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="9023" end="9035" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997492" start="9279" end="9293" title="MacDonald Gill" label="MacDonald Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="9572" end="9587" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="9589" end="9602" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="9816" end="9833" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797273" start="10282" end="10304" title="Art on the Underground" label="Art on the Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q454041" start="10575" end="10591" title="Rachel Whiteread" label="Rachel Whiteread"/>
<link wikidata="Q231121" start="10593" end="10605" title="Yayoi Kusama" label="Yayoi Kusama"/>
<link wikidata="Q241185" start="10607" end="10618" title="Tracey Emin" label="Tracey Emin"/>
<link wikidata="Q593621" start="10623" end="10635" title="Daniel Buren" label="Daniel Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q383685" start="10865" end="10873" title="Johnston (typeface)" label="Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050040" start="11264" end="11271" title="Pantone" label="Pantone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396295" start="11462" end="11477" title="colour printing" label="colour printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="11959" end="11971" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="11977" end="11990" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q763293" start="12871" end="12899" title="Heathrow Terminals 2 &amp;amp; 3 tube station" label="Heathrow Terminals 2 &amp;amp; 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592614" start="12901" end="12911" title="Heathrow Terminal 4 tube station" label="Terminal 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q800907" start="12917" end="12927" title="Heathrow Terminal 5 station" label="Terminal 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="12932" end="12948" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868954" start="12957" end="12984" title="London City Airport DLR station" label="DLR station at City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q371343" start="13161" end="13182" title="London River Services" label="London River Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q156013" start="13190" end="13198" title="Eurostar" label="Eurostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q795691" start="13251" end="13267" title="London Waterloo station" label="Waterloo station"/>
<link wikidata="Q720102" start="13319" end="13343" title="St Pancras railway station" label="St Pancras International"/>
<link wikidata="Q138914" start="13739" end="13746" title="Chesham tube station" label="Chesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q859427" start="14374" end="14386" title="Inner London" label="Inner London"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="14619" end="14633" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q489589" start="15325" end="15365" title="Association of Train Operating Companies" label="Association of Train Operating Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q868774" start="15472" end="15486" title="List of stations in London fare zones 7–9, G and W" label="fare zones 7–9"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102188" start="15573" end="15596" title="train operating company" label="train operating company"/>
<link wikidata="Q207699" start="16267" end="16291" title="Waterloo &amp;amp; City line" label="Waterloo &amp;amp; City line"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="16308" end="16320" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q787651" start="16474" end="16490" title="West London line" label="West London line"/>
<link wikidata="Q801623" start="16499" end="16517" title="Willesden Junction station" label="Willesden Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841264" start="16550" end="16563" title="Middle Circle" label="Middle Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904036" start="16573" end="16586" title="Uxbridge Road tube station" label="Uxbridge Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="16626" end="16647" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q629139" start="16656" end="16692" title="London, Midland and Scottish Railway" label="London, Midland and Scottish Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="16817" end="16834" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854601" start="16842" end="16859" title="North London line" label="North London line"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="16906" end="16918" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165932" start="16932" end="16942" title="Silverlink" label="Silverlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q801366" start="17233" end="17241" title="Richmond station (London)" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q800572" start="17245" end="17257" title="Broad Street railway station (England)" label="Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q801270" start="17280" end="17294" title="North Woolwich railway station" label="North Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q801480" start="17331" end="17340" title="Stratford station" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q787651" start="17348" end="17364" title="West London line" label="West London line"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882" start="17366" end="17381" title="Watford DC line" label="Watford DC line"/>
<link wikidata="Q179084" start="17386" end="17412" title="Gospel Oak to Barking line" label="Gospel Oak to Barking line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933886" start="17596" end="17614" title="Northern City Line" label="Northern City Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="17865" end="17877" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194990" start="17928" end="17938" title="Thameslink" label="Thameslink"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="18389" end="18412" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q124041" start="18453" end="18469" title="London Docklands" label="London Docklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337798" start="18482" end="18498" title="London Cable Car" label="London Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q926214" start="18508" end="18527" title="Greenwich Peninsula" label="Greenwich Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795188" start="18532" end="18543" title="Royal Docks" label="Royal Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="18618" end="18627" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160926" start="18639" end="18647" title="TfL Rail" label="TfL Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986446" start="18696" end="18710" title="Chingford branch line" label="Chingford line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508238" start="18712" end="18739" title="Lea Valley lines" label="Enfield &amp;amp; Cheshunt line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363198" start="18745" end="18767" title="Romford–Upminster line" label="Romford–Upminster line"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="18918" end="18932" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="19007" end="19024" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q831794" start="19048" end="19064" title="East London line" label="East London line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137886" start="19226" end="19243" title="South London line" label="South London line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="19758" end="19775" title="London buses" label="London bus routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013" start="19899" end="19910" title="Google Maps" label="Google Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="20520" end="20529" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808041" start="20537" end="20540" title="Gemeentelijk Vervoerbedrijf" label="GVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="20721" end="20727" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365741" start="20728" end="20765" title="Railways in Sydney" label="Suburban and City Underground railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049919" start="20947" end="20954" title="roundel" label="roundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="21008" end="21020" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577062" start="21027" end="21042" title="spider map" label="spider diagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085469" start="22045" end="22058" title="isochrone map" label="isochrone map"/>
<link wikidata="Q920339" start="22112" end="22129" title="British Waterways" label="British Waterways"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="22220" end="22232" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22246" end="22252" title=":Category:Canals in London" label="canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910421" start="22257" end="22276" title="Subterranean rivers of London" label="subterranean rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075104" start="22899" end="22918" title="University of Essex" label="University of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q216378" start="22949" end="22958" title="usability" label="usability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365082" start="22960" end="22978" title="information design" label="information design"/>
<link wikidata="Q619776" start="23075" end="23085" title="concentric" label="concentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100020" start="23141" end="23153" title="orbirail" label="orbital loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="23166" end="23180" title="Central London" label="Central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="23253" end="23262" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="23345" end="23354" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307433" start="23466" end="23481" title="Metro (British newspaper)" label="Metro newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="24074" end="24090" title="Tate Gallery" label="The Tate Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473963" start="24295" end="24302" title="Pimlico tube station" label="Pimlico"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="24382" end="24393" title="Tate Modern" label="Tate Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987361" start="24406" end="24420" title="The Great Bear (lithograph)" label="The Great Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519497" start="24430" end="24445" title="Simon Patterson (artist)" label="Simon Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541098" start="24708" end="24731" title="London Transport Museum" label="London Transport Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779040" start="25143" end="25158" title="McCann-Erickson" label="McCann-Erickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q270263" start="25174" end="25184" title="London Zoo" label="London Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541098" start="25533" end="25556" title="London Transport Museum" label="London Transport Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q712548" start="25560" end="25576" title="Albus Dumbledore" label="Albus Dumbledore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="25605" end="25624" title="Harry Potter series" label="Harry Potter series"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="25715" end="25727" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q337156" start="25893" end="25904" title="Andrew Adonis" label="Lord Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="26055" end="26080" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q26715541" start="26245" end="26263" title="Dinosaur Polo Club" label="Dinosaur Polo Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267881" start="26287" end="26297" title="Mini Metro (video game)" label="Mini Metro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26572" end="26587" title="Paris Métro#map" label="Paris Métro map"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982683" start="26590" end="26614" title="New York City Subway map" label="New York City Subway map"/>
<link wikidata="Q105128037" start="26655" end="26673" title="Alexander James Kent" label="Kent, Alexander J."/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="26961" end="26964" title="Portable Document Format" label="PDF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30269" wikidata="Q36600" url="?curid=30269" title="The Hague">
<text>The Hague ( ; or ) is the capital city of the South Holland province of the Netherlands. With a population of over half a million, it is the third-largest city in the Netherlands. Situated on the west coast facing the North Sea, The Hague is the country&#x27;s administrative centre and its seat of government, and while Amsterdam is the official capital of the Netherlands, The Hague has been described as the country&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; capital since the time of the Dutch Republic.

The Hague is the core municipality of the Greater The Hague urban area containing over 800,000 residents, and is also part of the Rotterdam–The Hague metropolitan area, which, with a population of approximately 2.6 million, is the largest metropolitan area of the Netherlands. The city is also part of the Randstad region, one of the largest conurbations in Europe.

The Hague is the seat of the Cabinet, the States General, the Supreme Court, and the Council of State of the Netherlands. King Willem-Alexander officially lives in the Huis ten Bosch and works at the Noordeinde Palace together with Queen Máxima. Most foreign embassies in the Netherlands are in the city. The Hague is also home to the headquarters of many Dutch companies, with Shell plc having major offices in the city as well. The Royal Library of the Netherlands is also located there. The Hague&#x27;s coastal area includes the popular seaside resort Scheveningen.

The Hague is known as the global hub of international law and arbitration. The International Court of Justice, the main judicial arm of the United Nations, is based in the city, as are the International Criminal Court, the Permanent Court of Arbitration, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Europol, and approximately 200 other international governmental organizations. The name &quot;The Hague&quot; is commonly used metonymically to refer to either of the international courts that reside in the city.

==Etymology==
The Hague was first mentioned as &quot;Die Haghe&quot; in 1242. In the 15th century, the name &quot;des Graven hage&quot; came into use, literally meaning &quot;the Count&#x27;s Grove&quot;, with connotations such as &quot;hedge&quot;, &quot;private enclosure&quot; or &quot;hunting grounds&quot;. The count in question was the Count of Holland (as is the case with nearby &#x27;s-Gravenzande). 

The spelling &quot;″s-Gravenhage&quot; was officially used for the city from the 17th century onward. Today, this name is used only in some official documents, such as birth and marriage certificates. The city itself uses &quot;Den Haag&quot; in all its communications. The post office specifies that letters should be addressed to &quot;″s-Gravenhage&quot;, but a letter to &quot;Den Haag&quot; will be delivered just as well. The railway stations use the name &quot;Den Haag&quot;, as do signposts.

== History ==
=== Ancient history===
The area was part of the Roman province of Germania Inferior and was close to the border of the empire, the Upper Germanic-Rhaetian Limes. In 1997, four Roman milestones were discovered at Wateringse Veld. The originals are in the &quot;Museon&quot; museum. The milestones indicate the distance from the nearest Roman city, Forum Hadriani (modern Voorburg), and can be dated to the reign of the emperors Antoninus Pius (138–161; the column is dated 151), Caracalla (211–217), Gordian III (238–244), and Decius (249–251).

=== Early history ===

Little is known about the origin of The Hague. There are no contemporary documents describing it, and later sources are often of dubious reliability. What is certain is that The Hague was founded by the last counts of the House of Holland. Floris IV already owned two residences in the area, but presumably purchased a third court situated by the present-day Hofvijver in 1229, previously owned by a woman called Meilendis. Presumably, Floris IV intended to rebuild the court into a large castle, but he died in a tournament in 1234, before anything was built. His son and successor William II lived in the court, and after he was elected King of the Romans in 1248, he promptly returned to The Hague, and had builders turn the court into a &quot;royal palace&quot; (&quot;regale palacium&quot;), which would later be called the Binnenhof (&quot;Inner Court&quot;). He died in 1256 before this palace was completed but parts of it were finished during the reign of his son Floris V, of which the Ridderzaal (&quot;Knights&#x27; Hall&quot;), still intact, is the most prominent. It is still used for political events, such as the annual speech from the throne by the Dutch monarch. From the 13th century onward, the counts of Holland used The Hague as their administrative center and residence when in Holland.

The village that originated around the Binnenhof was first mentioned as &quot;Die Haghe&quot; in a charter dating from 1242. It became the primary residence of the Counts of Holland in 1358 and thus became the seat of many government institutions. This status allowed the village to grow; by the Late Middle Ages, it had grown to the size of a city, although it did not receive city rights. In its early years, the village was in the &quot;&quot;, or rural district, of Monster, which was governed by the Lord of Monster. Seeking to exercise more direct control over the village, however, the Count split the village off and created a separate &quot;ambacht&quot; called Haagambacht, governed directly by the Counts of Holland. The territory of Haagambacht was considerably expanded during the reign of Floris V.

When the House of Burgundy inherited the counties of Holland and Zeeland in 1432, they appointed a stadtholder to rule in their stead with the States of Holland and West Friesland as an advisory council. Although their seat was in The Hague, the city became subordinate to more important centres of government such as Brussels and Mechelen, from where the sovereigns ruled over the increasingly centralised Burgundian Netherlands.

At the beginning of the Eighty Years&#x27; War, the absence of city walls proved disastrous, as it allowed Spanish troops to easily occupy the town. In 1575, the States of Holland, temporarily based in Delft, even considered demolishing the city but this proposal was abandoned, after mediation by William the Silent. In 1588, The Hague became the permanent seat of the States of Holland as well as the States General of the Dutch Republic. For the administration to maintain control over city matters, The Hague never received official city status, although it did have many of the privileges normally granted only to cities. In modern administrative law, &quot;city rights&quot; have no place anymore.

=== Modern history ===

In 1806, when the Kingdom of Holland was a puppet state of the First French Empire, the settlement was granted city rights by Louis Bonaparte. After the Napoleonic Wars, modern-day Belgium and the Netherlands were combined in the United Kingdom of the Netherlands to form a buffer against France. As a compromise, Brussels and Amsterdam alternated as capital every two years, with the government remaining in The Hague. After the separation of Belgium in 1830, Amsterdam remained the capital of the Netherlands, while the government was situated in The Hague. When the government started to play a more prominent role in Dutch society after 1850, The Hague quickly expanded. Many streets were specifically built for the large number of civil servants employed in the country&#x27;s government and for the Dutchmen who were retiring from the administration of the Netherlands East Indies. The growing city amalgamated the rural municipality of Loosduinen partly in 1903 and completely in 1923.

The city sustained heavy damage during World War II. Many Jews were killed during the German occupation. Additionally, the Atlantic Wall was built through the city, causing a large quarter to be torn down by the Nazi occupants. On 3 March 1945, the Royal Air Force mistakenly bombed the Bezuidenhout quarter. The target was an installation of V-2 rockets in the nearby Haagse Bos park, but because of navigational errors, the bombs fell on a heavily populated and historic part of the city. The bombardment wreaked widespread destruction in the area and caused 511 fatalities.

Because of uncertainty about what to do after the destructions of the bombing, nobody attempted to plan a reconstruction of Bezuidenhout. In 1962, David Jokinen saw an opportunity to put an end to the situation where two main stations each served only part of the rail traffic. The Jokinen Plan included the intent to demolish the Staatsspoor Station entirely, with Hollands Spoor becoming the central station. Jokinen&#x27;s plan sparked fierce discussions. The plan was not implemented, in part because it was only presented when decision-making had finally reached an advanced stage. In the site of the Staatsspoor station now stands the Den Haag Centraal railway station.
After the war, The Hague became at one time the largest building site in Europe. The city expanded massively to the southwest, and the destroyed areas were quickly rebuilt. The population peaked at 600,000 inhabitants around 1965. In the 1970s and 1980s, mostly white middle-class families moved to neighbouring towns such as Voorburg, Leidschendam, Rijswijk and (most of all) Zoetermeer. This led to the traditional pattern of an impoverished inner city and more prosperous suburbs. Attempts to include parts of these municipalities in the city of The Hague were highly controversial. In the 1990s, with the consent of the Dutch Parliament, The Hague annexed large areas from neighboring and non-adjacent towns to build new residential areas, which are still being developed today.

== Geography ==

The Hague is the largest Dutch city on the North Sea in the Netherlands and forms the centre of the Greater The Hague urban area. Westland and Wateringen lie to the south, Rijswijk, Delft and the Rotterdam conurbation (known as &quot;Rijnmond&quot;) to the southeast, Pijnacker-Nootdorp and Zoetermeer to the east, Leidschendam-Voorburg, Voorschoten and the Leiden conurbation to the northeast and Wassenaar to the north.

The conurbations around The Hague and Rotterdam are close enough to be seen as a single conurbation in some contexts. For example, they share the Rotterdam The Hague Airport and a light rail system called RandstadRail. This led to the creation of the Rotterdam-The Hague metropolitan area. This large conurbation centred on The Hague and Rotterdam is, in turn, part of the Randstad—specifically a band of municipalities called the South Wing (Zuidvleugel). The Randstad, which also includes among others Amsterdam and Utrecht, has a population of 6,659,300. The Hague lies at the southwestern corner of the second-largest conurbation in the European Union.

The Hague is divided into eight official districts which are, in turn, divided into neighbourhoods. Some of the most prosperous and some of the poorest neighbourhoods of the Netherlands can be found in The Hague. The wealthier areas such as Statenkwartier, Belgisch Park, Marlot, Benoordenhout and Archipelbuurt are generally in the northwestern part of the city, closer to the sea, whereas the southeastern neighbourhoods such as Transvaal, Moerwijk, and the Schilderswijk are significantly poorer, except the Vinex-locations of Leidschenveen-Ypenburg and Wateringse Veld. This division is reflected in the local accent: The more affluent citizens are usually called &quot;Hagenaars&quot; and speak so-called &quot;bekakt Haags&quot; (&quot;posh&quot;), this contrasts with the &quot;Hagenezen&quot;, who speak &quot;plat Haags&quot; (&quot;vulgar&quot;); see Demographics below.

The districts are:
* Centrum (110,000 inhabitants) forms the heart of The Hague. The Binnenhof, the Noordeinde Palace, the Mauritshuis museum, the Nieuwe Kerk, the Grote Kerk, the Old City Hall and the City Hall are located here. Architecture varies from medieval up to the 20th century.
* Escamp (131,000 inhabitants) is the most populous district of The Hague, built largely after the World War II as part of The Hague&#x27;s large expansion to the southeast. One railway station can be found here: Den Haag Moerwijk. The district is divided into six neighbourhoods.
* Haagse Hout (51,000 inhabitants) is a wealthy district in the northeast of the city and the location of the Haagse Bos, a large forest. The King of the Netherlands lives in the royal palace Huis ten Bosch, in this forest. The district also includes the financial centre of the city, the Beatrixkwartier.
* Laak (46,000 inhabitants) is the smallest district of the city, southeast of its centre, for the most part, built in the 20th and 21st centuries. The area used to be part of Rijswijk until the municipality of The Hague bought the land in 1844. The Hollands Spoor railway station and The Hague University are located here, as well as the site of the planned mixed-use development Nieuw Binckhorst.
* Leidschenveen-Ypenburg (48,000 inhabitants) is an early 21st-century Vinex-location southeast of the city, geographically connected to the main body of the city only by a narrow corridor. The district is divided into Leidschenveen and Ypenburg, which were part of Leidschendam, Nootdorp, and Rijswijk before the areas were annexed by The Hague in 2002. This area was the site of Ypenburg Airport which was a military airport during World War II.
* Loosduinen (53,000 inhabitants) is the westernmost district of The Hague. It was a village unto itself until 1923 when it was annexed by The Hague. The less popular of the city&#x27;s two seaside resorts, Kijkduin is located here. The district is divided into four neighbourhoods.
* Scheveningen (61,000 inhabitants) is the wealthy northernmost district of The Hague. A modern beach resort, Scheveningen is a popular tourist destination. It has a long sandy beach and its own esplanade, pier, and lighthouse, but also a Pathé cinema, a musical theatre, a casino, and a special Museum for Scheveningen. The district also includes a fishing harbour. Notable buildings include the Kurhaus and farther inland, the Peace Palace.
* Segbroek (63,000 inhabitants) is a district located between Scheveningen and Loosduinen. The population decreased until around 2005, but since then has begun to grow again, driven by students and east European immigrants. It became a district of The Hague in 1988 and is divided into five neighbourhoods.

=== Climate ===
The Hague experiences a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;) similar to almost all of the Netherlands. Because of its location on the coast, it experiences milder winters and cooler summers than more inland locations. However, because of its location, it can also be extremely windy in the winter and humid in the summer. It also gets more sunshine.

=== Cityscape ===

City life concentrates around the Hofvijver and the Binnenhof, where the States General of the Netherlands is located. Because of its history, the historical inner city of The Hague differs in various aspects from the nearby smaller cities of Leiden and Delft. It does not have a cramped inner city, bordered by canals and walls. Instead, it has some small streets in the town centre that may be dated from the late Middle Ages and several spacious streets boasting large and luxurious 18th-century residences built for diplomats and affluent Dutch families. It has a large church dating from the 15th century, a City Hall (built as such) from the 16th century, several large 17th-century palaces, a 17th-century Protestant church built in what was then a modern style, and many important 18th-century buildings.

The city is becoming more student-friendly with the introduction of a new campus in 2012 of Leiden University as well as Leiden University College The Hague, which was established in 2010. The Royal Conservatory of The Hague and the Royal Academy of Art are also located there, as well as The Hague University, a vocational university and a branch of The Open University of the Netherlands. The city has many civil servants and diplomats. In fact, the number and variety of foreign residents (especially the expatriates) make the city quite culturally diverse, with many foreign pubs, shops and cultural events.

The Hague is the largest Dutch city on the North Sea and includes two distinct beach resorts. The main beach resort Scheveningen, in the northwestern part of the city, is a popular destination for tourists as well as for inhabitants. With 10 million visitors a year, it is the most popular beach town in the Benelux area. Kijkduin, in the southwest, is The Hague&#x27;s other beach resort. It is significantly smaller and attracts mainly local residents.

The former Dutch colony of the East Indies, now Indonesia, has left its mark on The Hague. Since the 19th century, high-level civil servants from the Dutch East Indies often spent long-term leave and vacations in The Hague. Many streets are named after places in the Netherlands East Indies (as well as other former Dutch colonies such as Suriname) and there is a sizable &quot;Indo&quot; (i.e. mixed Dutch-Indonesian) community. Since the loss of these Dutch possessions in December 1949, &quot;Indo people&quot; also known as &quot;Indische people&quot; often refer to The Hague as &quot;the Widow of the Indies&quot;.

The older parts of the town have many characteristically wide and long streets. Houses are generally low-rise (often not more than three floors). A large part of the southwestern city was planned by the progressive Dutch architect H.P. Berlage about 1910. This &#x27;Plan Berlage&#x27; decided the spacious and homely streets for several decades. In World War II, a large amount of the western portion of The Hague was destroyed by the Germans. Afterward, modernist architect W.M. Dudok planned its renewal, putting apartment blocks for the middle class in open park-like settings.

The layout of the city is more spacious than other Dutch cities and because of the incorporation of large and old nobility estates, the creation of various parks, and the use of green zones around natural streams, it is a much more green city than any other in the Netherlands. That is, excepting some medieval close-knitted streets in the centre. The Hague has a canal system around the old city center, which is mainly used for boat tours around the city. Most of the canals were drained in the late 19th century and some were filled between 1910 and 1970 but many have been restored recently.

The tallest buildings of The Hague are both 146-meter-tall ministries of Justice and Security and the Interior and Kingdom Relations of the Netherlands, designed by Hans Kollhoff. Other significant skyscrapers include the Hoftoren, Het Strijkijzer and De Kroon.

==Demographics==

As of 1 January 2021, The Hague counts 549,163 inhabitants, making it the third-largest city in the Netherlands. Between 1800 and 1960, the city saw considerable growth from 40,000 in 1800 to 200,000 in 1900 and eventually 600,000 in 1960. The growth following 1900 was partially caused by the housing act of 1901, which stimulated the expansion of cities such as The Hague. In the period between 1960 and 1980, The Hague saw a shrinkage from 600,000 to 440,000 inhabitants, caused mostly by spatial policy, demographic processes, and lack of space. After several annexations and housing constructions, The Hague has since grown again, celebrating its 500,000th inhabitant in 2011. The municipality expects the growth to continue to just over 600,000 inhabitants by 2030.

The demonym of The Hague officially is &quot;Hagenaar&quot;, but the term &quot;Hagenees&quot; is informally used for someone who was born and raised in The Hague. The usage of these demonyms appears to be class-bound, with Hagenaar being the upper-class term and Hagenees being that of the lower-class.

===Origin make-up===
43% of the population of The Hague has two parents that were born in the Netherlands, while 15.6% has at least one parent who was born abroad in a western country, and 34.4% has at least one parent that was born in a non-western country.

=== Inhabitants by birthplace ===
===Religion===
Just under half of The Hague&#x27;s population identifies with a religious group. The two most popular religions are Christianity (29%) and Islam (14.1%). Religiosity is higher among people with a recent migration background from Indonesia, Turkey, Morocco and Surinam. Islam is the most common religion among people with a Turkish or Moroccan migration background. Among people of Surinamese heritage there is more religious diversity, with Hinduism being the most common. Of The Hague&#x27;s native Dutch population, most religious people adhere to Christianity. Just under 40% of the population of The Hague regularly attends a house of worship.

== Politics ==
=== Municipal government ===
Following the 2022 municipal election, the municipal council of The Hague currently contains fourteen groups, most notably Heart for The Hague (HvDH; 11 seats), Democrats 66 (D66; 8 seats), the People&#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD; 6 seats) and GroenLinks (5 seats).
! colspan=2|Group
! Seats
|bgcolor=&quot;#008f51&quot;|
|align=left|Heart for The Hague||
| 
|align=left|Democrats 66||
| 
|align=left|People&#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy||
| 
|align=left|GroenLinks||
| 
|align=left|Party for the Animals||
| 
|align=left|Labour Party||
| 
|align=left|Christian Democratic Appeal||
| 
|align=left|DENK||
|bgcolor=&quot;#fcda00&quot;|
|align=left|The Hague City Party||
| 
|align=left|Socialist Party||
| 
|align=left|Party for Freedom||
| 
|align=left|Christian Union – Reformed Political Party||
| 
|align=left|Forum for Democracy||
| 
|align=left|Van den Goorbergh group||
|align=left colspan=3|Source: Municipal Council

Since 2019, the municipal executive has comprised VVD, D66, GroenLinks, CDA and PvdA. The chairman of the college is Mayor Jan van Zanen (VVD), and the city has eight aldermen: Anne Mulder, Kavita Parbhudayal (both VVD), Robert van Asten, Saskia Bruines (both D66), Liesbeth van Tongeren, Bert van Alphen (both GroenLinks), Hilbert Bredemeijer (CDA) and Martijn Balster (PvdA). Each alderman is responsible for a number of particular policy areas and one of the city&#x27;s eight districts.

On 1 October 2019, the National Department of Criminal Investigation (&quot;Rijksrecherche&quot;) performed a raid on the homes and offices of then-aldermen Richard de Mos and Rachid Guernaoui, as part of an investigation of alleged administrative corruption, bribery and violation of confidentiality. The offices of several municipal civil servants and the homes of three entrepreneurs were also searched for the investigation. The aldermen were suspected of receiving bribes in exchange for granting permits. In April 2023, De Mos and Guernaoui were acquitted of all charges.

=== International politics ===

The Hague is home to many different international judicial bodies, such as the International Court of Justice (ICJ), the International Criminal Court (ICC), and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT). It houses Scheveningen Prison, the ICC&#x27;s detention center for those suspected of war crimes and other violations of international law. The Hague is the fourth major centre for the United Nations, after New York, Geneva and Vienna.

The foundation of The Hague as an &quot;international city of peace and justice&quot; started at the end of the 19th century, when the first global peace conference took place in The Hague on Tobias Asser&#x27;s initiative, with a second one a few years later. A direct result of these meetings was the establishment of the world&#x27;s first organisation for the settlement of international disputes, the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA). Shortly thereafter, the Scottish-American millionaire Andrew Carnegie made the necessary funds available to build the Peace Palace to house the PCA. After the establishment of the League of Nations, The Hague became the seat of the Permanent Court of International Justice, which was replaced (after World War II) by the UN&#x27;s International Court of Justice. The establishments of the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal (1981), the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (1993), and the International Criminal Court (2002) in the city further consolidated its role as a centre for international legal arbitration. Most recently, on 1 March 2009, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, a UN tribunal to investigate and prosecute suspects in the 2005 assassination of Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, opened in the former headquarters of the Dutch General Intelligence and Security Service in Leidschendam, a town within the greater area of The Hague.

Other major international and European organisations based in The Hague include:

* Europol, European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation
* Eurojust, European Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation
* Europeana, European Union digital platform for cultural heritage.
* The Hague Academy of International Law, centre for high-level education in both public and private international law
* Hague Conference on Private International Law (HCCH), the oldest and preeminent private international law harmonisation institution
* International Commission on Missing Persons (ICMP)
* European Patent Office
* Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization
* NATO Communications and Information Agency, (NCI Agency)
* Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
* The European Library

Many academic institutions in the fields of international relations, international law, and international development are based in The Hague. The Hague Academic Coalition (HAC) is a consortium of those institutions.

Its member institutions are:
* Carnegie Foundation
* Hague Institute for the Internationalisation of Law (HiiL)
* International Institute of Social Studies (ISS) of Erasmus University Rotterdam
* Leiden University College The Hague
* Netherlands Institute of International Relations &#x27;Clingendael&#x27;
* The Hague Academy of International Law
* The Hague University of Applied Sciences
* T.M.C. Asser Instituut

In 1948, the Congress of Europe was held with 750 delegates from 26 European governments, providing them with the opportunity to discuss ideas about the development of European integration, which eventually culminated in the creation of the modern-day European Union.

== Economy ==
The Hague has a service-oriented economy. A professional life in the city is dominated by a large number of civil servants and diplomats working in the city; , 26% of the jobs in The Hague are those offered by the Dutch government or the international institutions. Large employers in this sector include the ministries of Defence, Justice, Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment, Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations and Transport, Public Works and Water Management.

Several large international businesses have their headquarters in The Hague. Significant companies headquartered in The Hague include Aegon, APM Terminals, Damco, NIBC Bank, Chicago Bridge &amp; Iron Company and PostNL. The city is also host to the regional headquarters of Siemens, T-Mobile, AT&amp;T, Huawei, Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, McDermott International, Saudi Aramco, TotalEnergies and Worley. There has never been any large-scale industrial activity in The Hague, with the possible exception of the fishing activities of the harbour in Scheveningen. Many of the city&#x27;s logistical and minor-industrial services are in the Binckhorst in the Laak district, which contains many sizeable warehouses.

The city is the second biggest Dutch tourist destination after Amsterdam. In 2012, The Hague welcomed 1.2 million tourists, half of whom came from abroad. Tourists spend an average of €2 billion a year in the local economy. 1 in 10 residents make their living in the tourism sector.

== Culture ==

The Hague originated around the 13th century Binnenhof, and this is still considered the cultural centre of the city. Nightlife centres around the three main squares in the city centre. The &quot;Plein&quot; (meaning &quot;Plaza&quot; or &quot;Town square&quot;) is taken by several large sidewalk cafés where often politicians may be spotted. The &quot;Grote Markt&quot; (literally &quot;Big Market&quot;) is completely strewn with chairs and tables, summer or winter. The Buitenhof (literally &quot;Outer Courtyard&quot;, located just outside the Binnenhof) contains a six-screen Pathé cinema and a handful of bars and restaurants in the immediate vicinity. Adjacent to the Buitenhof is De Passage, the country&#x27;s first covered shopping mall. Dating from the late 19th century, it contains many expensive and speciality shops. One of the country&#x27;s largest music venues, Paard van Troje, can be found in the centre of The Hague. Another popular music venue in The Hague is Muziekcafé de Paap.
The Spuiplein is a modern fourth square in the city centre, opposite the Nieuwe Kerk. Besides the City Hall, this was also the location of the Anton Philipszaal, home to the Residentie Orchestra, and the Lucent Danstheater, home to the internationally celebrated modern dance company Nederlands Dans Theater. These buildings, designed by Rem Koolhaas in 1988, have been demolished to make space for a new theatre, Amare, which would house both institutes as well as the Royal Conservatory. Despite efforts of the municipality, public support for the proposed theatre remains low. At the heart of the city centre across the palace gardens is the home of Summerschool Den Haag, an international school for dance with guest teachers such as Valentina Scaglia, Igone de Jongh, and Maia Makhateli. The Koninklijke Schouwburg, home to Het Nationale Theater, can also be found in the city centre – on the Korte Voorhout. New European Ensemble is a collective for contemporary music consisting on international musicians. The ensemble has its main base in the city.

Scheveningen forms a second cultural centre of The Hague, having its own Pathé cinema as well as the musical theatre Circustheater although, especially in the summer, most night life concentrates around the sea-front boulevard with its bars, restaurants and gambling halls. Several other attractions can be found in Scheveningen, such as the miniature park Madurodam, the Beelden aan Zee museum, and a Sea Life Centre.

The Hague is the residence of the Dutch monarch, and several (former) royal palaces can be found in the city. King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands and Queen Máxima of the Netherlands live in Huis ten Bosch in the Haagse Bos and work in the Noordeinde Palace in the city centre. Moreover, there are two former royal palaces in The Hague. The Kneuterdijk Palace, built in 1716, is now home to the Council of State of the Netherlands, and the Lange Voorhout Palace is now occupied by the Escher Museum, dedicated to Dutch graphical artist M. C. Escher.
The Hague has its share of museums, most notably the Mauritshuis, located next to the Binnenhof, which exhibits many paintings by Dutch masters, such as Johannes Vermeer, Rembrandt van Rijn and Paulus Potter. Other museums include the science museum Museon, the modern art museum Kunstmuseum, the historic museum Haags Historisch Museum, the national postal museum Museum voor Communicatie, the Museum Bredius, the Louis Couperus Museum, the museum Beelden aan Zee in Scheveningen, Panorama Mesdag, and the Gevangenpoort, a former prison housed in a 15th-century gatehouse.

Since early times, possibly as far back as the 16th century, the stork has been the symbol of The Hague.

Several films have been (partially) shot in The Hague, including &quot;Mindhunters&quot; (2004), &quot;Hum Tum&quot; (2004), &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Twelve&quot; (2004), &quot;Black Book&quot; (2006) and &quot;Sonny Boy&quot; (2011). Parts of the second season of the Netflix series &quot;Sense8&quot; were filmed in The Hague. Notable actors and filmmakers from The Hague include Martin Koolhoven, Georgina Verbaan, Carel Struycken, Frederique van der Wal, Marwan Kenzari, Anna Drijver, Renée Soutendijk and Paul Verhoeven, who grew up in the city from an early age.

=== Sports ===

The city&#x27;s major football club is ADO Den Haag, which competes in the Eerste Divisie, the second-highest tier of football in the Netherlands. ADO Den Haag has won the KNVB Cup twice and won the League twice in the era before professional football. They play their matches at the 15,000 seat ADO Den Haag Stadium. Amateur team HVV are also based in the city. Before the professional era, the club won 10 national titles and one KNVB Cup, and they remain fourth in the all-time list of national title winners. HBS Craeyenhout is another amateur club in the city, which won three national titles before the establishment of the Eredivisie. On 13 May 2021, football club ADO Den Haag was relegated from the Eredivisie as they lost their final game of the season against Willem II. In effect, ADO Den Haag no longer holds a position in the top division of professional Dutch football.

Since 2020, the basketball club The Hague Royals plays in the professional Dutch Basketball League (DBL). Home games are played at the Sportcampus Zuiderpark.

The local rugby union team is Haagsche Rugby Club (a.k.a. HRC). The ice hockey team is HYS The Hague and the local American Football team is Den Haag Raiders &#x27;99.

Darts is another sport played in The Hague; its popularity was increased by Raymond van Barneveld winning several World Championships.

The half-marathon race CPC Loop Den Haag is held annually in The Hague. In 1994, The Hague held the FEI World Equestrian Games.

=== Annual events ===
Koningsdag, or &quot;King&#x27;s Day&quot;, is held annually on 27 April. It is traditionally celebrated with fairs and flea markets throughout the city. On this day, the colour orange predominates at a funfair (which sells orange cotton candy) and scores of informal street markets. The day is a &quot;vrijmarkt&quot; (literally &quot;free market&quot;), which means no licence is needed for street vending; children traditionally use this day to sell old unwanted toys. Since King&#x27;s Day is a national holiday and thus a day off, many people also go out and party on the evening before King&#x27;s Day. This evening is called King&#x27;s Night, or &quot;Koningnacht&quot; in The Hague. The &quot;t&quot; is left out because &quot;nacht&quot; is pronounced as &quot;nach&quot; in The Hague. Outdoor concerts throughout the city centre of The Hague draw tens of thousands of visitors every year.

Every third Tuesday in September is , or &quot;Prince&#x27;s Day&quot;, the opening of the Dutch parliament. On a festive day, children in The Hague are free from school so they may watch the procession of the Golden Coach. The King is driven in the coach from Noordeinde Palace to the Ridderzaal in the Binnenhof. Here, the King reads the Speech from the Throne, written jointly by the Ministers and Secretaries of State. This &quot;troonrede&quot; outlines the government&#x27;s plans for the coming year. As the procession returns to the Noordeinde Palace, the road is lined with members of the Dutch Royal Armed Forces, and in the afternoon, the Royal Family appears on the palace balcony to address an adoring and often frenzied public (&quot;balkonscène&quot;).

Vlaggetjesdag (nl), literally &quot;Flag Day&quot;, is the annual celebration of the arrival of the year&#x27;s first herring (Hollandse Nieuwe) in Scheveningen. Hundreds of thousands of people gather in Scheveningen for the festivities, and the fishing boats are decorated specially for the occasion. In addition to the omnipresent herring, this day also features several activities unrelated to fish. In Scheveningen, the first barrel of herring is traditionally sold at an auction on the Thursday preceding the official Vlaggetjesdag, and the proceeds go to charity. Vlaggetjesdag was made official in 1947, although the festive tradition around the beginning of herring season is much older: in the 18th century, the villages along the coast, including Scheveningen, were forbidden to gut the caught herring. Since herring was most appropriate for smoking around September, most fishing boats caught flatfish or round-bodied fish during part of the summer, to avoid a surplus of fresh herring. In July or August, The Hague hosts a series of weekly firework displays by the sea front in Scheveningen, as part of an international fireworks festival and competition.

Tong Tong Fair, formerly &quot;Pasar Malam Besar&quot;, is the largest festival in the world for Indo culture. Established in 1959, it is one of the oldest festivals and the fourth-largest grand fair in the Netherlands. It is also the annual event with the highest number of paying visitors to The Hague, having consistently attracted more than 100,000 visitors since 1993. The Milan Festival is Europe&#x27;s biggest Hindustani open-air event, annually held in Zuiderpark. The Hague also hosts several annual music festivals; on the last Sunday in June, the city hosts Parkpop, the largest free open-air pop concert in Europe. Crossing Border Festival, State-X and The Hague Jazz festival are among other music festivals in The Hague.

Crossing Border Festival is an annual festival in November, focusing on music and literature. The first edition took place in 1993.

Movies That Matter is an international film and debate festival about peace and justice that takes place every year at the end of March; nine days filled with screenings of fiction films and documentaries, daily talk-shows, music performances, and exhibitions. The first such event took place in 2006.

Moreover, The Hague International Model United Nations, annually held in January, is a five-day conference held at the World Forum, gathering over 4,000 students from over 200 secondary schools across the globe. It is the oldest and largest high school United Nations simulation in the world. &quot;Den Haag Sculptuur&quot; is an open-air exhibition of sculptures; the tenth such event, in 2007, celebrated the 400 years of the relationship between the Netherlands and Australia. Since 2009, the city of The Hague also annually presents an LGBTQ+ emancipation award, called the John Blankenstein Award. The exact date of the ceremony varies each year.

== Notable people ==
== Transport ==
===Air===
The Hague shares an airport with Rotterdam. It can be reached from Central Station by RandstadRail Line E, with an Airport Shuttle to and from Meijersplein Station. However, with several direct trains per hour from the railway stations Hollands Spoor and Centraal, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol is more frequently used by people travelling to and from The Hague by air.

===Rail===
There are two main railway stations in The Hague: Hollands Spoor and Centraal Station, apart from each other. Because the two stations were built and run by two different railway companies in the 19th century, services have traditionally been split between the two: east–west lines terminate at Centraal Station, whereas north–south lines run through Hollands Spoor. However, Centraal Station now offers direct services to most major Dutch cities, such as Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and Utrecht.

Other destinations include Leiden, Haarlem, Zwolle, Groningen, Leeuwarden, Amersfoort, Enschede, Breda, Tilburg and Eindhoven. International travellers for Antwerp and Brussels have to change trains at Rotterdam.

===Urban transport===
Public transport in The Hague consists of a tramway network and a sizeable number of bus routes, operated by HTM Personenvervoer. Plans for a subway were shelved in the early 1970s. However, in 2004 a tunnel was built under the city centre with two underground tram stations (Spui and Grote Markt); it is shared by RandstadRail lines 3 and 4 and tram routes 2 and 6.

RandstadRail connects The Hague to nearby cities, Zoetermeer, Rotterdam, and Leidschendam-Voorburg. It consists of four light rail lines (3, 4, and 19 to Zoetermeer, Rijswijk, Delft, and Leidschendam-Voorburg) and one subway line (E to Rotterdam).

===Road===
Major motorways connecting to The Hague include the A12, running to Utrecht and the German border. The A12 runs directly into the heart of the city in a cutting. Built in the 1970s, this section of the motorway (the &quot;Utrechtsebaan&quot;) is now heavily overburdened. Plans were made in the late 1990s for a second artery road into the city (the &quot;Rotterdamsebaan&quot;, previously called the &quot;Trekvliettracé&quot;) which was completed in 2021. Other connecting motorways are the A4, which connects the city with Amsterdam, and the A13, which runs to Rotterdam and connects to motorways towards the Belgian border. There is also the A44 that connects the city to Leiden, Haarlem and Amsterdam. In the 1970s, plans of building another motorway to Leiden existed. This &quot;Leidsebaan&quot; was supposed to start in the city centre and then follow the railway line from The Hague to Amsterdam. Some works had been executed but had been removed by the 1980s.

== See also ==

* List of people from The Hague

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
== External links ==

*City of The Hague.
* The largest painting in the Netherlands .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="0" end="9" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q694" start="46" end="59" title="South Holland" label="South Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="76" end="87" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="218" end="227" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901835" start="291" end="309" title="seat of government" label="seat of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="321" end="330" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q834162" start="347" end="373" title="capital of the Netherlands" label="capital of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="477" end="491" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092198" start="536" end="564" title="COROP" label="Greater The Hague urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174024" start="624" end="661" title="Rotterdam–The Hague metropolitan area" label="Rotterdam–The Hague metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q806" start="800" end="808" title="Randstad" label="Randstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="836" end="847" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479200" start="890" end="897" title="Cabinet of the Netherlands" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371388" start="903" end="917" title="States General of the Netherlands" label="States General"/>
<link wikidata="Q133765" start="923" end="936" title="Supreme Court of the Netherlands" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155243" start="946" end="962" title="Council of State (Netherlands)" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q154952" start="983" end="1004" title="Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands" label="King Willem-Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072284" start="1029" end="1043" title="Huis ten Bosch" label="Huis ten Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889721" start="1061" end="1078" title="Noordeinde Palace" label="Noordeinde Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q460960" start="1093" end="1105" title="Queen Máxima of the Netherlands" label="Queen Máxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032127" start="1212" end="1232" title="List of companies of the Netherlands" label="many Dutch companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="1239" end="1248" title="Shell plc" label="Shell plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526131" start="1295" end="1327" title="Royal Library of the Netherlands" label="Royal Library of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="1417" end="1429" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="1511" end="1541" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1572" end="1586" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="1621" end="1649" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="1655" end="1685" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="Permanent Court of Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="1691" end="1743" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q207203" start="1745" end="1752" title="Europol" label="Europol"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="1782" end="1821" title="international governmental organization" label="international governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="1872" end="1885" title="Metonymy" label="metonymically"/>
<link wikidata="Q548187" start="2301" end="2317" title="Count of Holland" label="Count of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q425786" start="2346" end="2365" title="&amp;#x27;s-Gravenzande" label="&amp;#x27;s-Gravenzande"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="2934" end="2948" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="2952" end="2969" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q17374397" start="3017" end="3046" title="Upper Germanic-Rhaetian Limes" label="Upper Germanic-Rhaetian Limes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954331" start="3146" end="3152" title="Museon" label="Museon"/>
<link wikidata="Q809821" start="3256" end="3264" title="Voorburg" label="Voorburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="3313" end="3327" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="3364" end="3373" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812" start="3385" end="3396" title="Gordian III" label="Gordian III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830" start="3412" end="3418" title="Decius" label="Decius"/>
<link wikidata="Q389703" start="3676" end="3692" title="House of Holland (nobility)" label="House of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q77256" start="3694" end="3703" title="Floris IV" label="Floris IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290298" start="3813" end="3822" title="Hofvijver" label="Hofvijver"/>
<link wikidata="Q736161" start="3968" end="3978" title="Tournament (medieval)" label="tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q77255" start="4037" end="4047" title="William II of Holland" label="William II"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="4093" end="4111" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q863935" start="4283" end="4292" title="Binnenhof" label="Binnenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q77245" start="4427" end="4435" title="Floris V, Count of Holland" label="Floris V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894519" start="4450" end="4460" title="Ridderzaal" label="Ridderzaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="4590" end="4612" title="speech from the throne" label="speech from the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="4626" end="4633" title="monarch" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626147" start="5135" end="5154" title="City rights in the Low Countries" label="receive city rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q969531" start="5235" end="5242" title="Monster, South Holland" label="Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642657" start="5588" end="5605" title="House of Burgundy" label="House of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="5678" end="5689" title="stadtholder" label="stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q769041" start="5722" end="5758" title="States of Holland and West Friesland" label="States of Holland and West Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="5897" end="5905" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="5910" end="5918" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157109" start="5986" end="6008" title="Burgundian Netherlands" label="Burgundian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="6035" end="6057" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6118" end="6125" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="6213" end="6218" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="6309" end="6327" title="William the Silent" label="William the Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371388" start="6414" end="6428" title="States General of the Netherlands" label="States General"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="6436" end="6450" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212278" start="6758" end="6776" title="Kingdom of Holland" label="Kingdom of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="6803" end="6822" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626147" start="6843" end="6862" title="City rights in the Low Countries" label="granted city rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729" start="6866" end="6881" title="Louis Bonaparte" label="Louis Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="6893" end="6908" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q15864" start="6970" end="7003" title="United Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="United Kingdom of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="7054" end="7062" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="7067" end="7076" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="7603" end="7626" title="Netherlands East Indies" label="Netherlands East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q994533" start="7683" end="7693" title="Loosduinen" label="Loosduinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7773" end="7785" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="7857" end="7870" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="7946" end="7950" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="7983" end="7998" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912379" start="8010" end="8016" title="Bombing of the Bezuidenhout" label="bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974010" start="8021" end="8033" title="Bezuidenhout" label="Bezuidenhout"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="8077" end="8087" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663130" start="8103" end="8113" title="Haagse Bos" label="Haagse Bos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456914" start="8594" end="8606" title="Jokinen Plan" label="Jokinen Plan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8643" end="8662" title="Den Haag Centraal railway station#History" label="Staatsspoor Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q800657" start="8678" end="8692" title="Hollands Spoor" label="Hollands Spoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q200704" start="8953" end="8986" title="Den Haag Centraal railway station" label="Den Haag Centraal railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="9061" end="9067" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q809821" start="9314" end="9322" title="Voorburg" label="Voorburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616233" start="9324" end="9336" title="Leidschendam" label="Leidschendam"/>
<link wikidata="Q506745" start="9338" end="9346" title="Rijswijk" label="Rijswijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q26432" start="9365" end="9375" title="Zoetermeer" label="Zoetermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="9832" end="9841" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9889" end="9917" title="COROP#South Holland province" label="Greater The Hague urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q26556" start="9919" end="9927" title="Westland (municipality), Netherlands" label="Westland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615972" start="9932" end="9942" title="Wateringen" label="Wateringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506745" start="9961" end="9969" title="Rijswijk" label="Rijswijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="9971" end="9976" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="9985" end="9994" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q765619" start="10023" end="10031" title="Rijnmond" label="Rijnmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q281768" start="10057" end="10075" title="Pijnacker-Nootdorp" label="Pijnacker-Nootdorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q26432" start="10080" end="10090" title="Zoetermeer" label="Zoetermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q112675" start="10104" end="10125" title="Leidschendam-Voorburg" label="Leidschendam-Voorburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q848324" start="10127" end="10138" title="Voorschoten" label="Voorschoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="10147" end="10153" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q505601" start="10187" end="10196" title="Wassenaar" label="Wassenaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q656807" start="10358" end="10385" title="Rotterdam The Hague Airport" label="Rotterdam The Hague Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q571257" start="10417" end="10429" title="RandstadRail" label="RandstadRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174024" start="10463" end="10500" title="Rotterdam-The Hague metropolitan area" label="Rotterdam-The Hague metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q806" start="10585" end="10593" title="Randstad" label="Randstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037568" start="10655" end="10666" title="Zuidvleugel" label="Zuidvleugel"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="10716" end="10725" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="10730" end="10737" title="Utrecht (city)" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10819" end="10867" title="List of metropolitan areas in Europe#Polycentric metropolitan areas in the European Union" label="second-largest conurbation in the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11111" end="11125" title="Statenkwartier" label="Statenkwartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414380" start="11127" end="11140" title="Belgisch Park" label="Belgisch Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q845320" start="11142" end="11148" title="Marlot" label="Marlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890135" start="11150" end="11163" title="Benoordenhout" label="Benoordenhout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11168" end="11181" title="The Hague Center#Archipelbuurt" label="Archipelbuurt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11301" end="11310" title="The Hague Center#Transvaal" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11312" end="11320" title="Moerwijk" label="Moerwijk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11330" end="11343" title="Schilderswijk" label="Schilderswijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q751666" start="11381" end="11395" title="Vinex-location" label="Vinex-location"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614939" start="11400" end="11422" title="Leidschenveen-Ypenburg" label="Leidschenveen-Ypenburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11427" end="11442" title="Wateringse Veld" label="Wateringse Veld"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11731" end="11743" title="#Demographics" label="Demographics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614034" start="11773" end="11780" title="The Hague Center" label="Centrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q863935" start="11837" end="11846" title="Binnenhof" label="Binnenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889721" start="11852" end="11869" title="Noordeinde Palace" label="Noordeinde Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q221092" start="11875" end="11886" title="Mauritshuis" label="Mauritshuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815556" start="11899" end="11910" title="Nieuwe Kerk (The Hague)" label="Nieuwe Kerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q456130" start="11916" end="11926" title="Grote of Sint-Jacobskerk (The Hague)" label="Grote Kerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658949" start="11932" end="11945" title="Old City Hall (The Hague)" label="Old City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7474100" start="11954" end="11963" title="The Hague City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615318" start="12042" end="12048" title="Escamp" label="Escamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12139" end="12151" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093239" start="12253" end="12270" title="Den Haag Moerwijk railway station" label="Den Haag Moerwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614057" start="12323" end="12334" title="Haagse Hout" label="Haagse Hout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663130" start="12431" end="12441" title="Haagse Bos" label="Haagse Bos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072284" start="12513" end="12527" title="Huis ten Bosch" label="Huis ten Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993657" start="12610" end="12625" title="Beatrixkwartier" label="Beatrixkwartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614099" start="12629" end="12633" title="Laak, The Hague" label="Laak"/>
<link wikidata="Q506745" start="12803" end="12811" title="Rijswijk" label="Rijswijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q800657" start="12877" end="12891" title="Den Haag Hollands Spoor railway station" label="Hollands Spoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2693497" start="12912" end="12932" title="The Hague University" label="The Hague University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704722" start="13008" end="13024" title="Nieuw Binckhorst" label="Nieuw Binckhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614939" start="13028" end="13050" title="Leidschenveen-Ypenburg" label="Leidschenveen-Ypenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q751666" start="13097" end="13111" title="Vinex-location" label="Vinex-location"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936298" start="13189" end="13214" title="Flagpole annexation" label="only by a narrow corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616233" start="13292" end="13304" title="Leidschendam" label="Leidschendam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615172" start="13306" end="13314" title="Nootdorp" label="Nootdorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q506745" start="13320" end="13328" title="Rijswijk" label="Rijswijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100416" start="13407" end="13423" title="Ypenburg Airport" label="Ypenburg Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q994533" start="13476" end="13486" title="Loosduinen" label="Loosduinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000107" start="13681" end="13689" title="Kijkduin" label="Kijkduin"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="13759" end="13771" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="13996" end="14001" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535365" start="14154" end="14161" title="Kurhaus of Scheveningen" label="Kurhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q834448" start="14186" end="14198" title="Peace Palace" label="Peace Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q846497" start="14202" end="14210" title="Segbroek" label="Segbroek"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="14558" end="14573" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="14575" end="14582" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen:"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290298" start="14943" end="14952" title="Hofvijver" label="Hofvijver"/>
<link wikidata="Q863935" start="14961" end="14970" title="Binnenhof" label="Binnenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="15152" end="15158" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="15163" end="15168" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="15325" end="15336" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658949" start="15522" end="15531" title="Old City Hall (The Hague)" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="15622" end="15632" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="15815" end="15832" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16741546" start="15844" end="15879" title="Leiden University College The Hague" label="Leiden University College The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q18245" start="15916" end="15947" title="Royal Conservatory of The Hague" label="Royal Conservatory of The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q511291" start="15956" end="15976" title="Royal Academy of Art (The Hague)" label="Royal Academy of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2693497" start="16012" end="16032" title="The Hague University" label="The Hague University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028020" start="16036" end="16057" title="vocational university" label="vocational university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407397" start="16078" end="16112" title="Open University of the Netherlands" label="Open University of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="16132" end="16145" title="civil servant" label="civil servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="16151" end="16159" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="16231" end="16241" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="16302" end="16305" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="16379" end="16388" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021711" start="16415" end="16427" title="beach resort" label="beach resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="16452" end="16464" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="16644" end="16651" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000107" start="16658" end="16666" title="Kijkduin" label="Kijkduin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="16823" end="16834" title="Dutch East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="16840" end="16849" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116909" start="17170" end="17174" title="Indo people" label="Indo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116909" start="17288" end="17299" title="Indo people" label="Indo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q318816" start="17645" end="17657" title="Hendrik Petrus Berlage" label="H.P. Berlage"/>
<link wikidata="Q560756" start="17890" end="17900" title="Willem Marinus Dudok" label="W.M. Dudok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041343" start="18667" end="18687" title="Ministry of Justice and Security" label="Justice and Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491421" start="18696" end="18726" title="Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations" label="Interior and Kingdom Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q68116" start="18759" end="18772" title="Hans Kollhoff" label="Hans Kollhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623326" start="18816" end="18824" title="Hoftoren" label="Hoftoren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198522" start="18826" end="18841" title="Het Strijkijzer" label="Het Strijkijzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044014" start="18846" end="18854" title="De Kroon (The Hague)" label="De Kroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="20379" end="20391" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20970" end="20993" title="2022 Dutch municipal elections#The Hague" label="2022 municipal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014622" start="20999" end="21016" title="Municipal council (Netherlands)" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809261" start="21079" end="21098" title="Richard de Mos" label="Heart for The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q747910" start="21117" end="21129" title="Democrats 66" label="Democrats 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q239333" start="21150" end="21195" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q667680" start="21215" end="21225" title="GroenLinks" label="GroenLinks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21305" end="21324" title="Richard de Mos#Local politics in The Hague" label="Heart for The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q747910" start="21342" end="21354" title="Democrats 66" label="Democrats 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q239333" start="21372" end="21417" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q667680" start="21435" end="21445" title="GroenLinks" label="GroenLinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q663535" start="21463" end="21484" title="Party for the Animals" label="Party for the Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q275441" start="21502" end="21514" title="Labour Party (Netherlands)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q273749" start="21532" end="21559" title="Christian Democratic Appeal" label="Christian Democratic Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28147283" start="21577" end="21581" title="DENK (political party)" label="DENK"/>
<link wikidata="Q849580" start="21664" end="21679" title="Socialist Party (Netherlands)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q332739" start="21697" end="21714" title="Party for Freedom" label="Party for Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435746" start="21732" end="21774" title="Christian Union – Reformed Political Party" label="Christian Union – Reformed Political Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163962" start="21792" end="21811" title="Forum for Democracy" label="Forum for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109105" start="21920" end="21939" title="municipal executive" label="municipal executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216667" start="22027" end="22040" title="Jan van Zanen" label="Jan van Zanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q976442" start="22081" end="22092" title="Anne Mulder" label="Anne Mulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578260" start="22170" end="22191" title="Liesbeth van Tongeren" label="Liesbeth van Tongeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q97368680" start="22506" end="22510" title="police raid" label="raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809261" start="22553" end="22567" title="Richard de Mos" label="Richard de Mos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="23086" end="23116" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="23128" end="23156" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667632" start="23172" end="23227" title="International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals" label="International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768015" start="23247" end="23266" title="Hague Penitentiary Institution" label="Scheveningen Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="23422" end="23436" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738625" start="23508" end="23559" title="Hague Justice Portal" label="&amp;quot;international city of peace and justice&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="23605" end="23638" title="Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907" label="the first global peace conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q216872" start="23666" end="23678" title="Tobias Asser" label="Tobias Asser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="23880" end="23910" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="Permanent Court of Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="23972" end="23987" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q834448" start="24036" end="24048" title="Peace Palace" label="Peace Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="24098" end="24115" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q838946" start="24150" end="24190" title="Permanent Court of International Justice" label="Permanent Court of International Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24218" end="24230" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="24249" end="24279" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q501576" start="24307" end="24341" title="Iran–United States Claims Tribunal" label="Iran–United States Claims Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="24354" end="24411" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="24428" end="24456" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109786" start="24591" end="24619" title="Special Tribunal for Lebanon" label="Special Tribunal for Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866011" start="24787" end="24828" title="General Intelligence and Security Service" label="General Intelligence and Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616233" start="24832" end="24844" title="Leidschendam" label="Leidschendam"/>
<link wikidata="Q207203" start="24976" end="24983" title="Europol" label="Europol"/>
<link wikidata="Q940784" start="25041" end="25049" title="Eurojust" label="Eurojust"/>
<link wikidata="Q234110" start="25108" end="25117" title="Europeana" label="Europeana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141717" start="25176" end="25214" title="The Hague Academy of International Law" label="The Hague Academy of International Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130823" start="25295" end="25340" title="Hague Conference on Private International Law" label="Hague Conference on Private International Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q676812" start="25429" end="25472" title="International Commission on Missing Persons" label="International Commission on Missing Persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132151" start="25482" end="25504" title="European Patent Office" label="European Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q215613" start="25507" end="25553" title="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization" label="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953132" start="25556" end="25598" title="NATO Communications and Information Agency" label="NATO Communications and Information Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="25615" end="25667" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q240304" start="25677" end="25697" title="European Library" label="The European Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041759" start="25845" end="25869" title="Hague Academic Coalition" label="Hague Academic Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050362" start="25947" end="25966" title="Carnegie Foundation (Netherlands)" label="Carnegie Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25969" end="26020" title="Hague Institute for the Internationalisation of Law" label="Hague Institute for the Internationalisation of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811679" start="26030" end="26071" title="International Institute of Social Studies" label="International Institute of Social Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q633529" start="26081" end="26109" title="Erasmus University Rotterdam" label="Erasmus University Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16741546" start="26112" end="26147" title="Leiden University College The Hague" label="Leiden University College The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357617" start="26150" end="26222" title="Netherlands Institute of International Relations Clingendael" label="Netherlands Institute of International Relations &amp;#x27;Clingendael&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141717" start="26225" end="26263" title="The Hague Academy of International Law" label="The Hague Academy of International Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2693497" start="26266" end="26306" title="The Hague University of Applied Sciences" label="The Hague University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668028" start="26309" end="26331" title="T.M.C. Asser Instituut" label="T.M.C. Asser Instituut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566327" start="26346" end="26364" title="Congress of Europe" label="Congress of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="26501" end="26521" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="26585" end="26599" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="26632" end="26648" title="Service economy" label="service-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119820" start="26939" end="26946" title="Ministry of Defence (Netherlands)" label="Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041343" start="26948" end="26955" title="Ministry of Justice and Security" label="Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q954289" start="26957" end="27002" title="Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment (Netherlands)" label="Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037495" start="27004" end="27019" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Netherlands)" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491421" start="27025" end="27071" title="Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations" label="Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433166" start="27076" end="27120" title="Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water Management (Netherlands)" label="Transport, Public Works and Water Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q291171" start="27257" end="27262" title="Aegon N.V." label="Aegon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653345" start="27264" end="27277" title="APM Terminals" label="APM Terminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18224" start="27279" end="27284" title="Damco" label="Damco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299444" start="27286" end="27295" title="NIBC Bank" label="NIBC Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095516" start="27297" end="27330" title="Chicago Bridge &amp;amp; Iron Company" label="Chicago Bridge &amp;amp; Iron Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921598" start="27335" end="27341" title="PostNL" label="PostNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="27397" end="27404" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q327634" start="27406" end="27414" title="T-Mobile International AG" label="T-Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="27416" end="27424" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="27426" end="27432" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634762" start="27434" end="27462" title="Kuwait Petroleum Corporation" label="Kuwait Petroleum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915079" start="27464" end="27487" title="McDermott International" label="McDermott International"/>
<link wikidata="Q679322" start="27489" end="27501" title="Saudi Aramco" label="Saudi Aramco"/>
<link wikidata="Q154037" start="27503" end="27516" title="TotalEnergies" label="TotalEnergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570041" start="27521" end="27527" title="Worley (company)" label="Worley"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="27672" end="27684" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="27868" end="27873" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="27900" end="27909" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q863935" start="28181" end="28190" title="Binnenhof" label="Binnenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491557" start="28332" end="28337" title="Plein, The Hague" label="Plein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681536" start="28610" end="28619" title="Buitenhof (The Hague)" label="Buitenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q863935" start="28685" end="28694" title="Binnenhof" label="Binnenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="28718" end="28723" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28825" end="28835" title="De Passage" label="De Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704368" start="29017" end="29032" title="Paard van Troje" label="Paard van Troje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815556" start="29212" end="29223" title="Nieuwe Kerk (The Hague)" label="Nieuwe Kerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7474100" start="29237" end="29246" title="The Hague City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29282" end="29299" title="Anton Philipszaal" label="Anton Philipszaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q612590" start="29313" end="29333" title="Residentie Orchestra" label="Residentie Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29343" end="29361" title="Lucent Danstheater" label="Lucent Danstheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810961" start="29423" end="29446" title="Nederlands Dans Theater" label="Nederlands Dans Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q232364" start="29477" end="29489" title="Rem Koolhaas" label="Rem Koolhaas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29553" end="29558" title="Amare (theatre)" label="Amare"/>
<link wikidata="Q18245" start="29609" end="29627" title="Royal Conservatory of The Hague" label="Royal Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29792" end="29813" title="Summerschool Den Haag" label="Summerschool Den Haag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29877" end="29894" title="Valentina Scaglia" label="Valentina Scaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493374" start="29896" end="29910" title="Igone de Jongh" label="Igone de Jongh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16752928" start="29916" end="29930" title="Maia Makhateli" label="Maia Makhateli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040000" start="29936" end="29958" title="Koninklijke Schouwburg" label="Koninklijke Schouwburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151559" start="29968" end="29989" title="Het Nationale Theater" label="Het Nationale Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007519" start="30053" end="30074" title="New European Ensemble" label="New European Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011523" start="30095" end="30113" title="contemporary music" label="contemporary music"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="30198" end="30210" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="30271" end="30276" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851347" start="30315" end="30328" title="Circustheater" label="Circustheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q747322" start="30555" end="30564" title="Madurodam" label="Madurodam"/>
<link wikidata="Q477275" start="30570" end="30585" title="Beelden aan Zee" label="Beelden aan Zee"/>
<link wikidata="Q664334" start="30600" end="30615" title="Sea Life Centres" label="Sea Life Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q154952" start="30733" end="30768" title="Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands" label="Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q460960" start="30779" end="30804" title="Máxima of the Netherlands" label="Máxima of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072284" start="30813" end="30827" title="Huis ten Bosch" label="Huis ten Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663130" start="30835" end="30845" title="Haagse Bos" label="Haagse Bos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889721" start="30862" end="30879" title="Noordeinde Palace" label="Noordeinde Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020929" start="30963" end="30981" title="Kneuterdijk Palace" label="Kneuterdijk Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155243" start="31017" end="31052" title="Council of State of the Netherlands" label="Council of State of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871689" start="31107" end="31120" title="Escher Museum" label="Escher Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470" start="31158" end="31170" title="M. C. Escher" label="M. C. Escher"/>
<link wikidata="Q221092" start="31225" end="31236" title="Mauritshuis" label="Mauritshuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="31289" end="31297" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="31325" end="31341" title="Johannes Vermeer" label="Johannes Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="31343" end="31361" title="Rembrandt van Rijn" label="Rembrandt van Rijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q355406" start="31366" end="31379" title="Paulus Potter" label="Paulus Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954331" start="31422" end="31428" title="Museon" label="Museon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499958" start="31452" end="31463" title="Gemeentemuseum Den Haag" label="Kunstmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722011" start="31485" end="31508" title="Haags Historisch Museum" label="Haags Historisch Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31537" end="31561" title="Museum voor Communicatie" label="Museum voor Communicatie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216754" start="31567" end="31581" title="Museum Bredius" label="Museum Bredius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653692" start="31587" end="31608" title="Louis Couperus Museum" label="Louis Couperus Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q477275" start="31621" end="31636" title="Beelden aan Zee" label="Beelden aan Zee"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="31640" end="31652" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738414" start="31654" end="31669" title="Panorama Mesdag" label="Panorama Mesdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520230" start="31679" end="31692" title="Gevangenpoort" label="Gevangenpoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q28507" start="31812" end="31817" title="stork" label="stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358271" start="31924" end="31935" title="Mindhunters" label="Mindhunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033304" start="31956" end="31963" title="Hum Tum (film)" label="Hum Tum"/>
<link wikidata="Q504053" start="31984" end="32003" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Twelve" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q163549" start="32024" end="32034" title="Zwartboek" label="Black Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q267281" start="32058" end="32067" title="Sonny Boy (2011 film)" label="Sonny Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080059" start="32137" end="32143" title="Sense8" label="Sense8"/>
<link wikidata="Q461191" start="32229" end="32245" title="Martin Koolhoven" label="Martin Koolhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q335569" start="32247" end="32263" title="Georgina Verbaan" label="Georgina Verbaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q496503" start="32265" end="32280" title="Carel Struycken" label="Carel Struycken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326640" start="32282" end="32304" title="Frederique van der Wal" label="Frederique van der Wal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13817318" start="32306" end="32320" title="Marwan Kenzari" label="Marwan Kenzari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049122" start="32322" end="32334" title="Anna Drijver" label="Anna Drijver"/>
<link wikidata="Q468236" start="32336" end="32352" title="Renée Soutendijk" label="Renée Soutendijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q129079" start="32357" end="32371" title="Paul Verhoeven" label="Paul Verhoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="32455" end="32463" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q24904" start="32472" end="32484" title="ADO Den Haag" label="ADO Den Haag"/>
<link wikidata="Q610823" start="32508" end="32522" title="Eerste Divisie" label="Eerste Divisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q216858" start="32605" end="32613" title="KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q720978" start="32729" end="32749" title="ADO Den Haag Stadium" label="ADO Den Haag Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q138655" start="32764" end="32767" title="HVV Den Haag" label="HVV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569520" start="32914" end="32944" title="List of Dutch football champions" label="list of national title winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713355" start="32946" end="32961" title="HBS Craeyenhout (football club)" label="HBS Craeyenhout"/>
<link wikidata="Q332664" start="33204" end="33213" title="Willem II (football club)" label="Willem II"/>
<link wikidata="Q100323854" start="33351" end="33367" title="The Hague Royals" label="The Hague Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400146" start="33394" end="33417" title="Dutch Basketball League" label="Dutch Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="33489" end="33500" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566189" start="33566" end="33579" title="HYS The Hague" label="HYS The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="33594" end="33611" title="American Football" label="American Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q131471" start="33648" end="33653" title="Darts" label="Darts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968959" start="33724" end="33745" title="Raymond van Barneveld" label="Raymond van Barneveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q975979" start="33807" end="33824" title="CPC Loop Den Haag" label="CPC Loop Den Haag"/>
<link wikidata="Q477657" start="33884" end="33887" title="International Federation for Equestrian Sports" label="FEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q333016" start="33935" end="33945" title="Koningsdag" label="Koningsdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q288514" start="34138" end="34145" title="funfair" label="funfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q49737" start="34166" end="34178" title="cotton candy" label="cotton candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663418" start="35046" end="35058" title="Golden Coach (Netherlands)" label="Golden Coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889721" start="35097" end="35114" title="Noordeinde Palace" label="Noordeinde Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894519" start="35122" end="35132" title="Ridderzaal" label="Ridderzaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q863935" start="35140" end="35149" title="Binnenhof" label="Binnenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="35176" end="35198" title="Speech from the Throne" label="Speech from the Throne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35605" end="35618" title="Vlaggetjesdag" label="Vlaggetjesdag"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35620" end="35622" title=":nl:Vlaggetjesdag" label="nl"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="35753" end="35765" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="36695" end="36707" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478389" start="36774" end="36788" title="Tong Tong Fair" label="Tong Tong Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116909" start="36871" end="36875" title="Indo people" label="Indo"/>
<link wikidata="Q228630" start="37236" end="37246" title="Zuiderpark" label="Zuiderpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851942" start="37344" end="37351" title="Parkpop" label="Parkpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735885" start="37402" end="37426" title="Crossing Border Festival" label="Crossing Border Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012201" start="37428" end="37435" title="State-X" label="State-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q676303" start="37440" end="37454" title="The Hague Jazz" label="The Hague Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735885" start="37511" end="37535" title="Crossing Border Festival" label="Crossing Border Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q464980" start="37892" end="37903" title="Exhibition" label="exhibitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234768" start="38066" end="38077" title="World Forum (The Hague)" label="World Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="38200" end="38214" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053072" start="38375" end="38425" title="Australia–Netherlands relations" label="relationship between the Netherlands and Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="38487" end="38506" title="LGBT social movements" label="LGBTQ+ emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851417" start="38525" end="38548" title="John Blankenstein Award" label="John Blankenstein Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q656807" start="38667" end="38674" title="Rotterdam The Hague Airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="38680" end="38689" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q571257" start="38733" end="38745" title="RandstadRail" label="RandstadRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321538" start="38790" end="38810" title="Meijersplein RandstadRail station" label="Meijersplein Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q9694" start="38912" end="38938" title="Amsterdam Airport Schiphol" label="Amsterdam Airport Schiphol"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="39045" end="39060" title="railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q800657" start="39076" end="39090" title="Den Haag HS railway station" label="Hollands Spoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q200704" start="39095" end="39111" title="Den Haag Centraal railway station" label="Centraal Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="39482" end="39491" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="39493" end="39502" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="39508" end="39515" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="39545" end="39551" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9920" start="39553" end="39560" title="Haarlem" label="Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q793" start="39562" end="39568" title="Zwolle" label="Zwolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q749" start="39570" end="39579" title="Groningen" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25390" start="39581" end="39591" title="Leeuwarden" label="Leeuwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q992" start="39593" end="39603" title="Amersfoort" label="Amersfoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q10002" start="39605" end="39613" title="Enschede" label="Enschede"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="39615" end="39620" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q26430" start="39622" end="39629" title="Tilburg" label="Tilburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="39634" end="39643" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="39674" end="39681" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="39686" end="39694" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429361" start="39796" end="39813" title="Trams in The Hague" label="a tramway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q132168" start="39863" end="39882" title="HTM Personenvervoer" label="HTM Personenvervoer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709985" start="40030" end="40034" title="Spui RandstadRail station" label="Spui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173663" start="40039" end="40050" title="Grote Markt RandstadRail station" label="Grote Markt"/>
<link wikidata="Q571257" start="40122" end="40134" title="RandstadRail" label="RandstadRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093936" start="40434" end="40437" title="A12 motorway (Netherlands)" label="A12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557823" start="40875" end="40877" title="A4 motorway (Netherlands)" label="A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="40908" end="40917" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q652212" start="40927" end="40930" title="A13 motorway (Netherlands)" label="A13"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="40946" end="40955" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429839" start="41028" end="41031" title="A44 motorway (Netherlands)" label="A44"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="41058" end="41064" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9920" start="41066" end="41073" title="Haarlem" label="Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="41078" end="41087" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864025" start="41371" end="41400" title="List of people from The Hague" label="List of people from The Hague"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30270" wikidata="Q403495" url="?curid=30270" title="Tom and Jerry (disambiguation)">
<text>Tom and Jerry is an American animated media franchise and series of comedy short films.

Tom and Jerry may also refer to:
==In the &quot;Tom and Jerry&quot; franchise==
* &quot;Tom and Jerry&quot; filmography, a list of the 166 cartoon shorts
* List of &quot;Tom and Jerry&quot; feature films, a list of feature-length films
**&quot;Tom and Jerry: The Movie&quot; (1992)
**&quot;Tom &amp; Jerry&quot; (2021 film)
* List of &quot;Tom and Jerry&quot; video games
* &quot;Tom and Jerry&quot;#Television, a list of TV shows

==Other uses in arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Tom and Jerry&quot; (Van Beuren), fictional characters in a series of cartoons 1931–1933
* &quot;Tom and Jerry, or Life in London&quot;, staged in 1821, based on characters by Pierce Egan
* &quot;Tom and Jerry&quot;, a short story featured in &quot;All in the Day&#x27;s Riding&quot;, a 1933 collection by Will James
* Tom Good and Jerry Leadbetter, in the British sitcom &quot;The Good Life&quot;
* Tom and Jerry Yeo, brothers in the Singaporean film &quot;I Not Stupid Too&quot;
* &quot;Tom &amp; Jerry&quot; (album), by Simon &amp; Garfunkel, 2002
* &quot;Tom &amp; Jerry&quot; (1996 film), an Indian Malayalam-language comedy
* &quot;Tom and Jerry&quot; (2021 Indian film)
* &quot;Tom &amp; Jerry&quot; (2021 American film)

==Performing pairs==
* Tom and Jerry (fl. 1956 to 1959), (Tom Graph and Jerry Landis) later known as Simon &amp; Garfunkel
* Tom and Jerry (guitarists) (fl. early 1960s), Tommy Tomlinson and Jerry Kennedy
* Tom Cheek and Jerry Howarth, radio announcers for Toronto Blue Jays baseball team 1981–2005 
* Tom &amp; Jerry, alias used by the electronic music duo 4hero.

==Other uses==
* Tom and Jerry (drink), a cocktail containing eggnog and rum
* Tom &amp; Jerry (roller coaster), at Parque Warner Madrid, Spain
* Tom and Jerry engine, a pump at Great Orme, Wales
* Tom and Jerry, nicknames for the satellites of the GRACE and GRACE-FO mission
* Tom and Jerry, processors in the Atari Jaguar game console
* Tom and Jerry, a nickname for an 1800s British beerhouse

==See also==
*&quot;Tom &amp; Gerri&quot;, TV episode of &quot;Inside No. 9&quot;
* &quot;Jerry and Tom&quot;, a 1998 American film
* &quot;Life in London&quot;, a 1821 British novel where the &quot;Tom and Jerry&quot; names originated</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131144" start="0" end="13" title="Tom and Jerry" label="Tom and Jerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q462595" start="171" end="208" title="Tom and Jerry filmography" label="&amp;quot;Tom and Jerry&amp;quot; filmography"/>
<link wikidata="Q96388589" start="245" end="292" title="List of Tom and Jerry feature films" label="List of &amp;quot;Tom and Jerry&amp;quot; feature films"/>
<link wikidata="" start="333" end="357" title="Tom and Jerry: The Movie" label="Tom and Jerry: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q65921361" start="373" end="412" title="Tom &amp;amp; Jerry (2021 American film)" label="&amp;quot;Tom &amp;amp; Jerry&amp;quot; (2021 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600336" start="415" end="460" title="List of Tom and Jerry video games" label="List of &amp;quot;Tom and Jerry&amp;quot; video games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="463" end="499" title="Tom and Jerry#Television" label="&amp;quot;Tom and Jerry&amp;quot;#Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062571" start="564" end="602" title="Tom and Jerry (Van Beuren)" label="&amp;quot;Tom and Jerry&amp;quot; (Van Beuren)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460114" start="667" end="699" title="Tom and Jerry, or Life in London" label="Tom and Jerry, or Life in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568291" start="876" end="886" title="Will James (artist)" label="Will James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789136" start="948" end="961" title="The Good Life (1975 TV series)" label="The Good Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184264" start="1028" end="1044" title="I Not Stupid Too" label="I Not Stupid Too"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814720" start="1053" end="1088" title="Tom &amp;amp; Jerry (album)" label="&amp;quot;Tom &amp;amp; Jerry&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814721" start="1123" end="1162" title="Tom &amp;amp; Jerry (1996 film)" label="&amp;quot;Tom &amp;amp; Jerry&amp;quot; (1996 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128153061" start="1202" end="1246" title="Tom and Jerry (2021 Indian film)" label="&amp;quot;Tom and Jerry&amp;quot; (2021 Indian film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65921361" start="1249" end="1297" title="Tom &amp;amp; Jerry (2021 American film)" label="&amp;quot;Tom &amp;amp; Jerry&amp;quot; (2021 American film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q484918" start="1400" end="1421" title="Simon &amp;amp; Garfunkel" label="Simon &amp;amp; Garfunkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818157" start="1424" end="1450" title="Tom and Jerry (guitarists)" label="Tom and Jerry (guitarists)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646437" start="1506" end="1515" title="Tom Cheek" label="Tom Cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183773" start="1520" end="1533" title="Jerry Howarth" label="Jerry Howarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="1657" end="1662" title="4hero" label="4hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q752333" start="1682" end="1703" title="Tom and Jerry (drink)" label="Tom and Jerry (drink)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495883" start="1744" end="1776" title="Tom &amp;amp; Jerry (roller coaster)" label="Tom &amp;amp; Jerry (roller coaster)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395318" start="1843" end="1853" title="Great Orme" label="Great Orme"/>
<link wikidata="Q704319" start="1914" end="1932" title="GRACE and GRACE-FO" label="GRACE and GRACE-FO"/>
<link wikidata="Q650601" start="1976" end="1988" title="Atari Jaguar" label="Atari Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880067" start="2051" end="2060" title="beerhouse" label="beerhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746409" start="2082" end="2097" title="Tom &amp;amp; Gerri" label="Tom &amp;amp; Gerri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687787" start="2152" end="2165" title="Jerry and Tom" label="Jerry and Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q108208589" start="2202" end="2216" title="Life in London (novel)" label="Life in London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30271" wikidata="Q363810" url="?curid=30271" title="Tim Powers">
<text>Timothy Thomas Powers (born February 29, 1952) is an American science fiction and fantasy author. His first major novel was &quot;The Drawing of the Dark&quot; (1979), but the novel that earned him wide praise was &quot;The Anubis Gates&quot; (1983), which won the Philip K. Dick Award, and has since been published in many other languages. His other written work include &quot;Dinner at Deviant&#x27;s Palace&quot; (1985), &quot;Last Call&quot; (1992), &quot;Expiration Date&quot; (1996), &quot;Earthquake Weather&quot; (1997), &quot;Declare&quot; (2000), and &quot;Three Days to Never&quot; (2006). Powers has won the World Fantasy Award twice for his critically acclaimed novels &quot;Last Call&quot; and &quot;Declare&quot;. His 1987 novel &quot;On Stranger Tides&quot; served as inspiration for the &quot;Monkey Island&quot; franchise of video games and was partly adapted into the fourth &quot;Pirates of the Caribbean&quot; film.

Several of Powers&#x27; novels depict historical events being influenced by occult or supernatural factors. Regarding his 2001 novel &quot;Declare&quot;, Powers stated, &quot;I made it an ironclad rule that I could not change or disregard any of the recorded facts, nor rearrange any days of the calendar – and then I tried to figure out what momentous but unrecorded fact could explain them all.&quot;

==Life and career==

Powers was born in Buffalo, New York, but has lived in California since 1959. He studied English Literature at Cal State Fullerton, and earned his B.A. in 1976. It was there that he first met James Blaylock and K. W. Jeter, both of whom remained close friends and occasional collaborators; the trio have half-seriously referred to themselves as &quot;steampunks&quot; in contrast to the prevailing cyberpunk genre of the 1980s. Powers and Blaylock invented the poet William Ashbless while they were at Cal State Fullerton.

Another friend Powers first met during this period was noted science fiction writer Philip K. Dick; the character named &quot;David&quot; in Dick&#x27;s novel &quot;VALIS&quot; is based on Powers. When &quot;Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?&quot; was retitled &quot;Blade Runner&quot; to tie-in with the movie based on the novel, Dick dedicated it to Tim and Serena Powers.

Powers&#x27; first major novel was &quot;The Drawing of the Dark&quot; (1979), but the novel that earned him wide praise was &quot;The Anubis Gates&quot;, which won the Philip K. Dick Award, and has since been published in many other languages.

Powers also teaches part-time in his role as Writer in Residence for the Orange County High School of the Arts and California School of the Arts in San Gabriel Valley in the Creative Writing Conservatory, as well as Chapman University, where Blaylock taught. He also taught part-time at the University of Redlands.

Powers and his wife, Serena Batsford Powers, currently live in Muscoy, California. He has frequently served as a mentor author as part of the Clarion science fiction/fantasy writer&#x27;s workshop.

==Bibliography==

===Novels===
* &quot;The Skies Discrowned&quot; (1976), published by Laser Books, ISBN 0373720289. Revised and republished in 1986 as &quot;Forsake the Sky&quot; by Tom Doherty Associates, ISBN 0812549732.

* &quot;An Epitaph in Rust&quot; (1976)

* &quot;The Drawing of the Dark&quot; (1979)

* &quot;The Anubis Gates&quot;(1983): Philip K. Dick Award winner, 1983; Locus Fantasy Award nominee, 1984; BSFA nominee, 1985
* &quot;Dinner at Deviant&#x27;s Palace&quot; (1985): Philip K. Dick Award winner, and Nebula Award nominee, 1985. Dave Langford&#x27;s review for White Dwarf #92 stated &quot;Sizzling entertainment: but the sudden triumph over alien omnipotence doesn&#x27;t quite convince.&quot;

* &quot;On Stranger Tides&quot; (1987): Locus Fantasy and World Fantasy Awards nominee, 1988 Disney incorporated elements of the novel into the fourth &quot;Pirates of the Caribbean&quot; film.

* &quot;The Stress of Her Regard&quot; (1989): Locus Fantasy and World Fantasy Awards nominee, 1990 and winner of the 1990 Mythopoeic Fantasy Award.

==== Fault Lines series ====
:*&quot;Last Call&quot; (1992): Locus Fantasy and World Fantasy Awards winner, 1993
:*&quot;Expiration Date&quot; (1996): World Fantasy Award nominee, 1996; 1996 Nebula Award nominee 
:* &quot;Earthquake Weather&quot; (1997): BSFA Award nominee, 1997; Locus Fantasy Award winner, 1998

* &quot;Declare&quot; (2001): World Fantasy Award winner and Locus Fantasy nominee, 2001; 2001 Nebula Award nominee&quot;

* &quot;Powers of Two&quot; (2004): Re-release of &quot;Skies Discrowned&quot; and &quot;Epitaph in Rust&quot;.

* &quot;Three Days to Never&quot; (2006): Locus Fantasy Award nominee, 2007

* &quot;Hide Me Among the Graves&quot; (2012)

* &quot;Medusa&#x27;s Web&quot; (2016)

==== Vickery and Castine series ====
:* &quot;Alternate Routes&quot; (August 2018)
:* &quot;Forced Perspectives&quot; (March 2020)
:* &quot;Stolen Skies&quot; (January 2022)

* &quot;My Brother&#x27;s Keeper&quot; (2023)

===Short story collections===
* &quot;Night Moves and Other Stories&quot; (2000)
* &quot;On Pirates&quot;, by James P. Blaylock and Powers as William Ashbless (2001)
* &quot;The Devils in the Details&quot; (with James Blaylock) (2003)
* &quot;Strange Itineraries&quot;: 2005, published by Tachyon Publications of San Francisco, California (includes all six stories from &quot;Night Moves&quot; plus both stories by Powers from &quot;Devils&quot;)
* &quot;The Bible Repairman and Other Stories&quot;: 2011, published by Tachyon Publications
* &quot;Down and Out in Purgatory: The Collected Stories of Tim Powers&quot;: 2017, published in hardcover and ebook editions by Baen Books in November 2017. Becky Spratford in &quot;Booklist&quot; called the book &quot;a treat for fans and newbies alike; hand it to readers who enjoy genre-blending authors as varied as Jim Butcher, Dean Koontz and China Miéville.&quot;

===Other===
* &quot;The Complete Twelve Hours of the Night&quot; (1986): A joke pamphlet by Blaylock and Powers as William Ashbless, published by Cheap Street Press; features in &quot;The Anubis Gates&quot;
* &quot;A Short Poem by William Ashbless&quot; (1987): A joke chapbook written by Phil Garland, with permission of Blaylock and Powers as Ashbless. Published by The Folly Press.
* &quot;The William Ashbless Memorial Cookbook&quot; (2002): A cookbook by Blaylock and Powers as Ashbless. Published by Subterranean Press.
* &quot;The Bible Repairman&quot; (2005): A chapbook containing an original short story. Published by Subterranean Press.
* &quot;Nine Sonnets by Francis Thomas Marrity&quot; (2006): A chapbook containing nine sonnets &quot;written&quot; by one of the main characters in &quot;Three Days to Never&quot;. Published by Subterranean Press and given away with the collectors&#x27; edition of &quot;Three Days To Never.&quot;
* &quot;A Soul in a Bottle&quot; (2007): A ghost story about a poet largely based on American poet Edna St Vincent Millay. This novella published by Subterranean Press.
* &quot;Three Sonnets by Cheyenne Fleming&quot; (2007): Printed loose and inserted into the collectors&#x27; edition of &quot;A Soul in a Bottle&quot;.
* &quot;Death of a Citizen&quot; (2012): A short nonfiction essay included in &quot;A Comprehensive Dual Bibliography of James P. Blaylock &amp; Tim Powers&quot; by Silver Smith. Published by Argent Leaf Press.
* &quot;Salvage and Demolition&quot; (2013): Time-travel novella. Published by Subterranean Press.
* &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Home&quot; (2014): novella set in the world of &quot;The Anubis Gates&quot;.
* &quot;Appointment at Sunset&quot; (2014): Published by Charnel House
* &quot;Down and Out in Purgatory&quot; (2016): A ghost story about posthumous revenge. This novella was published by Subterranean Press.
* &quot;More Walls Broken&quot; (February 2019): novella published by Subterranean Press.
* &quot;After Many a Summer&quot; (2023): novella published by Subterranean Press.

===Critical studies and reviews of Powers&#x27; work===
;&quot;Salvage and Demolition&quot;

==References==
==External links==

* – includes a very long interview
* Bibliographical list of book reviews published in &quot;Locus&quot; magazine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q363810" start="0" end="21" title="Tim Powers" label="Timothy Thomas Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="62" end="77" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="82" end="89" title="fantasy fiction" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792899" start="130" end="153" title="The Drawing of the Dark" label="The Drawing of the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q128324" start="220" end="236" title="The Anubis Gates" label="The Anubis Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341487" start="265" end="285" title="Philip K. Dick Award" label="Philip K. Dick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795023" start="378" end="409" title="Dinner at Deviant&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Dinner at Deviant&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q610680" start="430" end="439" title="Last Call (novel)" label="Last Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016940" start="460" end="475" title="Expiration Date (Powers novel)" label="Expiration Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327266" start="496" end="514" title="Earthquake Weather (novel)" label="Earthquake Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249488" start="535" end="542" title="Declare" label="Declare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797441" start="567" end="586" title="Three Days to Never" label="Three Days to Never"/>
<link wikidata="Q594886" start="620" end="639" title="World Fantasy Award" label="World Fantasy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660753" start="750" end="767" title="On Stranger Tides" label="On Stranger Tides"/>
<link wikidata="Q533239" start="810" end="823" title="Monkey Island (series)" label="Monkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="" start="887" end="935" title="Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides" label="fourth &amp;quot;Pirates of the Caribbean&amp;quot; film"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="1382" end="1399" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="1452" end="1470" title="English literature" label="English Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026925" start="1474" end="1493" title="California State University, Fullerton" label="Cal State Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1510" end="1514" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q979465" start="1555" end="1569" title="James Blaylock" label="James Blaylock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090406" start="1574" end="1585" title="K. W. Jeter" label="K. W. Jeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q223685" start="1714" end="1723" title="steampunk" label="steampunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="1761" end="1770" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q841900" start="1829" end="1845" title="William Ashbless" label="William Ashbless"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="1971" end="1985" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320318" start="2052" end="2057" title="VALIS" label="VALIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q605249" start="2095" end="2131" title="Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?" label="Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="2157" end="2169" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792899" start="2307" end="2330" title="The Drawing of the Dark" label="The Drawing of the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q128324" start="2397" end="2413" title="The Anubis Gates" label="The Anubis Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341487" start="2435" end="2455" title="Philip K. Dick Award" label="Philip K. Dick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099586" start="2585" end="2622" title="Orange County High School of the Arts" label="Orange County High School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q586060" start="2686" end="2702" title="Creative Writing" label="Creative Writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805085" start="2728" end="2746" title="Chapman University" label="Chapman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270831" start="2803" end="2825" title="University of Redlands" label="University of Redlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901255" start="2891" end="2909" title="Muscoy, California" label="Muscoy, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589018" start="2970" end="3024" title="Clarion Writers Workshop" label="Clarion science fiction/fantasy writer&amp;#x27;s workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792899" start="3301" end="3324" title="The Drawing of the Dark" label="The Drawing of the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q128324" start="3347" end="3363" title="The Anubis Gates" label="The Anubis Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795023" start="3474" end="3505" title="Dinner at Deviant&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Dinner at Deviant&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="3553" end="3565" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="3613" end="3624" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660753" start="3756" end="3773" title="On Stranger Tides" label="On Stranger Tides"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3892" end="3940" title="Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides" label="fourth &amp;quot;Pirates of the Caribbean&amp;quot; film"/>
<link wikidata="Q151550" start="3951" end="3975" title="The Stress of Her Regard" label="The Stress of Her Regard"/>
<link wikidata="Q610680" start="4130" end="4139" title="Last Call (novel)" label="Last Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016940" start="4214" end="4229" title="Expiration Date (Powers novel)" label="Expiration Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327266" start="4315" end="4333" title="Earthquake Weather (novel)" label="Earthquake Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249488" start="4416" end="4423" title="Declare" label="Declare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797441" start="4652" end="4671" title="Three Days to Never" label="Three Days to Never"/>
<link wikidata="Q979465" start="5140" end="5157" title="James P. Blaylock" label="James P. Blaylock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673867" start="5319" end="5339" title="Tachyon Publications" label="Tachyon Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673867" start="5549" end="5569" title="Tachyon Publications" label="Tachyon Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="5699" end="5709" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943246" start="5753" end="5761" title="Booklist" label="Booklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367995" start="5891" end="5902" title="Jim Butcher" label="Jim Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q272076" start="5904" end="5915" title="Dean Koontz" label="Dean Koontz"/>
<link wikidata="Q319196" start="5920" end="5934" title="China Miéville" label="China Miéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088858" start="6089" end="6101" title="Cheap Street Press" label="Cheap Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632210" start="6449" end="6467" title="Subterranean Press" label="Subterranean Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="6545" end="6556" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q80056" start="6679" end="6685" title="sonnet" label="sonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632210" start="6786" end="6804" title="Subterranean Press" label="Subterranean Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519335" start="6933" end="6944" title="ghost story" label="ghost story"/>
<link wikidata="Q62134" start="6989" end="7011" title="Edna St Vincent Millay" label="Edna St Vincent Millay"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="7018" end="7025" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="7479" end="7486" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519335" start="7741" end="7752" title="ghost story" label="ghost story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="7770" end="7777" title="revenge" label="revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="7784" end="7791" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="7878" end="7885" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="7961" end="7968" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q963987" start="8224" end="8229" title="Locus (magazine)" label="Locus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30273" wikidata="Q37767" url="?curid=30273" title="T. S. Eliot">
<text>Thomas Stearns Eliot (26 September 18884 January 1965) was a poet, essayist and playwright. He was a leading figure in English-language Modernist poetry where he reinvigorated the art through his use of language, writing style, and verse structure. He is also noted for his critical essays, which often re-evaluated long-held cultural beliefs.

Born in St. Louis, Missouri, to a prominent Boston Brahmin family, he moved to England in 1914 at the age of 25 and went on to settle, work, and marry there. He became a British subject in 1927 at the age of 39 and renounced his American citizenship.

Eliot first attracted widespread attention for his poem &quot;The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock&quot; from 1914 to 1915, which, at the time of its publication, was considered outlandish. It was followed by &quot;The Waste Land&quot; (1922), &quot;The Hollow Men&quot; (1925), &quot;Ash Wednesday&quot; (1930), and &quot;Four Quartets&quot; (1943). He wrote seven plays, including &quot;Murder in the Cathedral&quot; (1935) and &quot;The Cocktail Party&quot; (1949). He was awarded the 1948 Nobel Prize in Literature, &quot;for his outstanding, pioneer contribution to present-day poetry&quot;.

==Life==
===Early life and education===
The Eliots were a Boston elite family, with roots in England and New England. Eliot&#x27;s paternal grandfather, William Greenleaf Eliot, had moved to St. Louis, Missouri, to establish a Unitarian Christian church there. His father, Henry Ware Eliot, was a successful businessman, president and treasurer of the Hydraulic-Press Brick Company in St Louis. His mother, Charlotte Champe Stearns, who wrote poetry, was a social worker, which was a new profession in the U.S. in the early 20th century. Eliot was the last of six surviving children. Known to family and friends as Tom, he was the namesake of his maternal grandfather, Thomas Stearns.

Eliot&#x27;s childhood infatuation with literature can be ascribed to several factors. First, he had to overcome physical limitations as a child. Struggling from a congenital double inguinal hernia, he could not participate in many physical activities and thus was prevented from socialising with his peers. As he was often isolated, his love for literature developed. Once he learned to read, the young boy immediately became obsessed with books, favouring tales of savage life, the Wild West, or Mark Twain&#x27;s &quot;Tom Sawyer&quot;. In his memoir about Eliot, his friend Robert Sencourt comments that the young Eliot &quot;would often curl up in the window-seat behind an enormous book, setting the drug of dreams against the pain of living.&quot; Secondly, Eliot credited his hometown with fuelling his literary vision: &quot;It is self-evident that St. Louis affected me more deeply than any other environment has ever done. I feel that there is something in having passed one&#x27;s childhood beside the big river, which is incommunicable to those people who have not. I consider myself fortunate to have been born here, rather than in Boston, or New York, or London.&quot;

From 1898 to 1905, Eliot attended Smith Academy, the boys college preparatory division of Washington University, where his studies included Latin, Ancient Greek, French, and German. He began to write poetry when he was 14 under the influence of Edward Fitzgerald&#x27;s translation of the &quot;Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam.&quot; He said the results were gloomy and despairing and he destroyed them. His first published poem, &quot;A Fable For Feasters&quot;, was written as a school exercise and was published in the &quot;Smith Academy Record&quot; in February 1905. Also published there in April 1905 was his oldest surviving poem in manuscript, an untitled lyric, later revised and reprinted as &quot;Song&quot; in &quot;The Harvard Advocate&quot;, Harvard University&#x27;s student literary magazine. He published three short stories in 1905, &quot;Birds of Prey&quot;, &quot;A Tale of a Whale&quot; and &quot;The Man Who Was King&quot;. The last mentioned story reflected his exploration of the Igorot Village while visiting the 1904 World&#x27;s Fair of St. Louis. His interest in indigenous peoples thus predated his anthropological studies at Harvard.

Eliot lived in St. Louis, Missouri, for the first 16 years of his life at the house on Locust Street where he was born. After going away to school in 1905, he returned to St. Louis only for vacations and visits. Despite moving away from the city, Eliot wrote to a friend that &quot;Missouri and the Mississippi have made a deeper impression on me than any other part of the world.&quot;

Following graduation from Smith Academy, Eliot attended Milton Academy in Massachusetts for a preparatory year, where he met Scofield Thayer who later published &quot;The Waste Land&quot;. He studied at Harvard College from 1906 to 1909, earning a Bachelor of Arts in an elective program similar to comparative literature in 1909 and a Master of Arts in English literature the following year. Because of his year at Milton Academy, Eliot was allowed to earn his Bachelor of Arts after three years instead of the usual four. Frank Kermode writes that the most important moment of Eliot&#x27;s undergraduate career was in 1908 when he discovered Arthur Symons&#x27;s &quot;The Symbolist Movement in Literature&quot;. This introduced him to Jules Laforgue, Arthur Rimbaud, and Paul Verlaine. Without Verlaine, Eliot wrote, he might never have heard of Tristan Corbière and his book &quot;Les amours jaunes&quot;, a work that affected the course of Eliot&#x27;s life. &quot;The Harvard Advocate&quot; published some of his poems and he became lifelong friends with Conrad Aiken, the American writer and critic.

After working as a philosophy assistant at Harvard from 1909 to 1910, Eliot moved to Paris where, from 1910 to 1911, he studied philosophy at the Sorbonne. He attended lectures by Henri Bergson and read poetry with Henri Alban-Fournier. From 1911 to 1914, he was back at Harvard studying Indian philosophy and Sanskrit. While a member of the Harvard Graduate School, Eliot met and fell in love with Emily Hale. Eliot was awarded a scholarship to Merton College, Oxford, in 1914. He first visited Marburg, Germany, where he planned to take a summer programme, but when the First World War broke out he went to Oxford instead. At the time so many American students attended Merton that the Junior Common Room proposed a motion &quot;that this society abhors the Americanization of Oxford&quot;. It was defeated by two votes after Eliot reminded the students how much they owed American culture.

Eliot wrote to Conrad Aiken on New Year&#x27;s Eve 1914: &quot;I hate university towns and university people, who are the same everywhere, with pregnant wives, sprawling children, many books and hideous pictures on the walls [...] Oxford is very pretty, but I don&#x27;t like to be dead.&quot; Escaping Oxford, Eliot spent much of his time in London. This city had a monumental and life-altering effect on Eliot for several reasons, the most significant of which was his introduction to the influential American literary figure Ezra Pound. A connection through Aiken resulted in an arranged meeting and on 22 September 1914, Eliot paid a visit to Pound&#x27;s flat. Pound instantly deemed Eliot &quot;worth watching&quot; and was crucial to Eliot&#x27;s fledgling career as a poet, as he is credited with promoting Eliot through social events and literary gatherings. Thus, according to biographer John Worthen, during his time in England Eliot &quot;was seeing as little of Oxford as possible&quot;. He was instead spending long periods of time in London, in the company of Ezra Pound and &quot;some of the modern artists whom the war has so far spared [...] It was Pound who helped most, introducing him everywhere.&quot; In the end, Eliot did not settle at Merton and left after a year. In 1915 he taught English at Birkbeck College, University of London.

In 1916, he completed a doctoral dissertation for Harvard on &quot;Knowledge and Experience in the Philosophy of F. H. Bradley&quot;, but failed to return for the &quot;viva voce&quot; examination.

===Marriage===

Before leaving the US, Eliot had told Emily Hale that he was in love with her. He exchanged letters with her from Oxford during 1914 and 1915, but they did not meet again until 1927. In a letter to Aiken late in December 1914, Eliot, aged 26, wrote: &quot;I am very dependent upon women (I mean female society).&quot; Less than four months later, Thayer introduced Eliot to Vivienne Haigh-Wood, a Cambridge governess. They were married at Hampstead Register Office on 26 June 1915.

After a short visit, alone, to his family in the United States, Eliot returned to London and took several teaching jobs, such as lecturing at Birkbeck College, University of London. The philosopher Bertrand Russell took an interest in Vivienne while the newlyweds stayed in his flat. Some scholars have suggested that she and Russell had an affair, but the allegations were never confirmed.

The marriage seems to have been markedly unhappy, in part because of Vivienne&#x27;s health problems. In a letter addressed to Ezra Pound, she covers an extensive list of her symptoms, which included a habitually high temperature, fatigue, insomnia, migraines, and colitis. This, coupled with apparent mental instability, meant that she was often sent away by Eliot and her doctors for extended periods in the hope of improving her health. As time went on, he became increasingly detached from her.
According to witnesses, both Eliots were frequent complainers of illness, physical and mental, while Eliot would drink excessively and Vivienne is said to have developed a liking for opium and ether, drugs prescribed for medical issues. It is claimed that the couple&#x27;s wearying behaviour caused some visitors to vow never to spend another evening in the company of both together.
The couple formally separated in 1933, and in 1938 Vivienne&#x27;s brother, Maurice, had her committed to a mental hospital, against her will, where she remained until her death of heart disease in 1947. When told via a phone call from the asylum that Vivienne had died unexpectedly during the night, Eliot is said to have buried his face in his hands and cried out &#x27;Oh God, oh God.&#x27;

Their relationship became the subject of a 1984 play &quot;Tom &amp; Viv&quot;, which in 1994 was adapted as a film of the same name.

In a private paper written in his sixties, Eliot confessed: &quot;I came to persuade myself that I was in love with Vivienne simply because I wanted to burn my boats and commit myself to staying in England. And she persuaded herself (also under the influence of [Ezra] Pound) that she would save the poet by keeping him in England. To her, the marriage brought no happiness. To me, it brought the state of mind out of which came &quot;The Waste Land&quot;.&quot;

===Teaching, banking, and publishing===

After leaving Merton, Eliot worked as a schoolteacher, most notably at Highgate School in London, where he taught French and Latin: his students included John Betjeman. He subsequently taught at the Royal Grammar School, High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire. To earn extra money, he wrote book reviews and lectured at evening extension courses at University College London and Oxford. In 1917, he took a position at Lloyds Bank in London, working on foreign accounts. On a trip to Paris in August 1920 with the artist Wyndham Lewis, he met the writer James Joyce. Eliot said he found Joyce arrogant, and Joyce doubted Eliot&#x27;s ability as a poet at the time, but the two writers soon became friends, with Eliot visiting Joyce whenever he was in Paris. Eliot and Wyndham Lewis also maintained a close friendship, leading to Lewis&#x27;s later making his well-known portrait painting of Eliot in 1938.

Charles Whibley recommended T. S. Eliot to Geoffrey Faber. In 1925 Eliot left Lloyds to become a director in the publishing firm Faber and Gwyer (later Faber &amp; Faber), where he remained for the rest of his career. At Faber &amp; Faber, he was responsible for publishing distinguished English poets, including W. H. Auden, Stephen Spender, Charles Madge and Ted Hughes.

===Conversion to Anglicanism and British citizenship===

On 29 June 1927, Eliot converted from Unitarianism to Anglicanism, and in November that year he took British citizenship, thereby renouncing his United States citizenship in the event he had not officially done so previously.
He became a churchwarden of his parish church, St Stephen&#x27;s, Gloucester Road, London, and a life member of the Society of King Charles the Martyr. He specifically identified as Anglo-Catholic, proclaiming himself &quot;classicist in literature, royalist in politics, and anglo-catholic in religion&quot;.

About 30 years later Eliot commented on his religious views that he combined &quot;a Catholic cast of mind, a Calvinist heritage, and a Puritanical temperament&quot;. He also had wider spiritual interests, commenting that &quot;I see the path of progress for modern man in his occupation with his own self, with his inner being&quot; and citing Goethe and Rudolf Steiner as exemplars of such a direction.

One of Eliot&#x27;s biographers, Peter Ackroyd, commented that &quot;the purposes of [Eliot&#x27;s conversion] were two-fold. One: the Church of England offered Eliot some hope for himself, and I think Eliot needed some resting place. But secondly, it attached Eliot to the English community and English culture.&quot;

===Separation and remarriage===
By 1932, Eliot had been contemplating a separation from his wife for some time. When Harvard offered him the Charles Eliot Norton professorship for the 1932–1933 academic year, he accepted and left Vivienne in England. Upon his return, he arranged for a formal separation from her, avoiding all but one meeting with her between his leaving for America in 1932 and her death in 1947. Vivienne was committed to the Northumberland House mental hospital in Woodberry Down, Manor House, London, in 1938, and remained there until she died. Although Eliot was still legally her husband, he never visited her. From 1933 to 1946 Eliot had a close emotional relationship with Emily Hale. Eliot later destroyed Hale&#x27;s letters to him, but Hale donated Eliot&#x27;s to Princeton University Library where they were sealed, following Eliot&#x27;s and Hale&#x27;s wishes, for 50 years after both had died, until 2020. When Eliot heard of the donation he deposited his own account of their relationship with Harvard University to be opened whenever the Princeton letters were.

From 1938 to 1957 Eliot&#x27;s public companion was Mary Trevelyan of London University, who wanted to marry him and left a detailed memoir.

From 1946 to 1957, Eliot shared a flat at 19 Carlyle Mansions, Chelsea, with his friend John Davy Hayward, who collected and managed Eliot&#x27;s papers, styling himself &quot;Keeper of the Eliot Archive&quot;. Hayward also collected Eliot&#x27;s pre-Prufrock verse, commercially published after Eliot&#x27;s death as &quot;Poems Written in Early Youth&quot;. When Eliot and Hayward separated their household in 1957, Hayward retained his collection of Eliot&#x27;s papers, which he bequeathed to King&#x27;s College, Cambridge, in 1965.

On 10 January 1957, at the age of 68, Eliot married Esmé Valerie Fletcher, who was 30. In contrast to his first marriage, Eliot knew Fletcher well, as she had been his secretary at Faber &amp; Faber since August 1949. They kept their wedding secret; the ceremony was held in St Barnabas Church, Kensington, London, at 6:15 am with virtually no one in attendance other than his wife&#x27;s parents. In the early 1960s, by then in failing health, Eliot worked as an editor for the Wesleyan University Press, seeking new poets in Europe for publication. After Eliot&#x27;s death, Valerie dedicated her time to preserving his legacy, by editing and annotating &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot&quot; and a facsimile of the draft of &quot;The Waste Land&quot;. Valerie Eliot died on 9 November 2012 at her home in London.

Eliot had no children with either of his wives.

===Death and honours===
Eliot died of emphysema at his home in Kensington in London, on 4 January 1965, and was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium. In accordance with his wishes, his ashes were taken to St Michael and All Angels&#x27; Church, East Coker, the village in Somerset from which his Eliot ancestors had emigrated to America. A wall plaque in the church commemorates him with a quotation from his poem &quot;East Coker&quot;: &quot;In my beginning is my end. In my end is my beginning.&quot;

In 1967, on the second anniversary of his death, Eliot was commemorated by the placement of a large stone in the floor of Poets&#x27; Corner in London&#x27;s Westminster Abbey. The stone, cut by designer Reynolds Stone, is inscribed with his life dates, his Order of Merit, and a quotation from his poem &quot;Little Gidding&quot;, &quot;the communication / of the dead is tongued with fire beyond / the language of the living.&quot;

In 1986, a blue plaque was placed on the apartment block - No. 3 Kensington Court Gardens - where he lived and died.

==Poetry==
For a poet of his stature, Eliot produced relatively few poems. He was aware of this even early in his career; he wrote to J. H. Woods, one of his former Harvard professors, &quot;My reputation in London is built upon one small volume of verse, and is kept up by printing two or three more poems in a year. The only thing that matters is that these should be perfect in their kind, so that each should be an event.&quot;

Typically, Eliot first published his poems individually in periodicals or in small books or pamphlets and then collected them in books. His first collection was &quot;Prufrock and Other Observations&quot; (1917). In 1920, he published more poems in &quot;Ara Vos Prec&quot; (London) and &quot;Poems: 1920&quot; (New York). These had the same poems (in a different order) except that &quot;Ode&quot; in the British edition was replaced with &quot;Hysteria&quot; in the American edition. In 1925, he collected &quot;The Waste Land&quot; and the poems in &quot;Prufrock&quot; and &quot;Poems&quot; into one volume and added &quot;The Hollow Men&quot; to form &quot;Poems: 1909–1925&quot;. From then on, he updated this work as &quot;Collected Poems&quot;. Exceptions are &quot;Old Possum&#x27;s Book of Practical Cats&quot; (1939), a collection of light verse; &quot;Poems Written in Early Youth&quot;, posthumously published in 1967 and consisting mainly of poems published between 1907 and 1910 in &quot;The Harvard Advocate&quot;, and &quot;Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909–1917&quot;, material Eliot never intended to have published, which appeared posthumously in 1996.

During an interview in 1959, Eliot said of his nationality and its role in his work: &quot;I&#x27;d say that my poetry has obviously more in common with my distinguished contemporaries in America than with anything written in my generation in England. That I&#x27;m sure of. ... It wouldn&#x27;t be what it is, and I imagine it wouldn&#x27;t be so good; putting it as modestly as I can, it wouldn&#x27;t be what it is if I&#x27;d been born in England, and it wouldn&#x27;t be what it is if I&#x27;d stayed in America. It&#x27;s a combination of things. But in its sources, in its emotional springs, it comes from America.&quot;

Cleo McNelly Kearns notes in her biography that Eliot was deeply influenced by Indic traditions, notably the Upanishads. From the Sanskrit ending of &quot;The Waste Land&quot; to the &quot;What Krishna meant&quot; section of &quot;Four Quartets&quot; shows how much Indic religions and more specifically Hinduism made up his philosophical basic for his thought process. It must also be acknowledged, as Chinmoy Guha showed in his book &quot;Where the Dreams Cross: T S Eliot and French Poetry&quot; (Macmillan, 2011) that he was deeply influenced by French poets from Baudelaire to Paul Valéry. He himself wrote in his 1940 essay on W.B. Yeats: &quot;The kind of poetry that I needed to teach me the use of my own voice did not exist in English at all; it was only to be found in French.&quot; (&quot;Yeats&quot;, &quot;On Poetry and Poets&quot;, 1948).

===&quot;The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock&quot;===
In 1915, Ezra Pound, overseas editor of &quot;Poetry&quot; magazine, recommended to Harriet Monroe, the magazine&#x27;s founder, that she should publish &quot;The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock&quot;. Although the character Prufrock seems to be middle-aged, Eliot wrote most of the poem when he was only twenty-two. Its now-famous opening lines, comparing the evening sky to &quot;a patient etherised upon a table&quot;, were considered shocking and offensive, especially at a time when Georgian Poetry was hailed for its derivations of the 19th-century Romantic Poets.

The poem&#x27;s structure was heavily influenced by Eliot&#x27;s extensive reading of Dante and refers to a number of literary works, including &quot;Hamlet&quot; and those of the French Symbolists. Its reception in London can be gauged from an unsigned review in &quot;The Times Literary Supplement&quot; on 21 June 1917. &quot;The fact that these things occurred to the mind of Mr. Eliot is surely of the very smallest importance to anyone, even to himself. They certainly have no relation to &quot;poetry&quot;.&quot;

===&quot;The Waste Land&quot;===
In October 1922, Eliot published &quot;The Waste Land&quot; in &quot;The Criterion&quot;. Eliot&#x27;s dedication to &quot;il miglior fabbro&quot; (&#x27;the better craftsman&#x27;) refers to Ezra Pound&#x27;s significant hand in editing and reshaping the poem from a longer manuscript to the shortened version that appears in publication.

It was composed during a period of personal difficulty for Eliot—his marriage was failing, and both he and Vivienne were suffering from nervous disorders. Before the poem&#x27;s publication as a book in December 1922, Eliot distanced himself from its vision of despair. On 15 November 1922, he wrote to Richard Aldington, saying, &quot;As for &quot;The Waste Land&quot;, that is a thing of the past so far as I am concerned and I am now feeling toward a new form and style.&quot; 

The poem is often read as a representation of the disillusionment of the post-war generation. Dismissing this view, Eliot commented in 1931, &quot;When I wrote a poem called &quot;The Waste Land&quot;, some of the more approving critics said that I had expressed &#x27;the disillusion of a generation&#x27;, which is nonsense. I may have expressed for them their own illusion of being disillusioned, but that did not form part of my intention.&quot;

The poem is known for its disjointed nature due to its usage of allusion and quotation and its abrupt changes of speaker, location, and time. This structural complexity is one of the reasons that the poem has become a touchstone of modern literature, a poetic counterpart to a novel published in the same year, James Joyce&#x27;s &quot;Ulysses&quot;.

Among its best-known phrases are &quot;April is the cruellest month&quot;, &quot;I will show you fear in a handful of dust&quot;, and &quot;These fragments I have shored against my ruins&quot;.

===&quot;The Hollow Men&quot;===
&quot;The Hollow Men&quot; appeared in 1925. For the critic Edmund Wilson, it marked &quot;The nadir of the phase of despair and desolation given such effective expression in &#x27;The Waste Land&#x27;.&quot; It is Eliot&#x27;s major poem of the late 1920s. Similar to Eliot&#x27;s other works, its themes are overlapping and fragmentary. Post-war Europe under the Treaty of Versailles (which Eliot despised), the difficulty of hope and religious conversion, Eliot&#x27;s failed marriage.

Allen Tate perceived a shift in Eliot&#x27;s method, writing, &quot;The mythologies disappear altogether in &#x27;The Hollow Men&#x27;.&quot; This is a striking claim for a poem as indebted to Dante as anything else in Eliot&#x27;s early work, to say little of the modern English mythology—the &quot;Old Guy Fawkes&quot; of the Gunpowder Plot—or the colonial and agrarian mythos of Joseph Conrad and James George Frazer, which, at least for reasons of textual history, echo in &quot;The Waste Land&quot;. The &quot;continuous parallel between contemporaneity and antiquity&quot; that is so characteristic of his mythical method remained in fine form. &quot;The Hollow Men&quot; contains some of Eliot&#x27;s most famous lines, notably its conclusion: 

===&quot;Ash-Wednesday&quot;===

&quot;Ash-Wednesday&quot; is the first long poem written by Eliot after his 1927 conversion to Anglicanism. Published in 1930, it deals with the struggle that ensues when a person who has lacked faith acquires it. Sometimes referred to as Eliot&#x27;s &quot;conversion poem&quot;, it is richly but ambiguously allusive, and deals with the aspiration to move from spiritual barrenness to hope for human salvation. Eliot&#x27;s style of writing in &quot;Ash-Wednesday&quot; showed a marked shift from the poetry he had written prior to his 1927 conversion, and his post-conversion style continued in a similar vein. His style became less ironic, and the poems were no longer populated by multiple characters in dialogue. Eliot&#x27;s subject matter also became more focused on his spiritual concerns and his Christian faith.

Many critics were particularly enthusiastic about &quot;Ash-Wednesday&quot;. Edwin Muir maintained that it is one of the most moving poems Eliot wrote, and perhaps the &quot;most perfect&quot;, though it was not well received by everyone. The poem&#x27;s groundwork of orthodox Christianity discomfited many of the more secular &quot;literati&quot;.

===&quot;Old Possum&#x27;s Book of Practical Cats&quot;===

In 1939, Eliot published a book of light verse, &quot;Old Possum&#x27;s Book of Practical Cats&quot;. (&quot;Old Possum&quot; was Ezra Pound&#x27;s friendly nickname for Eliot.) The first edition had an illustration of the author on the cover. In 1954, the composer Alan Rawsthorne set six of the poems for speaker and orchestra in a work titled &quot;Practical Cats&quot;. After Eliot&#x27;s death, the book was the basis of the musical &quot;Cats&quot; by Andrew Lloyd Webber, first produced in London&#x27;s West End in 1981 and opening on Broadway the following year.

===&quot;Four Quartets&quot;===

Eliot regarded &quot;Four Quartets&quot; as his masterpiece, and it is the work that most of all led him to being awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. It consists of four long poems, each first published separately: &quot;Burnt Norton&quot; (1936), &quot;East Coker&quot; (1940), &quot;The Dry Salvages&quot; (1941) and &quot;Little Gidding&quot; (1942). Each has five sections. Although they resist easy characterisation, each poem includes meditations on the nature of time in some important respect—theological, historical, physical—and its relation to the human condition. Each poem is associated with one of the four classical elements, respectively: air, earth, water, and fire.

&quot;Burnt Norton&quot; is a meditative poem that begins with the narrator trying to focus on the present moment while walking through a garden, focusing on images and sounds such as the bird, the roses, clouds and an empty pool. The meditation leads the narrator to reach &quot;the still point&quot; in which there is no attempt to get anywhere or to experience place and/or time, instead experiencing &quot;a grace of sense&quot;. In the final section, the narrator contemplates the arts (&quot;words&quot; and &quot;music&quot;) as they relate to time. The narrator focuses particularly on the poet&#x27;s art of manipulating &quot;Words [which] strain, / Crack and sometimes break, under the burden [of time], under the tension, slip, slide, perish, decay with imprecision, [and] will not stay in place, / Will not stay still.&quot; By comparison, the narrator concludes that &quot;Love is itself unmoving, / Only the cause and end of movement, / Timeless, and undesiring.&quot;

&quot;East Coker&quot; continues the examination of time and meaning, focusing in a famous passage on the nature of language and poetry. Out of darkness, Eliot offers a solution: &quot;I said to my soul, be still, and wait without hope.&quot;

&quot;The Dry Salvages&quot; treats the element of water, via images of river and sea. It strives to contain opposites: &quot;The past and future / Are conquered, and reconciled.&quot;

&quot;Little Gidding&quot; (the element of fire) is the most anthologised of the &quot;Quartets&quot;. Eliot&#x27;s experiences as an air raid warden in the Blitz power the poem, and he imagines meeting Dante during the German bombing. The beginning of the &quot;Quartets&quot; (&quot;Houses / Are removed, destroyed&quot;) had become a violent everyday experience; this creates an animation, where for the first time he talks of love as the driving force behind all experience. From this background, the &quot;Quartets&quot; end with an affirmation of Julian of Norwich: &quot;All shall be well and / All manner of thing shall be well.&quot;

The &quot;Four Quartets&quot; draws upon Christian theology, art, symbolism and language of such figures as Dante, and mystics St. John of the Cross and Julian of Norwich.

==Plays==

With the important exception of &quot;Four Quartets&quot;, Eliot directed much of his creative energies after &quot;Ash Wednesday&quot; to writing plays in verse, mostly comedies or plays with redemptive endings. He was long a critic and admirer of Elizabethan and Jacobean verse drama; witness his allusions to Webster, Thomas Middleton, William Shakespeare and Thomas Kyd in &quot;The Waste Land&quot;. In a 1933 lecture he said &quot;Every poet would like, I fancy, to be able to think that he had some direct social utility . . . . He would like to be something of a popular entertainer and be able to think his own thoughts behind a tragic or a comic mask. He would like to convey the pleasures of poetry, not only to a larger audience but to larger groups of people collectively; and the theatre is the best place in which to do it.&quot;

After &quot;The Waste Land&quot; (1922), he wrote that he was &quot;now feeling toward a new form and style&quot;. One project he had in mind was writing a play in verse, using some of the rhythms of early jazz. The play featured &quot;Sweeney&quot;, a character who had appeared in a number of his poems. Although Eliot did not finish the play, he did publish two scenes from the piece. These scenes, titled &quot;Fragment of a Prologue&quot; (1926) and &quot;Fragment of an Agon&quot; (1927), were published together in 1932 as &quot;Sweeney Agonistes&quot;. Although Eliot noted that this was not intended to be a one-act play, it is sometimes performed as one.

A pageant play by Eliot called &quot;The Rock&quot; was performed in 1934 for the benefit of churches in the Diocese of London. Much of it was a collaborative effort; Eliot accepted credit only for the authorship of one scene and the choruses. George Bell, the Bishop of Chichester, had been instrumental in connecting Eliot with producer E. Martin Browne for the production of &quot;The Rock&quot;, and later commissioned Eliot to write another play for the Canterbury Festival in 1935. 
This one, &quot;Murder in the Cathedral&quot;, concerning the martyrdom of Thomas Becket, was more under Eliot&#x27;s control. Eliot biographer Peter Ackroyd comments that &quot;for [Eliot], &quot;Murder in the Cathedral&quot; and succeeding verse plays offered a double advantage; it allowed him to practice poetry but it also offered a convenient home for his religious sensibility.&quot; After this, he worked on more &quot;commercial&quot; plays for more general audiences: &quot;The Family Reunion&quot; (1939), &quot;The Cocktail Party&quot; (1949), &quot;The Confidential Clerk&quot;, (1953) and &quot;The Elder Statesman&quot; (1958) (the latter three were produced by Henry Sherek and directed by E. Martin Browne). The Broadway production in New York of &quot;The Cocktail Party&quot; received the 1950 Tony Award for Best Play. Eliot wrote &quot;The Cocktail Party&quot; while he was a visiting scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study.

Regarding his method of playwriting, Eliot explained, &quot;If I set out to write a play, I start by an act of choice. I settle upon a particular emotional situation, out of which characters and a plot will emerge. And then lines of poetry may come into being: not from the original impulse but from a secondary stimulation of the unconscious mind.&quot;

==Literary criticism==
Eliot also made significant contributions to the field of literary criticism, and strongly influenced the school of New Criticism. He was somewhat self-deprecating and minimising of his work and once said his criticism was merely a &quot;by-product&quot; of his &quot;private poetry-workshop&quot;. But the critic William Empson once said, &quot;I do not know for certain how much of my own mind [Eliot] invented, let alone how much of it is a reaction against him or indeed a consequence of misreading him. He is a very penetrating influence, perhaps not unlike the east wind.&quot;

In his critical essay &quot;Tradition and the Individual Talent&quot;, Eliot argues that art must be understood not in a vacuum, but in the context of previous pieces of art. &quot;In a peculiar sense [an artist or poet] ... must inevitably be judged by the standards of the past.&quot; This essay was an important influence over the New Criticism by introducing the idea that the value of a work of art must be viewed in the context of the artist&#x27;s previous works, a &quot;simultaneous order&quot; of works (i.e., &quot;tradition&quot;). Eliot himself employed this concept on many of his works, especially on his long-poem &quot;The Waste Land&quot;.

Also important to New Criticism was the idea—as articulated in Eliot&#x27;s essay &quot;Hamlet and His Problems&quot;—of an &quot;objective correlative&quot;, which posits a connection among the words of the text and events, states of mind, and experiences. This notion concedes that a poem means what it says, but suggests that there can be a non-subjective judgment based on different readers&#x27; different—but perhaps corollary—interpretations of a work.

More generally, New Critics took a cue from Eliot in regard to his &quot;&#x27;classical&#x27; ideals and his religious thought; his attention to the poetry and drama of the early seventeenth century; his deprecation of the Romantics, especially Percy Shelley; his proposition that good poems constitute &#x27;not a turning loose of emotion but an escape from emotion&#x27;; and his insistence that &#x27;poets... at present must be difficult&#x27;.&quot;

Eliot&#x27;s essays were a major factor in the revival of interest in the metaphysical poets. Eliot particularly praised the metaphysical poets&#x27; ability to show experience as both psychological and sensual, while at the same time infusing this portrayal with—in Eliot&#x27;s view—wit and uniqueness. Eliot&#x27;s essay &quot;The Metaphysical Poets&quot;, along with giving new significance and attention to metaphysical poetry, introduced his now well-known definition of &quot;unified sensibility&quot;, which is considered by some to mean the same thing as the term &quot;metaphysical&quot;.

His 1922 poem &quot;The Waste Land&quot; also can be better understood in light of his work as a critic. He had argued that a poet must write &quot;programmatic criticism&quot;, that is, a poet should write to advance his own interests rather than to advance &quot;historical scholarship&quot;. Viewed from Eliot&#x27;s critical lens, &quot;The Waste Land&quot; likely shows his personal despair about the First World War rather than an objective historical understanding of it.

Late in his career, Eliot focused much of his creative energy on writing for the theatre; some of his earlier critical writing, in essays such as &quot;Poetry and Drama&quot;, &quot;Hamlet and his Problems&quot;, and &quot;The Possibility of a Poetic Drama&quot;, focused on the aesthetics of writing drama in verse.

==Critical reception==

===Responses to his poetry===
The writer Ronald Bush noted that Eliot&#x27;s early poems like &quot;The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock&quot;, &quot;Portrait of a Lady&quot;, &quot;La Figlia Che Piange&quot;, &quot;Preludes&quot;, and &quot;Rhapsody on a Windy Night&quot; had &quot;[an] effect [that] was both unique and compelling, and their assurance staggered [Eliot&#x27;s] contemporaries who were privileged to read them in manuscript. [Conrad] Aiken, for example, marveled at &#x27;how sharp and complete and sui generis the whole thing was, from the outset. The wholeness is there, from the very beginning.&#x27;&quot;

The initial critical response to Eliot&#x27;s &quot;The Waste Land&quot; was mixed. Bush noted that the piece was at first correctly perceived as a work of jazz-like syncopation—and, like 1920s jazz, essentially iconoclastic.&quot; Some critics, like Edmund Wilson, Conrad Aiken, and Gilbert Seldes thought it was the best poetry being written in the English language while others thought it was esoteric and wilfully difficult. Edmund Wilson, being one of the critics who praised Eliot, called him &quot;one of our only authentic poets&quot;. Wilson also pointed out some of Eliot&#x27;s weaknesses as a poet. In regard to &quot;The Waste Land&quot;, Wilson admits its flaws (&quot;its lack of structural unity&quot;), but concluded, &quot;I doubt whether there is a single other poem of equal length by a contemporary American which displays so high and so varied a mastery of English verse.&quot;

Charles Powell was critical in his assessment of Eliot, calling his poems incomprehensible. And the writers of &quot;Time&quot; magazine were similarly baffled by a challenging poem like &quot;The Waste Land&quot;. John Crowe Ransom wrote negative criticisms of Eliot&#x27;s work but also had positive things to say. For instance, though Ransom negatively criticised &quot;The Waste Land&quot; for its &quot;extreme disconnection&quot;, Ransom was not completely condemnatory of Eliot&#x27;s work and admitted that Eliot was a talented poet.

Addressing some of the common criticisms directed against &quot;The Waste Land&quot; at the time, Gilbert Seldes stated, &quot;It seems at first sight remarkably disconnected and confused... [however] a closer view of the poem does more than illuminate the difficulties; it reveals the hidden form of the work, [and] indicates how each thing falls into place.&quot;

Eliot&#x27;s reputation as a poet, as well as his influence in the academy, peaked following the publication of &quot;The Four Quartets&quot;. In an essay on Eliot published in 1989, the writer Cynthia Ozick refers to this peak of influence (from the 1940s through the early 1960s) as &quot;the Age of Eliot&quot; when Eliot &quot;seemed pure zenith, a colossus, nothing less than a permanent luminary, fixed in the firmament like the sun and the moon&quot;. But during this post-war period, others, like Ronald Bush, observed that this time also marked the beginning of the decline in Eliot&#x27;s literary influence:
Bush also notes that Eliot&#x27;s reputation &quot;slipped&quot; significantly further after his death. He writes, &quot;Sometimes regarded as too academic (William Carlos Williams&#x27;s view), Eliot was also frequently criticized for a deadening neoclassicism (as he himself—perhaps just as unfairly—had criticized Milton). However, the multifarious tributes from practicing poets of many schools published during his centenary in 1988 was a strong indication of the intimidating continued presence of his poetic voice.&quot;

Literary scholars, such as Harold Bloom and Stephen Greenblatt, acknowledge Eliot&#x27;s poetry as central to the literary English canon. For instance, the editors of &quot;The Norton Anthology of English Literature&quot; write, &quot;There is no disagreement on [Eliot&#x27;s] importance as one of the great renovators of the English poetry dialect, whose influence on a whole generation of poets, critics, and intellectuals generally was enormous. [However] his range as a poet [was] limited, and his interest in the great middle ground of human experience (as distinct from the extremes of saint and sinner) [was] deficient.&quot; Despite this criticism, these scholars also acknowledge &quot;[Eliot&#x27;s] poetic cunning, his fine craftsmanship, his original accent, his historical and representative importance as &quot;the&quot; poet of the modern symbolist-Metaphysical tradition&quot;.

===Antisemitism===
The depiction of Jews in some of Eliot&#x27;s poems has led several critics to accuse him of antisemitism, most forcefully Anthony Julius in his book &quot;T. S. Eliot, Anti-Semitism, and Literary Form&quot; (1996). In &quot;Gerontion&quot;, Eliot writes, in the voice of the poem&#x27;s elderly narrator, &quot;And the jew squats on the window sill, the owner [of my building] / Spawned in some of Antwerp.&quot; Another example appears in the poem, &quot;Burbank with a Baedeker: Bleistein with a Cigar&quot; in which Eliot wrote, &quot;The rats are underneath the piles. / The jew is underneath the lot. / Money in furs.&quot; Julius writes: &quot;The anti-Semitism is unmistakable. It reaches out like a clear signal to the reader.&quot; Julius&#x27; viewpoint has been supported by Harold Bloom, Christopher Ricks, George Steiner, Tom Paulin and James Fenton.

In lectures delivered at the University of Virginia in 1933 (published in 1934 under the title &quot;After Strange Gods: A Primer of Modern Heresy&quot;), Eliot wrote of societal tradition and coherence, &quot;What is still more important [than cultural homogeneity] is unity of religious background, and reasons of race and religion combine to make any large number of free-thinking Jews undesirable.&quot; Eliot never re-published this book/lecture. In his 1934 pageant play &quot;The Rock&quot;, Eliot distances himself from Fascist movements of the 1930s by caricaturing Oswald Mosley&#x27;s Blackshirts, who &quot;firmly refuse/ To descend to palaver with anthropoid Jews&quot;. The &quot;new evangels&quot; of totalitarianism are presented as antithetic to the spirit of Christianity.

In &quot;In Defence of T. S. Eliot&quot; (2001) and &quot;T. S. Eliot&quot; (2006), Craig Raine defended Eliot from the charge of anti-Semitism. Paul Dean was not convinced by Raine&#x27;s argument but nevertheless concluded, &quot;Ultimately, as both Raine and, to do him justice, Julius insist, however much Eliot may have been compromised as a person, as we all are in our several ways, his greatness as a poet remains.&quot; Critic Terry Eagleton also questioned the entire basis for Raine&#x27;s book, writing, &quot;Why do critics feel a need to defend the authors they write on, like doting parents deaf to all criticism of their obnoxious children? Eliot&#x27;s well-earned reputation [as a poet] is established beyond all doubt, and making him out to be as unflawed as the Archangel Gabriel does him no favours.&quot;

==Influence==
Eliot influenced many poets, novelists, and songwriters, including Seán Ó Ríordáin, Máirtín Ó Díreáin, Virginia Woolf, Ezra Pound, Bob Dylan, Hart Crane, William Gaddis, Allen Tate, Andrew Lloyd Webber, Trevor Nunn, Ted Hughes, Geoffrey Hill, Seamus Heaney, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Russell Kirk, George Seferis (who in 1936 published a modern Greek translation of &quot;The Waste Land&quot;) and James Joyce. T. S. Eliot was a strong influence on 20th-century Caribbean poetry written in English, including the epic &quot;Omeros&quot; (1990) by Nobel laureate Derek Walcott, and &quot;Islands&quot; (1969) by Barbadian Kamau Brathwaite.

==Honours and awards==
Below is a partial list of honours and awards received by Eliot or bestowed or created in his honour.

===National or state honours===
These honours are displayed in order of precedence based on Eliot&#x27;s nationality and rules of protocol, not awarding date.
===Literary awards===
* Nobel Prize in Literature &quot;for his outstanding, pioneer contribution to present-day poetry&quot; (1948)
* Hanseatic Goethe Prize (of Hamburg) (1955)
* Dante Medal (of Florence) (1959)

===Drama awards===
* 1950 Tony Award for Best Play for the Broadway production of &quot;The Cocktail Party&quot;
* 1983 Tony Award for Best Book of a Musical for his poems used in the musical &quot;Cats&quot; 
* 1983 Tony Award for Best Original Score for his poems used in the musical &quot;Cats&quot; (shared with Andrew Lloyd Webber) 

===Music awards===
* Ivor Novello Award for Best Song Musically and Lyrically for his poems used in the song &quot;Memory&quot; (1982)

===Academic awards===
* Inducted into Phi Beta Kappa (1935)
* Elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1954)
* Elected to the American Philosophical Society (1960)
* Thirteen Honorary Doctorates (Including ones from Oxford, Cambridge, the Sorbonne, and Harvard)

===Other honours===
* Eliot College of the University of Kent, England, named in his honour
* Celebrated on U.S. commemorative postage stamps
* Star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame

==Works==

Source: 
===Earliest works===
* Prose
** &quot;The Birds of Prey&quot; (a short story; 1905)
** &quot;A Tale of a Whale&quot; (a short story; 1905)
** &quot;The Man Who Was King&quot; (a short story; 1905)
** &quot;The Wine and the Puritans&quot; (review, 1909)
** &quot;The Point of View&quot; (1909)
** &quot;Gentlemen and Seamen&quot; (1909)
** &quot;Egoist&quot; (review, 1909)
* Poems
** &quot;A Fable for Feasters&quot; (1905)
** &quot;[A Lyric:]&#x27;If Time and Space as Sages say&#x27;&quot; (1905)
** &quot;[At Graduation 1905]&quot; (1905)
** &quot;Song: &#x27;If space and time, as sages say&#x27;&quot; (1907)
** &quot;Before Morning&quot; (1908)
** &quot;Circe&#x27;s Palace&quot; (1908)
** &quot;Song: &#x27;When we came home across the hill&#x27;&quot; (1909)
** &quot;On a Portrait&quot; (1909)
** &quot;Song: &#x27;The moonflower opens to the moth&#x27;&quot; (1909)
** &quot;Nocturne&quot; (1909)
** &quot;Humoresque&quot; (1910)
** &quot;Spleen&quot; (1910)
** &quot;[Class] Ode&quot; (1910)
** &quot;The Death of Saint Narcissus&quot; (-15)

===Poetry===
* &quot;&quot; (1917)
** &quot;The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock&quot;
** &quot;Portrait of a Lady&quot;
** &quot;Preludes&quot;
** &quot;Rhapsody on a Windy Night&quot;
** &quot;Morning at the Window&quot;
** &quot;The Boston Evening Transcript&quot; (about the &quot;Boston Evening Transcript&quot;)
** &quot;Aunt Helen&quot;
** &quot;Cousin Nancy&quot;
** &quot;Mr. Apollinax&quot;
** &quot;Hysteria&quot;
** &quot;Conversation Galante&quot;
** &quot;La Figlia Che Piange&quot;
* &quot;&quot; (1920)
** &quot;Gerontion&quot;
** &quot;Burbank with a Baedeker: Bleistein with a Cigar&quot;
** &quot;Sweeney Erect&quot;
** &quot;A Cooking Egg&quot;
** &quot;Le Directeur&quot;
** &quot;Mélange Adultère de Tout&quot;
** &quot;Lune de Miel&quot;
** &quot;The Hippopotamus&quot;
** &quot;Dans le Restaurant&quot;
** &quot;Whispers of Immortality&quot;
** &quot;Mr. Eliot&#x27;s Sunday Morning Service&quot;
** &quot;Sweeney Among the Nightingales&quot;
* &quot;The Waste Land&quot; (1922)
* &quot;The Hollow Men&quot; (1925)
* &quot;Ariel Poems&quot; (1927–1954)
** &quot;Journey of the Magi&quot; (1927)
** &quot;A Song for Simeon&quot; (1928)
** &quot;Animula&quot; (1929)
** &quot;Marina&quot; (1930)
** &quot;Triumphal March&quot; (1931)
** &quot;The Cultivation of Christmas Trees&quot; (1954)
** &quot;Macavity:The Mystery Cat&quot;
* &quot;Ash Wednesday&quot; (1930)
* &quot;Coriolan&quot; (1931)
* &quot;Old Possum&#x27;s Book of Practical Cats&quot; (1939)
* &quot;The Marching Song of the Pollicle Dogs&quot; and &quot;Billy M&#x27;Caw: The Remarkable Parrot&quot; (1939) in &quot;The Queen&#x27;s Book of the Red Cross&quot;
* &quot;Four Quartets&quot; (1945)

===Plays===
* &quot;Sweeney Agonistes&quot; (published in 1926, first performed in 1934)
* &quot;The Rock&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Murder in the Cathedral&quot; (1935)
* &quot;The Family Reunion&quot; (1939)
* &quot;The Cocktail Party&quot; (1949)
* &quot;The Confidential Clerk&quot; (1953)
* &quot;The Elder Statesman&quot; (first performed in 1958, published in 1959)

===Non-fiction===
* &quot;Christianity &amp; Culture&quot; (1939, 1948)
* &quot;The Second-Order Mind&quot; (1920)
* &quot;Tradition and the Individual Talent&quot; (1920)
* &quot;The Sacred Wood: Essays on Poetry and Criticism&quot; (1920)
** &quot;Hamlet and His Problems&quot;
* &quot;Homage to John Dryden&quot; (1924)
* &quot;Shakespeare and the Stoicism of Seneca&quot; (1928)
* &quot;For Lancelot Andrewes&quot; (1928)
* &quot;Dante&quot; (1929)
* &quot;Selected Essays, 1917-1932&quot; (1932)
* &quot;The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism&quot; (1933)
* &quot;After Strange Gods&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Elizabethan Essays&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Essays Ancient and Modern&quot; (1936)
* &quot;The Idea of a Christian Society&quot; (1939)
* &quot;A Choice of Kipling&#x27;s Verse&quot; (1941) made by Eliot, with an essay on Rudyard Kipling
* &quot;Notes Towards the Definition of Culture&quot; (1948)
* &quot;Poetry and Drama&quot; (1951)
* &quot;The Three Voices of Poetry&quot; (1954)
* &quot;The Frontiers of Criticism&quot; (1956)
* &quot;On Poetry and Poets&quot; (1943)

===Posthumous publications===
* &quot;To Criticize the Critic&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Poems Written in Early Youth&quot; (1967)
* &quot;The Waste Land: Facsimile Edition&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909–1917&quot; (1996)
===Critical editions===
* &quot;Collected Poems, 1909–1962&quot; (1963), excerpt and text search
* &quot;Old Possum&#x27;s Book of Practical Cats, Illustrated Edition&quot; (1982), excerpt and text search
* &quot;Selected Prose of T.S. Eliot&quot;, edited by Frank Kermode (1975), excerpt and text search
* &quot;The Waste Land&quot; (Norton Critical Editions), edited by Michael North (2000) excerpt and text search
* &quot;The Poems of T.S. Eliot&quot;, volume 1 (Collected &amp; Uncollected Poems) and volume 2 (Practical Cats &amp; Further Verses), edited by Christopher Ricks and Jim McCue (2015), Faber &amp; Faber
* &quot;Selected Essays&quot; (1932); enlarged (1960)
* &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot,&quot; edited by Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton, Volume 1: 1898–1922 (1988, revised 2009)
* &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot,&quot; edited by Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton, Volume 2: 1923–1925 (2009)
* &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot,&quot; edited by Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden, Volume 3: 1926–1927 (2012)
* &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot,&quot; edited by Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden, Volume 4: 1928–1929 (2013)
* &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot,&quot; edited by Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden, Volume 5: 1930–1931 (2014)
* &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot,&quot; edited by Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden, Volume 6: 1932–1933 (2016)
* &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot,&quot; edited by Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden, Volume 7: 1934–1935 (2017)
* &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot,&quot; edited by Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden, Volume 8: 1936–1938 (2019)
* &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot,&quot; edited by Valerie Eliot and John Haffenden, Volume 9: 1939–1941 (2021)

==References==
==Further reading==
* Ackroyd, Peter. &quot;T. S. Eliot: A Life&quot; (1984).
* Adamson, Donald (ed.) and Sencourt, Robert. &quot;T. S. Eliot: A Memoir&quot;, Dodd Mead (1971). 
* Ali, Ahmed. &quot;Mr. Eliot&#x27;s Penny World of Dreams: An Essay in the Interpretation of T.S. Eliot&#x27;s Poetry&quot;, Published for the Lucknow University by New Book Co., Bombay, P.S. King &amp; Staples Ltd, Westminster, London, 1942, 138 pp.
* Asher, Kenneth &quot;T. S. Eliot and Ideology&quot; (1995).
* Bottum, Joseph, &quot;What T. S. Eliot Almost Believed&quot;, &quot;First Things&quot; 55 (August/September 1995): 25–30.
* Brand, Clinton A. &quot;The Voice of This Calling: The Enduring Legacy of T. S. Eliot&quot;, &quot;Modern Age&quot; Volume 45, Number 4; Fall 2003, conservative perspective.
* Brown, Alec. &quot;The Lyrical Impulse in Eliot&#x27;s Poetry&quot;, &quot;Scrutiny&quot;, vol. 2.
* Bush, Ronald. &quot;T. S. Eliot: A Study in Character and Style&quot; (1984).
* Bush, Ronald, &#x27;The Presence of the Past: Ethnographic Thinking/ Literary Politics&#x27;. In &quot;Prehistories of the Future&quot;, ed. Elzar Barkan and Ronald Bush, Stanford University Press (1995).
* Crawford, Robert. &quot;The Savage and the City in the Work of T. S. Eliot&quot; (1987).
* Crawford, Robert. &quot;Young Eliot: From St Louis to &quot;The Waste Land&quot;&quot; (2015).
* Crawford, Robert. &quot;Eliot. After The Waste Land&quot; (2022).
* Christensen, Karen. &quot;Dear Mrs. Eliot&quot;, &quot;The Guardian Review&quot; (29 January 2005).
* Das, Jolly. &#x27;Eliot&#x27;s Prismatic Plays: A Multifaceted Quest&#x27;. New Delhi: Atlantic, 2007.
* Dawson, J. L., P. D. Holland &amp; D. J. McKitterick, &quot;A Concordance to &quot;The Complete Poems and Plays of T.S. Eliot&quot;&quot; Ithaca &amp; London: Cornell University Press, 1995.
* Forster, E. M. Essay on T. S. Eliot, in &quot;Life and Letters&quot;, June 1929.
* Gardner, Helen. &quot;The Art of T. S. Eliot&quot; (1949).
* Gordon, Lyndall. &quot;T. S. Eliot: An Imperfect Life&quot; (1998).
* Guha, Chinmoy. &quot;Where the Dreams Cross: T. S. Eliot and French Poetry&quot; (2000, 2011). 
* Harding, W. D. &quot;T. S. Eliot, 1925–1935&quot;, Scrutiny, September 1936: A Review.
* Hargrove, Nancy Duvall. &quot;Landscape as Symbol in the Poetry of T. S. Eliot&quot;. University Press of Mississippi (1978).
* Hearn, Sheila G., &quot;Tradition and the Individual Scot]: Edwin Muir &amp; T.S. Eliot&quot;, in &quot;Cencrastus&quot; No. 13, Summer 1983, pp. 21–24, 
* Hearn, Sheila G. &quot;T. S. Eliot&#x27;s Parisian Year&quot;. University Press of Florida (2009).
* Julius, Anthony. &quot;T. S. Eliot, Anti-Semitism, and Literary Form&quot;. Cambridge University Press (1995).
* Kenner, Hugh. &quot;The Invisible Poet: T. S. Eliot&quot; (1969).
* Kenner, Hugh. editor, &quot;T. S. Eliot: A Collection of Critical Essays&quot;, Prentice-Hall (1962).
* Kirk, Russell &quot;Eliot and His Age: T. S, Eliot&#x27;s Moral Imagination in the Twentieth Century&quot; (Introduction by Benjamin G. Lockerd Jr.). Wilmington: Intercollegiate Studies Institute, Republication of the revised second edition, 2008.
* Kojecky, Roger. &quot;T.S. Eliot&#x27;s Social Criticism&quot;, Faber &amp; Faber, Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1972, revised Kindle edn. 2014.
* Lal, P. (editor), &quot;T. S. Eliot: Homage from India: A Commemoration Volume of 55 Essays &amp; Elegies&quot;, Writer&#x27;s Workshop Calcutta, 1965.
* &quot;The Letters of T. S. Eliot&quot;. Ed. Valerie Eliot. Vol. I, 1898–1922. San Diego [etc.], 1988. Vol. 2, 1923–1925. Edited by Valerie Eliot and Hugh Haughton, London: Faber, 2009. 
* Levy, William Turner and Victor Scherle. &quot;Affectionately, T. S. Eliot: The Story of a Friendship: 1947–1965&quot; (1968).
* Matthews, T. S. &quot;Great Tom: Notes Towards the Definition of T. S. Eliot&quot; (1973)
* Maxwell, D. E. S. &quot;The Poetry of T. S. Eliot&quot;, Routledge and Kegan Paul (1960).
* Miller, James E., Jr. &quot;T. S. Eliot. The Making of an American Poet, 1888–1922&quot;. The Pennsylvania State University Press. 2005.
* North, Michael (ed.) &quot;The Waste Land (Norton Critical Editions)&quot;. New York: W.W. Norton, 2000.
* Raine, Craig. &quot;T. S. Eliot&quot;. Oxford University Press (2006).
* Ricks, Christopher.&quot;T. S. Eliot and Prejudice&quot; (1988).
*Robinson, Ian &quot;The English Prophets&quot;, The Brynmill Press Ltd (2001)
* Schuchard, Ronald. &quot;Eliot&#x27;s Dark Angel: Intersections of Life and Art&quot; (1999).
* Scofield, Dr. Martin, &quot;T.S. Eliot: The Poems&quot;, Cambridge University Press (1988).
* Seymour-Jones, Carole. &quot;Painted Shadow: A Life of Vivienne Eliot&quot; (2001).
*Sinha, Arun Kumar and Vikram, Kumar. &quot;T. S. Eliot: An Intensive Study of Selected Poems&quot;, New Delhi: Spectrum Books Pvt. Ltd (2005).
* Spender, Stephen. &quot;T. S. Eliot&quot; (1975)
*Spurr, Barry, &quot;Anglo-Catholic in Religion: T. S. Eliot and Christianity&quot;, The Lutterworth Press (2009)
* Tate, Allen, editor. &quot;T. S. Eliot: The Man and His Work&quot; (1966; republished by Penguin, 1971).
==External links==
===Biography===
* T. S. Eliot at the Poetry Foundation
* Biography From T. S. Eliot Lives&#x27; and Legacies 
* Eliot family genealogy, including T. S. Eliot
* Eliot&#x27;s grave
* Lyndall Gordon, Eliot&#x27;s Early Years, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1977, .
* T. S. Eliot Profile, Poems, Essays at Poets.org

===Works===
* 
* 
* official listing of T. S. Eliot&#x27;s works with some available in full
* doollee.com listing of T S Eliot&#x27;s works written for the stage 
* Poems by T.S. Eliot and biography at PoetryFoundation.org
* Text of early poems (1907–1910) printed in &quot;The Harvard Advocate&quot;
* T. S. Eliot Collection at Bartleby.com
* T.S. Eliot&#x27;s Cats
*&quot;The Sacred Wood: Essays on Poetry and Criticism&quot;. Knopf, 1921. Via HathiTrust.

===Websites===
* T. S. Eliot Society (UK) Resource Hub
* T. S. Eliot Hypertext Project
* Official (T. S. Eliot Estate) site
* T. S. Eliot Society (US) Home Page

===Archives===
* Search for T.S. Eliot at Harvard University
* T. S. Eliot Collection at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin
* T. S. Eliot Collection at Merton College, Oxford University
* T. S. Eliot collection at University of Victoria, Special Collections
*T. S. Eliot collection at the University of Maryland Libraries 
*. Yale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.

===Miscellaneous===
* Links to audio recordings of Eliot reading his work
* An interview with Eliot: 
* Yale College Lecture on T. S. Eliot audio, video and full transcripts from Open Yale Courses
*T S Eliot at the British Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="0" end="20" title="T. S. Eliot" label="Thomas Stearns Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="61" end="65" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35760" start="67" end="75" title="essayist" label="essayist"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="80" end="90" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889129" start="119" end="152" title="Modernist poetry in English" label="English-language Modernist poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="353" end="362" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q387720" start="389" end="403" title="Boston Brahmin" label="Boston Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="515" end="530" title="British nationality law" label="British subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="574" end="594" title="American citizenship" label="American citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247005" start="659" end="694" title="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" label="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q581458" start="811" end="825" title="The Waste Land" label="The Waste Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084475" start="846" end="860" title="The Hollow Men" label="The Hollow Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346941" start="881" end="894" title="Ash Wednesday (poem)" label="Ash Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468448" start="919" end="932" title="Four Quartets" label="Four Quartets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947367" start="985" end="1008" title="Murder in the Cathedral" label="Murder in the Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766503" start="1032" end="1050" title="The Cocktail Party" label="The Cocktail Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q107366020" start="1084" end="1114" title="1948 Nobel Prize in Literature" label="1948 Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361270" start="1238" end="1244" title="Eliot family (America)" label="Eliots"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="1299" end="1310" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010172" start="1347" end="1370" title="William Greenleaf Eliot" label="William Greenleaf Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1385" end="1394" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="1421" end="1430" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729871" start="1467" end="1483" title="Henry Ware Eliot" label="Henry Ware Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085873" start="1601" end="1625" title="Charlotte Champe Stearns" label="Charlotte Champe Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="1651" end="1664" title="social worker" label="social worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144039" start="2062" end="2077" title="inguinal hernia" label="inguinal hernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="2378" end="2388" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q944203" start="2402" end="2412" title="Tom Sawyer" label="Tom Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="2894" end="2903" title="Mississippi River" label="big river"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779832" start="3099" end="3112" title="Mary Institute and St. Louis Country Day School" label="Smith Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="3155" end="3176" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3205" end="3210" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3212" end="3225" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3227" end="3233" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3239" end="3245" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q532457" start="3310" end="3327" title="Edward FitzGerald (poet)" label="Edward Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059358" start="3360" end="3384" title="Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam" label="Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738951" start="3787" end="3807" title="The Harvard Advocate" label="The Harvard Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3815" end="3833" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234581" start="4063" end="4077" title="Igorot people" label="Igorot Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520847" start="4097" end="4119" title="1904 World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1904 World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="4150" end="4168" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="4239" end="4248" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623150" start="4311" end="4324" title="Locust Street (St. Louis)" label="Locust Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="4506" end="4514" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="4519" end="4534" title="Mississippi River" label="the Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860967" start="4668" end="4682" title="Milton Academy" label="Milton Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="4686" end="4699" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434247" start="4737" end="4752" title="Scofield Thayer" label="Scofield Thayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q581458" start="4779" end="4793" title="The Waste Land" label="The Waste Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="4815" end="4830" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443556" start="5136" end="5149" title="Frank Kermode" label="Frank Kermode"/>
<link wikidata="Q711666" start="5256" end="5269" title="Arthur Symons" label="Arthur Symons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767807" start="5283" end="5319" title="The Symbolist Movement in Literature" label="The Symbolist Movement in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q380275" start="5350" end="5364" title="Jules Laforgue" label="Jules Laforgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="5366" end="5380" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Arthur Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q755" start="5386" end="5399" title="Paul Verlaine" label="Paul Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q316536" start="5461" end="5477" title="Tristan Corbière" label="Tristan Corbière"/>
<link wikidata="Q380645" start="5673" end="5685" title="Conrad Aiken" label="Conrad Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="5866" end="5874" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q42156" start="5900" end="5913" title="Henri Bergson" label="Henri Bergson"/>
<link wikidata="Q298394" start="5935" end="5955" title="Alain-Fournier" label="Henri Alban-Fournier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="6030" end="6038" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225988" start="6119" end="6129" title="Emily Hale" label="Emily Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q82513" start="6166" end="6188" title="Merton College, Oxford" label="Merton College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869" start="6216" end="6223" title="Marburg" label="Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6292" end="6307" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153462" start="6408" end="6426" title="Junior Common Room" label="Junior Common Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q459318" start="6480" end="6495" title="Americanization" label="Americanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="7142" end="7152" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q375606" start="7933" end="7971" title="Birkbeck, University of London" label="Birkbeck College, University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q350236" start="8087" end="8100" title="F. H. Bradley" label="F. H. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="8137" end="8170" title="Thesis defence" label="&amp;quot;viva voce&amp;quot; examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937883" start="8563" end="8582" title="Vivienne Haigh-Wood" label="Vivienne Haigh-Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540278" start="8596" end="8605" title="governess" label="governess"/>
<link wikidata="Q375606" start="8814" end="8830" title="Birkbeck, University of London" label="Birkbeck College"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="8832" end="8852" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="8870" end="8886" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="9295" end="9302" title="fatigue (medical)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="9304" end="9312" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="9314" end="9322" title="migraine" label="migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453464" start="9329" end="9336" title="colitis" label="colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22807426" start="10402" end="10415" title="Tom &amp;amp; Viv (play)" label="Tom &amp;amp; Viv"/>
<link wikidata="Q559429" start="10454" end="10475" title="Tom &amp;amp; Viv" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560910" start="11054" end="11069" title="Highgate School" label="Highgate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q962308" start="11137" end="11150" title="John Betjeman" label="John Betjeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374229" start="11182" end="11216" title="Royal Grammar School, High Wycombe" label="Royal Grammar School, High Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="11220" end="11235" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152847" start="11394" end="11405" title="Lloyds Bank" label="Lloyds Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q780102" start="11496" end="11509" title="Wyndham Lewis" label="Wyndham Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="11529" end="11540" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q120727601" start="11830" end="11871" title="Portrait of T. S. Eliot" label="his well-known portrait painting of Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083490" start="11882" end="11897" title="Charles Whibley" label="Charles Whibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534593" start="11925" end="11939" title="Geoffrey Faber" label="Geoffrey Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q898097" start="12011" end="12026" title="Faber and Gwyer" label="Faber and Gwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q898097" start="12034" end="12051" title="Faber &amp;amp; Faber" label="Faber &amp;amp; Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="12195" end="12206" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q448764" start="12208" end="12223" title="Stephen Spender" label="Stephen Spender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080579" start="12225" end="12238" title="Charles Madge" label="Charles Madge"/>
<link wikidata="Q272194" start="12243" end="12253" title="Ted Hughes" label="Ted Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="12351" end="12363" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="12367" end="12378" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="12414" end="12433" title="British nationality law" label="British citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290825" start="12551" end="12563" title="churchwarden" label="churchwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139003" start="12586" end="12620" title="St Stephen&amp;#x27;s, Gloucester Road" label="St Stephen&amp;#x27;s, Gloucester Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552542" start="12655" end="12689" title="Society of King Charles the Martyr" label="Society of King Charles the Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q541235" start="12721" end="12735" title="Anglo-Catholic" label="Anglo-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="12763" end="12773" title="Classicism" label="classicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="12789" end="12797" title="royalist" label="royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="13195" end="13201" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="13206" end="13220" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q319169" start="13289" end="13302" title="Peter Ackroyd" label="Peter Ackroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="13391" end="13408" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064268" start="13717" end="13751" title="Charles Eliot Norton Lectures" label="Charles Eliot Norton professorship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14077" end="14096" title="Manor House, London#Early development" label="Manor House, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225988" start="14274" end="14284" title="Emily Hale" label="Emily Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q96390199" start="14414" end="14420" title="List of sealed archives" label="sealed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780859" start="14726" end="14740" title="Mary Trevelyan" label="Mary Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043142" start="14861" end="14877" title="Carlyle Mansions" label="Carlyle Mansions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228864" start="14904" end="14921" title="John Davy Hayward" label="John Davy Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="15313" end="15343" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911263" start="15407" end="15428" title="Esmé Valerie Fletcher" label="Esmé Valerie Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="15650" end="15660" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984073" start="15834" end="15859" title="Wesleyan University Press" label="Wesleyan University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="16259" end="16268" title="emphysema" label="emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="16284" end="16294" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141350" start="16345" end="16370" title="Golders Green Crematorium" label="Golders Green Crematorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17554772" start="16427" end="16477" title="St Michael and All Angels&amp;#x27; Church, East Coker" label="St Michael and All Angels&amp;#x27; Church, East Coker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275898" start="16849" end="16867" title="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner" label="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="16885" end="16902" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319669" start="16931" end="16945" title="Reynolds Stone" label="Reynolds Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q94056" start="16985" end="16999" title="Order of Merit" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835023" start="17037" end="17051" title="Little Gidding (poem)" label="Little Gidding"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="17173" end="17184" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391439" start="17227" end="17251" title="Kensington Court Gardens" label="Kensington Court Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738951" start="18716" end="18736" title="The Harvard Advocate" label="The Harvard Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="19632" end="19642" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishads"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192728" start="19926" end="19938" title="Chinmoy Guha" label="Chinmoy Guha"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="20156" end="20166" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W.B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="20441" end="20451" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207482" start="20478" end="20484" title="Poetry (magazine)" label="Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586150" start="20516" end="20530" title="Harriet Monroe" label="Harriet Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509327" start="20920" end="20935" title="Georgian Poetry" label="Georgian Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="20987" end="21001" title="romanticism" label="Romantic Poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="21090" end="21095" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="21154" end="21160" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="21274" end="21303" title="The Times Literary Supplement" label="The Times Literary Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127446" start="21628" end="21641" title="The Criterion" label="The Criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q514998" start="22203" end="22220" title="Richard Aldington" label="Richard Aldington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889129" start="23065" end="23082" title="Modernist poetry in English" label="modern literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="23144" end="23155" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="23169" end="23176" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q704931" start="23473" end="23486" title="Edmund Wilson" label="Edmund Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="23778" end="23798" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q975706" start="23903" end="23913" title="Allen Tate" label="Allen Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13898" start="24207" end="24217" title="Guy Fawkes" label="Guy Fawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45810" start="24231" end="24245" title="Gunpowder Plot" label="Gunpowder Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="24266" end="24274" title="Agrarianism" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="24285" end="24298" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q151936" start="24303" end="24322" title="James George Frazer" label="James George Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="24784" end="24795" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="25091" end="25100" title="salvation" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q304752" start="25590" end="25600" title="Edwin Muir" label="Edwin Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="25847" end="25855" title="Intellectual" label="literati"/>
<link wikidata="Q715697" start="25959" end="25970" title="light verse" label="light verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="26054" end="26064" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q428560" start="26190" end="26205" title="Alan Rawsthorne" label="Alan Rawsthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q337097" start="26368" end="26372" title="Cats (musical)" label="Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="26382" end="26401" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="26467" end="26475" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="26656" end="26681" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647427" start="26754" end="26766" title="Burnt Norton" label="Burnt Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3717657" start="26787" end="26797" title="East Coker (poem)" label="East Coker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731099" start="26818" end="26834" title="The Dry Salvages" label="The Dry Salvages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835023" start="26858" end="26872" title="Little Gidding (poem)" label="Little Gidding"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="27034" end="27045" title="theological" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="27154" end="27172" title="classical elements" label="classical elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="28786" end="28795" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="28836" end="28841" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q236699" start="29186" end="29203" title="Julian of Norwich" label="Julian of Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="29404" end="29425" title="St. John of the Cross" label="St. John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q236699" start="29430" end="29447" title="Julian of Norwich" label="Julian of Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="29710" end="29721" title="Elizabethan" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29726" end="29734" title="Literature in English#Jacobean literature" label="Jacobean"/>
<link wikidata="Q225904" start="29773" end="29780" title="John Webster" label="Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q344865" start="29782" end="29798" title="Thomas Middleton" label="Thomas Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="29800" end="29819" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q337082" start="29824" end="29834" title="Thomas Kyd" label="Thomas Kyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="30513" end="30517" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410009" start="30843" end="30860" title="Sweeney Agonistes" label="Sweeney Agonistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946379" start="31082" end="31099" title="Diocese of London" label="Diocese of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q336326" start="31217" end="31228" title="George Bell (bishop)" label="George Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q458461" start="31234" end="31254" title="Bishop of Chichester" label="Bishop of Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322057" start="31312" end="31328" title="E. Martin Browne" label="E. Martin Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033748" start="31432" end="31451" title="Canterbury Festival" label="Canterbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="31537" end="31550" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q319169" start="31606" end="31619" title="Peter Ackroyd" label="Peter Ackroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q17429767" start="32139" end="32151" title="Henry Sherek" label="Henry Sherek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322057" start="32168" end="32184" title="E. Martin Browne" label="E. Martin Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="32275" end="32285" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="32383" end="32411" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="32851" end="32869" title="literary criticism" label="literary criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q742302" start="32909" end="32922" title="New Criticism" label="New Criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q966870" start="33107" end="33121" title="William Empson" label="William Empson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832271" start="33406" end="33441" title="Tradition and the Individual Talent" label="Tradition and the Individual Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12250082" start="34125" end="34148" title="Hamlet and His Problems" label="Hamlet and His Problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076958" start="34167" end="34188" title="objective correlative" label="objective correlative"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="34744" end="34757" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Percy Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q827137" start="35029" end="35047" title="metaphysical poets" label="metaphysical poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q311290" start="36893" end="36904" title="sui generis" label="sui generis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="37199" end="37203" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q704931" start="37256" end="37269" title="Edmund Wilson" label="Edmund Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q380645" start="37271" end="37283" title="Conrad Aiken" label="Conrad Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q969685" start="37289" end="37303" title="Gilbert Seldes" label="Gilbert Seldes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337955" start="38121" end="38138" title="John Crowe Ransom" label="John Crowe Ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q444849" start="39010" end="39023" title="Cynthia Ozick" label="Cynthia Ozick"/>
<link wikidata="Q178106" start="39592" end="39615" title="William Carlos Williams" label="William Carlos Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="39683" end="39696" title="neoclassicism" label="neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="39752" end="39758" title="John Milton" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q345612" start="39991" end="40003" title="Harold Bloom" label="Harold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q639065" start="40008" end="40026" title="Stephen Greenblatt" label="Stephen Greenblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="40819" end="40828" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q827137" start="40829" end="40841" title="Metaphysical poets" label="Metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="40972" end="40984" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772862" start="41002" end="41016" title="Anthony Julius" label="Anthony Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289249" start="41104" end="41113" title="Gerontion" label="Gerontion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="41278" end="41285" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q345612" start="41666" end="41678" title="Harold Bloom" label="Harold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675876" start="41680" end="41697" title="Christopher Ricks" label="Christopher Ricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q453288" start="41699" end="41713" title="George Steiner" label="George Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358515" start="41715" end="41725" title="Tom Paulin" label="Tom Paulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q449235" start="41730" end="41742" title="James Fenton" label="James Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="41774" end="41796" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="42273" end="42280" title="Fascist" label="Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="42320" end="42333" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q846081" start="42341" end="42351" title="Blackshirt" label="Blackshirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="42461" end="42476" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="42522" end="42534" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138630" start="42621" end="42632" title="Craig Raine" label="Craig Raine"/>
<link wikidata="Q315349" start="42973" end="42987" title="Terry Eagleton" label="Terry Eagleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="43319" end="43336" title="Gabriel" label="Archangel Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322192" start="43446" end="43461" title="Seán Ó Ríordáin" label="Seán Ó Ríordáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q522472" start="43463" end="43480" title="Máirtín Ó Díreáin" label="Máirtín Ó Díreáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="43482" end="43496" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="43498" end="43508" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="43510" end="43519" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380723" start="43521" end="43531" title="Hart Crane" label="Hart Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q456958" start="43533" end="43547" title="William Gaddis" label="William Gaddis"/>
<link wikidata="Q975706" start="43549" end="43559" title="Allen Tate" label="Allen Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="43561" end="43580" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334509" start="43582" end="43593" title="Trevor Nunn" label="Trevor Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q272194" start="43595" end="43605" title="Ted Hughes" label="Ted Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q649280" start="43607" end="43620" title="Geoffrey Hill" label="Geoffrey Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q93356" start="43622" end="43635" title="Seamus Heaney" label="Seamus Heaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="43637" end="43656" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q158997" start="43658" end="43670" title="Russell Kirk" label="Russell Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q165823" start="43672" end="43686" title="George Seferis" label="George Seferis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="43772" end="43783" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039450" start="43836" end="43852" title="Caribbean poetry" label="Caribbean poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="43887" end="43891" title="epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882169" start="43898" end="43904" title="Omeros" label="Omeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q132701" start="43936" end="43949" title="Derek Walcott" label="Derek Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722859" start="43995" end="44011" title="Kamau Brathwaite" label="Kamau Brathwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="44323" end="44348" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q354312" start="44434" end="44456" title="Hanseatic Goethe Prize" label="Hanseatic Goethe Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799442" start="44539" end="44563" title="Tony Award for Best Play" label="Tony Award for Best Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784838" start="44633" end="44670" title="Tony Award for Best Book of a Musical" label="Tony Award for Best Book of a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q337097" start="44711" end="44715" title="Cats (musical)" label="Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478089" start="44730" end="44764" title="Tony Award for Best Original Score" label="Tony Award for Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q337097" start="44805" end="44809" title="Cats (musical)" label="Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="44829" end="44848" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="44873" end="44891" title="Ivor Novello Award" label="Ivor Novello Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920130" start="44967" end="44973" title="Memory (Cats song)" label="Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="45026" end="45040" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="45065" end="45102" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="45127" end="45157" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361221" start="45286" end="45299" title="Eliot College, Kent" label="Eliot College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516684" start="45307" end="45325" title="University of Kent" label="University of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="45377" end="45405" title="Commemorative stamp" label="commemorative postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589721" start="45420" end="45442" title="St. Louis Walk of Fame" label="St. Louis Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247005" start="46562" end="46597" title="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" label="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232321" start="46613" end="46631" title="Portrait of a Lady (poem)" label="Portrait of a Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947900" start="46802" end="46827" title="Boston Evening Transcript" label="Boston Evening Transcript"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289249" start="47045" end="47054" title="Gerontion" label="Gerontion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994001" start="47353" end="47376" title="Whispers of Immortality" label="Whispers of Immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q581458" start="47492" end="47506" title="The Waste Land" label="The Waste Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084475" start="47528" end="47542" title="The Hollow Men" label="The Hollow Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668659" start="47564" end="47575" title="T. S. Eliot&amp;#x27;s Ariel poems" label="Ariel Poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q14746852" start="47603" end="47622" title="Journey of the Magi" label="Journey of the Magi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14776522" start="47645" end="47662" title="A Song for Simeon" label="A Song for Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841957" start="47839" end="47847" title="Macavity" label="Macavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346941" start="47878" end="47891" title="Ash Wednesday (poem)" label="Ash Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q671859" start="47943" end="47983" title="Old Possum&amp;#x27;s Book of Practical Cats" label="Old Possum&amp;#x27;s Book of Practical Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758958" start="48122" end="48160" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s Book of the Red Cross" label="The Queen&amp;#x27;s Book of the Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468448" start="48175" end="48188" title="Four Quartets" label="Four Quartets"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410009" start="48223" end="48240" title="Sweeney Agonistes" label="Sweeney Agonistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761247" start="48300" end="48308" title="The Rock (play)" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947367" start="48330" end="48353" title="Murder in the Cathedral" label="Murder in the Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733327" start="48375" end="48393" title="The Family Reunion" label="The Family Reunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766503" start="48415" end="48433" title="The Cocktail Party" label="The Cocktail Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727345" start="48455" end="48477" title="The Confidential Clerk" label="The Confidential Clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731688" start="48499" end="48518" title="The Elder Statesman (play)" label="The Elder Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832271" start="48694" end="48729" title="Tradition and the Individual Talent" label="Tradition and the Individual Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12250082" start="48821" end="48844" title="Hamlet and His Problems" label="Hamlet and His Problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447683" start="49032" end="49058" title="Selected Essays, 1917-1932" label="Selected Essays, 1917-1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087238" start="49324" end="49356" title="A Choice of Kipling&amp;#x27;s Verse" label="A Choice of Kipling&amp;#x27;s Verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="49402" end="49417" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827731" start="49573" end="49599" title="The Frontiers of Criticism" label="The Frontiers of Criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675876" start="50465" end="50482" title="Christopher Ricks" label="Christopher Ricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q319169" start="51644" end="51658" title="Peter Ackroyd" label="Ackroyd, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q456812" start="51702" end="51717" title="Donald Adamson" label="Adamson, Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287721" start="51781" end="51790" title="Dodd, Mead &amp;amp; Co." label="Dodd Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193019" start="52116" end="52130" title="Joseph Bottum (author)" label="Bottum, Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439355" start="52491" end="52499" title="Scrutiny (journal)" label="Scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q189119" start="53460" end="53474" title="E. M. Forster" label="Forster, E. M."/>
<link wikidata="Q5702334" start="53543" end="53557" title="Helen Gardner (critic)" label="Gardner, Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708612" start="53604" end="53619" title="Lyndall Gordon" label="Gordon, Lyndall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058809" start="54093" end="54103" title="Cencrastus" label="Cencrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772862" start="54246" end="54261" title="Anthony Julius" label="Julius, Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334954" start="54359" end="54371" title="Hugh Kenner" label="Kenner, Hugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334954" start="54427" end="54439" title="Hugh Kenner" label="Kenner, Hugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q158997" start="54531" end="54544" title="Russell Kirk" label="Kirk, Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665945" start="54693" end="54726" title="Intercollegiate Studies Institute" label="Intercollegiate Studies Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133160" start="55577" end="55598" title="James E. Miller" label="Miller, James E., Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6833098" start="55716" end="55730" title="Michael North (professor)" label="North, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282208" start="55802" end="55813" title="W.W. Norton" label="W.W. Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138630" start="55823" end="55835" title="Craig Raine" label="Raine, Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675876" start="55896" end="55914" title="Christopher Ricks" label="Ricks, Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044730" start="56232" end="56253" title="Carole Seymour-Jones" label="Seymour-Jones, Carole"/>
<link wikidata="Q448764" start="56462" end="56478" title="Stephen Spender" label="Spender, Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q975706" start="56627" end="56638" title="Allen Tate" label="Tate, Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207490" start="56788" end="56805" title="Poetry Foundation" label="Poetry Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708612" start="56932" end="56946" title="Lyndall Gordon" label="Lyndall Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="56995" end="57018" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738951" start="57354" end="57374" title="The Harvard Advocate" label="The Harvard Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="57743" end="57761" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="57794" end="57813" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="57821" end="57850" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82513" start="57879" end="57893" title="Merton College" label="Merton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="57895" end="57912" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895690" start="58016" end="58048" title="University of Maryland Libraries" label="University of Maryland Libraries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30274" wikidata="Q331748" url="?curid=30274" title="Tommy Lee">
<text>Thomas Lee (born Thomas Lee Bass; October 3, 1962) is an American musician who co-founded and plays drums for the heavy metal band Mötley Crüe. He also founded rap metal band Methods of Mayhem and has pursued solo musical projects.

==Early life==
Lee was born Thomas Lee Bass on October 3, 1962, in Athens, Greece, to father David Lee Thomas Bass, an American U.S. Army sergeant, and mother Vassiliki &quot;Voula&quot; Papadimitriou (Greek: Βασιλική Παπαδημητρίου), a contestant on the 1957 Miss Greece beauty contest. He has a younger sister, Athena, who is also a drummer. When Lee was approximately two years old, his father moved the family back to the United States, settling in California.

Lee received his first drum sticks when he was four years old, and his first proper drum kit when he was a teenager. Lee attended Royal Oak High School where he met Vince Neil and was part of the marching band. He dropped out of high school to pursue a career in music, starting with the L.A. club band Suite 19. As a teenager, he listened to Led Zeppelin, Van Halen, Cheap Trick, Kiss, AC/DC and Sweet. His main drumming influences are John Bonham, Tommy Aldridge, Alex Van Halen and Terry Bozzio. 

==Music career==
In the late 1970s Lee&#x27;s band, Suite 19, was a regular on the Sunset Strip club circuit in Los Angeles along with other up-and-coming acts such as Van Halen and Quiet Riot. He became acquainted with bassist Nikki Sixx, whose bands Sister and later London played the same circuit. Sixx was forming a theatrical band that borrowed heavily from Sister&#x27;s fusion of occult imagery with a theatrical heavy metal performance, and became a fan of Lee&#x27;s drumming. It was during this time period that Lee dropped his surname and earned the nickname &quot;T-bone&quot; due to his 6′ 2½″ height and his lean physique. When London finally broke up in 1981, Lee and Sixx decided to form a new group together. Shortly afterward, guitarist Mick Mars joined the band. Seeking a charismatic frontman, Lee mentioned to the others a singer, Vince Neil, whom he had known casually in high school; Neil soon joined the group, and Mötley Crüe was formed.

===Mötley Crüe===
Mötley Crüe quickly built a strong fanbase, and released its debut album &quot;Too Fast for Love&quot; in 1981 on its own independent label (Leathür Records). Elektra Records decided to sign the band shortly thereafter, reissuing the debut in 1982. The band then began a string of hit releases throughout the decade—1983&#x27;s &quot;Shout at the Devil&quot;, 1985&#x27;s &quot;Theatre of Pain&quot;, 1987&#x27;s &quot;Girls, Girls, Girls&quot;, and 1989&#x27;s &quot;Dr. Feelgood&quot;—establishing the quartet as one of the biggest hard rock/metal bands of the 1980s.

Lee used several memorable gimmicks during his drum solos at concerts, such as having his entire kit revolving and spinning, or having the entire kit float above the crowd while he continued to play. He was noted for mooning the crowd at nearly every show. The band was known for its decadent behavior both on and offstage, often consuming excessive amounts of drugs, such as cocaine, heroin, pills and alcohol. The duo of Lee and Sixx are called the &quot;Terror Twins&quot;.

In 2004, Lee reunited with the original Mötley Crüe line-up to release the double-disc anthology album entitled &quot;Red, White &amp; Crüe&quot;, which went quadruple-platinum and launched a monumental reunion tour to support it, &quot;The Red, White &amp; Crüe Tour 2005: Better Live Than Dead&quot;, the band&#x27;s first tour in six years. Mötley Crüe finished the year at #8 on the Top Concert Money Earners list. It played 81 shows and grossed million according to &quot;Billboard&quot; Boxscore.

===Solo career===

Lee came back once with Mötley Crüe to go on the &quot;Crüe&#x27;s Greatest Hits&quot; tour in 1999. With the popularity of rap metal, he formed a band called Methods of Mayhem. The band released a self-titled album the same year and toured in support of it. Although Lee distanced himself from Mötley Crüe after splitting, he agreed to take part in the band&#x27;s 2001 autobiography, &quot;The Dirt&quot;. In addition to Mötley Crüe and Methods of Mayhem, Lee has made guest appearances on albums by other artists, such as Stuart Hamm, Nine Inch Nails and Rob Zombie. He also contributed a song, &quot;Planet Boom&quot; (originally on Mötley Crüe&#x27;s Quaternary EP) to the soundtrack of then-wife Pamela Anderson&#x27;s 1996 movie, &quot;Barb Wire&quot;, and produced an album for the pre-Goldfinger project from John Feldmann and Simon Williams, the Electric Love Hogs.
Lee parted ways with Methods of Mayhem partner TiLo and began recording with members of Incubus. He then released his first solo album. The album, 2002&#x27;s &quot;Never a Dull Moment&quot;, has tones of rap metal and electronica. The song &quot;Blue&quot; features guest vocalist Rodleen Getsic (the credits read: &quot;Rolleen&quot;). In August 2002, Tommy Lee and his solo band joined Ozzfest, mainstage. In 2006, he formed a new band called Rock Star Supernova with Jason Newsted (ex-Flotsam &amp; Jetsam, Voivod, Metallica) and Gilby Clarke (ex-Guns N&#x27; Roses).

The 2006 season of &quot;Rock Star&quot; selected Lukas Rossi as the lead singer for Supernova. Dilana, Magni Ásgeirsson, and Toby Rand with his own band Juke Kartel were the three runners up and accepted an offer to go on tour with Supernova. The self-titled debut album &quot;Rock Star Supernova&quot; was released on November 21, 2006.

Lee released his autobiography, &quot;Tommyland&quot; and his second solo album, &quot;&quot; in 2005. The CD featured as a soundtrack to the book and includes the singles, &quot;Tryin to be Me&quot;, &quot;Good Times&quot; which was the theme song to his reality TV series &quot;Tommy Lee Goes to College&quot; and &quot;Hello, Again&quot; which features Andrew McMahon from Something Corporate and Jack&#x27;s Mannequin. Lee was also a guest DJ at WXRK &quot;K-Rock&quot; in New York during the Fourth of July Monster Metal Meltdown in 2005.

He also recorded drum tracks for the alternative rock band Jack&#x27;s Mannequin, which has released the album &quot;Everything in Transit&quot;.
In November 2007, it was announced by Nikki Sixx that Lee was no longer a member of Mötley Crüe. The drummer reportedly quit after the rest of the band sued his manager, Carl Stubner, for forcing Tommy to take part in reality TV shows, thus forcing the cancellation of a lengthy leg of Crüe tour dates in 2006. Lee had already quit once in September 2007 before returning to the band. Vince Neil denied the claims that Tommy Lee resigned from the band, and said that Mötley Crüe would be going into the studio in January to start recording its new album. In the end, Lee did end up recording the new album, &quot;Saints of Los Angeles&quot;, and toured with the band in 2008 on its Crüe Fest tour.

Tommy Lee&#x27;s more recent artistic endeavors include touring as an electronic dance music DJ with his Methods of Mayhem DJ/production partner, DJ Aero (birth name: Chester Deitz). As DJs, they are also known as Electro Mayhem, and clocked over 60 club dates as DJs throughout North America in 2007 alone, with stops in the Bahamas and Central America. Lee and Aero debuted as DJs on the mainstage at Ultra Music Festival during Winter Music Conference (WMC) in 2004. Lee and Aero began DJing together in 2000. In 2009, Lee appeared in select cities with Sharam, one half of Grammy-winning Deep Dish, accompanying Sharam live on the piano during his house DJ sets. Lee and DJ Aero also accompanied deadmau5 in his 2011 Meowington Hax tour. He played keyboards with Deftones at a benefit show for now deceased bassist Chi Cheng in 2009.

In 2014, Lee performed on the Smashing Pumpkins&#x27; &quot;Monuments to an Elegy&quot; album. That same year, he rejoined his Mötley Crüe bandmates for the group&#x27;s farewell tour. As part of a legal agreement between the four band members, each signed a contract which would prevent any of them from ever touring under the Mötley Crüe moniker again unless all members were involved.

In 2022, Lee had a phone conversation with Foo Fighters drummer Taylor Hawkins just hours before the latter&#x27;s death. It was reported that Lee was one of the last people to speak to Hawkins while he was still alive. Lee later appeared with Nikki Sixx in a tribute concert for Hawkins at Kia Forum in Inglewood, California on September 27, 2022.
==Film and television appearances==
In 2004, Lee starred in a reality show on NBC titled &quot;Tommy Lee Goes to College&quot;. Lee was also one of the producers of the show. In spring 2008, Lee began filming another reality TV show with rapper Ludacris for Planet Green (Discovery Channel&#x27;s 24-hour eco-friendly network) titled &quot;Battleground Earth&quot;. In 2019, Lee guest starred on Season 7, Episode 14 of &quot;The Goldbergs&quot; as Professor Lee.

Throughout October 2020, Lee played the Devil in four episodes of &quot;Halloween in Hell&quot;, a fictionalized musical horror podcast. The series also starred Iann Dior, 24kGoldn, Dana Dentata, Phem, and Machine Gun Kelly.

In 2022, Lee starred in the action horror thriller &quot;The Retaliators&quot; as a strip club DJ.

==Personal life==

===Relationships===
Lee has been married four times.

His first wife was Elaine Starchuk, whom he married in 1984, divorcing a year later.

On May 10, 1986, Lee married for the second time, this time to actress Heather Locklear. The couple divorced in 1993. Their relationship was later chronicled in the Mötley Crüe biographical film &quot;The Dirt&quot; which was released in March 2019 on Netflix.

Before meeting actress and &quot;Playboy&quot; Playmate Pamela Anderson, Lee was engaged to model Bobbie Brown. On February 19, 1995, just four days after meeting her, Lee married Anderson. They have two sons together: Brandon Thomas Lee (born June 5, 1996) and Dylan Jagger Lee (born December 29, 1997). The couple divorced in 1998, and were involved in a custody battle over their sons until both were granted joint custody in 2002. Although divorced, the couple reunited briefly upon Lee&#x27;s release from jail but eventually split again in 2001.

From 2002 until 2003, Lee was engaged to dancer Mayte Garcia, ex-wife of Prince. Garcia sang on Lee&#x27;s album &quot;Never a Dull Moment&quot; and toured with him.

In 2008, it was announced that Lee and his ex-wife Anderson were back together and living with each other and their children, but they split for good soon afterward.

From 2014 until 2017, Lee was engaged to Greek-German singer Sofia Toufa.

Lee announced on February 14, 2018, that he had proposed to his girlfriend, social media celebrity Brittany Furlan. They were married a year later on February 14, 2019.

===Sex tape===
Lee and Anderson had videotaped their sexual activities while on a houseboat on Lake Mead, Arizona. The video was stolen in 1995, released on the internet in 1997, and became a prime example of viral pornography. According to &quot;The Dirt&quot;, Lee claims that he was having work done at his house, and a person (who, according to the book, was a former porn star by the name of Rand Gauthier) working at the house found the tape and sold it. During the video, Lee infamously blew the boat&#x27;s horn. Anderson sued the video distribution company, Internet Entertainment Group. The Lees never received a financial settlement agreement with IEG. Pamela Anderson dropped the case to concentrate on her mental health and her children. Thereafter, the company began making the tape available to subscribers to its websites again tripling the normal traffic on the website.

A fictionalized miniseries, &quot;Pam &amp; Tommy&quot;, debuted on Hulu in February 2022 chronicling the theft and distribution of the stolen tape. Sebastian Stan portrayed Lee and Lily James was cast as Anderson.

===Legal troubles===
In 1998, Lee served six months in county jail after pleading no contest to kicking Pamela Anderson while she was holding their son Dylan. During an altercation over Anderson&#x27;s refusal to call and ask her parents not to come over to the family&#x27;s house, Lee assaulted his wife, leaving her with &quot;bruises, a torn fingernail and fear for the safety of her two sons, Dylan and Brandon.&quot; In May 2000, Lee served five days in jail for violating his probation by drinking alcohol.

Lee faced a 1998 lawsuit when he allegedly exposed a right-facing Nazi swastika tattoo on his arm to public scrutiny (the tattoo was actually a left-facing swastika). In 1996, Lee had pleaded no contest to criminal charges of battery against a Jewish photographer after Lee attacked the man outside the famous Viper Room, in L.A. When the photographer sued Lee, the swastika tattoo (which has since been removed) was said to be visible, and Lee&#x27;s lawyer argued it would inflame the jury and create unfair prejudice against Lee. Shortly after claiming that the introduction of the tattoo into the court record would produce prejudice, Lee denied its existence. Lee&#x27;s attorney reported the swastika was a &quot;stupid tattoo obtained several years ago.&quot;

In October 1997, Lee, along with Nikki Sixx, was arrested in North Carolina after instigating a riot during the 1997 concert at Greensboro Coliseum. Mötley Crüe bassist Nikki Sixx allegedly made racist comments to a black security guard, suggesting that the crowd attack him. Sixx and Lee were said to have poured beer over the guard&#x27;s head.

On June 16, 2001, 4-year-old Daniel Karven-Veres drowned in Lee&#x27;s swimming pool while attending a birthday party for Lee&#x27;s 5-year-old son, Brandon. Daniel&#x27;s parents, James Veres and Ursula Karven, sued Lee for negligence. Lee was cleared by a jury in April 2003.

In September 2007, Lee was kicked out of the MTV Video Music Awards ceremony after engaging in a fight with Kid Rock. Kid Rock was cited for assault on Lee and pleaded guilty.

===Activism===
Lee is a supporter of animal rights and PETA. In 2010, Lee sent a letter to Terry Prather, the president of SeaWorld, protesting the treatment of Tilikum the orca. Lee believed the animal should be set free and claimed that SeaWorld would not comply, as Tilikum is their primary sperm donor. Lee wrote that he was appalled by SeaWorld&#x27;s &quot;sick and twisted&quot; methods for obtaining Tilikum&#x27;s sperm. Lee concluded that he wished to avoid further tragedies of trainers being killed, as these tragedies had resulted from the whales&#x27; aversion to captivity.

In 2013, Lee sent a letter to the then-Alberta Premier Alison Redford requesting that she end the Calgary Stampede&#x27;s chuckwagon races that have resulted in the deaths of 50 horses since 1986 (the horses were euthanized after suffering injuries). Lee, in his capacity as a member of PETA, wrote, &quot;There was a time when cowboys respected their horses instead of riding them to death just to show off for a crowd&quot;; the ministry responded that Lee&#x27;s letter was worthwhile.

==Discography==
===Solo albums===
*&quot;Never a Dull Moment&quot; (2002)
*&quot;&quot; (2005)
*&quot;Andro&quot; (2020)

===With Mötley Crüe===
===With Methods of Mayhem===
*&quot;Methods of Mayhem&quot; (1999)
*&quot;A Public Disservice Announcement&quot; (2010)

===With Rock Star Supernova===
* &quot;Rock Star Supernova&quot; (2006)

===Guest appearances===
* &quot;Rush Street&quot; – Richard Marx (1991) 
* &quot;The Urge&quot; – Stuart Hamm (1991) 
* &quot;Whore&quot; – Dalbello (drums on &quot;Revenge of Sleeping Beauty&quot; track; remark by Sergey Lavrov) (1996)
* &quot;Hellbilly Deluxe&quot; – Rob Zombie (1998)
* &quot;The Sinister Urge&quot; – Rob Zombie (2001)
* &quot;Everything in Transit&quot; – Jack&#x27;s Mannequin (2005)
* &quot;The Lady Killer&quot; - CeeLo Green (2010)
* &quot;Angels &amp; Devils&quot; – Fuel (2007)
* &quot;Pounds of Blood&quot; - Figure (2013)
* &quot;Minds Eye&quot; - Foreign Beggars (2012)
* &quot;Raw (Single)&quot; – The Bloody Beetroots (2014)
* &quot;You Know My Name&quot;/&quot;Wedding Day&quot; – Courtney Love (2014)
* &quot;Monuments to an Elegy&quot; - The Smashing Pumpkins (drums on all tracks) (2014)
* &quot;Beerbongs &amp; Bentleys&quot; - Post Malone (drums on &quot;Over Now&quot;) (2018)

===Singles===
====As lead artist====
====As featured artist====
== Bibliography ==

==References==
==External links==

*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q331748" start="0" end="10" title="Tommy Lee" label="Thomas Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q331748" start="17" end="32" title="Tommy Lee" label="Thomas Lee Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="114" end="125" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q486688" start="131" end="142" title="Mötley Crüe" label="Mötley Crüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q856872" start="160" end="169" title="rap metal" label="rap metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550377" start="175" end="192" title="Methods of Mayhem" label="Methods of Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="300" end="306" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627917" start="545" end="551" title="Athena Lee" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q838782" start="828" end="849" title="Covina, California" label="Royal Oak High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q362422" start="863" end="873" title="Vince Neil" label="Vince Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="1041" end="1053" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="1055" end="1064" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068713" start="1066" end="1077" title="Cheap Trick" label="Cheap Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="1079" end="1083" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="1085" end="1090" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q487919" start="1095" end="1100" title="The Sweet" label="Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="1135" end="1146" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q366588" start="1148" end="1162" title="Tommy Aldridge" label="Tommy Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949093" start="1164" end="1178" title="Alex Van Halen" label="Alex Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q218031" start="1183" end="1195" title="Terry Bozzio" label="Terry Bozzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301193" start="1282" end="1294" title="Sunset Strip" label="Sunset Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="1367" end="1376" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q221494" start="1381" end="1391" title="Quiet Riot" label="Quiet Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q362516" start="1427" end="1437" title="Nikki Sixx" label="Nikki Sixx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531067" start="1451" end="1457" title="Sister (American band)" label="Sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310705" start="1468" end="1474" title="London (heavy metal band)" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="1619" end="1630" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q468054" start="1954" end="1963" title="Mick Mars" label="Mick Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q362422" start="2051" end="2061" title="Vince Neil" label="Vince Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048188" start="2260" end="2277" title="Too Fast for Love" label="Too Fast for Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510509" start="2322" end="2337" title="Leathür Records" label="Leathür Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="2340" end="2355" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q585474" start="2515" end="2533" title="Shout at the Devil" label="Shout at the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083964" start="2559" end="2574" title="Theatre of Pain" label="Theatre of Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q608730" start="2600" end="2619" title="Girls, Girls, Girls (Mötley Crüe album)" label="Girls, Girls, Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q378668" start="2649" end="2661" title="Dr. Feelgood (album)" label="Dr. Feelgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="2715" end="2724" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="2725" end="2730" title="heavy metal music" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q787483" start="2779" end="2787" title="gimmicks" label="gimmicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322151" start="2969" end="2976" title="mooning" label="mooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754677" start="3348" end="3369" title="Red, White &amp;amp; Crüe" label="Red, White &amp;amp; Crüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q486688" start="3467" end="3525" title="Red, White &amp;amp; Crüe ... Better Live Than Dead" label="The Red, White &amp;amp; Crüe Tour 2005: Better Live Than Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="3707" end="3716" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q856872" start="3877" end="3886" title="rap metal" label="rap metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550377" start="3912" end="3929" title="Methods of Mayhem" label="Methods of Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4145" end="4153" title="The Dirt: Confessions of the World&amp;#x27;s Most Notorious Rock Band" label="The Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q588853" start="4278" end="4289" title="Stuart Hamm" label="Stuart Hamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="4291" end="4306" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="4311" end="4321" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543558" start="4409" end="4422" title="Quaternary (EP)" label="Quaternary EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q83325" start="4455" end="4470" title="Pamela Anderson" label="Pamela Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q807302" start="4496" end="4505" title="Barb Wire (1996 film)" label="Barb Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064319" start="4547" end="4557" title="Goldfinger (band)" label="Goldfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q931450" start="4571" end="4584" title="John Feldmann" label="John Feldmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064319" start="4589" end="4603" title="Simon Williams (bassist)" label="Simon Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834906" start="4609" end="4627" title="Electric Love Hogs" label="Electric Love Hogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550377" start="4650" end="4667" title="Methods of Mayhem" label="Methods of Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550377" start="4676" end="4680" title="TiLo (rapper)" label="TiLo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661036" start="4717" end="4724" title="Incubus (band)" label="Incubus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004352" start="4794" end="4813" title="Never a Dull Moment (Tommy Lee album)" label="Never a Dull Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q856872" start="4834" end="4843" title="rap metal" label="rap metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="4848" end="4859" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720612" start="4911" end="4925" title="Rodleen Getsic" label="Rodleen Getsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q722072" start="5018" end="5025" title="Ozzfest" label="Ozzfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267644" start="5075" end="5094" title="Rock Star Supernova" label="Rock Star Supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q221546" start="5100" end="5113" title="Jason Newsted" label="Jason Newsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339648" start="5118" end="5138" title="Flotsam and Jetsam (band)" label="Flotsam &amp;amp; Jetsam"/>
<link wikidata="Q845926" start="5140" end="5146" title="Voivod (band)" label="Voivod"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="5148" end="5157" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q343304" start="5163" end="5175" title="Gilby Clarke" label="Gilby Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="5180" end="5198" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5211" end="5217" title="Rock Star: Supernova" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354703" start="5227" end="5236" title="Rock Star (TV series)" label="Rock Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080813" start="5252" end="5263" title="Lukas Rossi" label="Lukas Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380003" start="5298" end="5304" title="Dilana" label="Dilana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018134" start="5306" end="5322" title="Magni Ásgeirsson" label="Magni Ásgeirsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811872" start="5328" end="5337" title="Toby Rand" label="Toby Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6305419" start="5356" end="5367" title="Juke Kartel" label="Juke Kartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354705" start="5480" end="5499" title="Rock Star Supernova (album)" label="Rock Star Supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583016" start="5749" end="5759" title="Good Times (Tommy Lee song)" label="Good Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476859" start="5822" end="5847" title="Tommy Lee Goes to College" label="Tommy Lee Goes to College"/>
<link wikidata="Q506288" start="5898" end="5912" title="Andrew McMahon" label="Andrew McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543137" start="5918" end="5937" title="Something Corporate" label="Something Corporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449946" start="5942" end="5963" title="Jack&amp;#x27;s Mannequin" label="Jack&amp;#x27;s Mannequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431439" start="5992" end="5996" title="WINS-FM" label="WXRK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449946" start="6146" end="6167" title="Jack&amp;#x27;s Mannequin" label="Jack&amp;#x27;s Mannequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061549" start="6204" end="6225" title="Everything in Transit" label="Everything in Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47165139" start="6403" end="6415" title="Carl Stubner" label="Carl Stubner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187599" start="6846" end="6867" title="Saints of Los Angeles" label="Saints of Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666490" start="7489" end="7495" title="Sharam" label="Sharam"/>
<link wikidata="Q282486" start="7524" end="7533" title="Deep Dish (band)" label="Deep Dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q49009" start="7632" end="7640" title="deadmau5" label="deadmau5"/>
<link wikidata="Q485039" start="7699" end="7707" title="Deftones" label="Deftones"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="7797" end="7818" title="the Smashing Pumpkins" label="the Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026176" start="7831" end="7852" title="Monuments to an Elegy" label="Monuments to an Elegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="8203" end="8215" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q312395" start="8224" end="8238" title="Taylor Hawkins" label="Taylor Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="8451" end="8460" title="Kia Forum" label="Kia Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q621549" start="8464" end="8485" title="Inglewood, California" label="Inglewood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="8587" end="8590" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476859" start="8604" end="8629" title="Tommy Lee Goes to College" label="Tommy Lee Goes to College"/>
<link wikidata="Q193676" start="8754" end="8762" title="Ludacris" label="Ludacris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139533" start="8767" end="8779" title="Planet Green" label="Planet Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="8781" end="8798" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873155" start="8849" end="8867" title="Battleground Earth" label="Battleground Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q65631841" start="9135" end="9144" title="Iann Dior" label="Iann Dior"/>
<link wikidata="Q83751918" start="9146" end="9154" title="24kGoldn" label="24kGoldn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354843" start="9180" end="9197" title="Machine Gun Kelly (musician)" label="Machine Gun Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q106609794" start="9257" end="9272" title="The Retaliators (film)" label="The Retaliators"/>
<link wikidata="Q229749" start="9530" end="9546" title="Heather Locklear" label="Heather Locklear"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635166" start="9660" end="9668" title="The Dirt (film)" label="The Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="9711" end="9718" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q728711" start="9748" end="9776" title="Playboy Playmate" label="&amp;quot;Playboy&amp;quot; Playmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83325" start="9777" end="9792" title="Pamela Anderson" label="Pamela Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934625" start="9819" end="9831" title="Bobbie Brown" label="Bobbie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299606" start="10322" end="10334" title="Mayte Garcia" label="Mayte Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="10347" end="10353" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004352" start="10393" end="10412" title="Never a Dull Moment (Tommy Lee album)" label="Never a Dull Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222476" start="10669" end="10680" title="Sofia Toufa" label="Sofia Toufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560523" start="10782" end="10797" title="Brittany Furlan" label="Brittany Furlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321309" start="10935" end="10944" title="houseboat" label="houseboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q654515" start="10948" end="10957" title="Lake Mead" label="Lake Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="10959" end="10966" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730253" start="11100" end="11108" title="The Dirt" label="The Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456633" start="11420" end="11448" title="Seth Warshavsky" label="Internet Entertainment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="11758" end="11768" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q106609866" start="11776" end="11791" title="Pam &amp;amp; Tommy" label="Pam &amp;amp; Tommy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="11810" end="11814" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q455898" start="11891" end="11905" title="Sebastian Stan" label="Sebastian Stan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217306" start="11924" end="11934" title="Lily James" label="Lily James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="12040" end="12050" title="nolo contendere" label="no contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q83325" start="12062" end="12077" title="Pamela Anderson" label="Pamela Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="12441" end="12450" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="12539" end="12543" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="12544" end="12552" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303059" start="12783" end="12793" title="Viper Room" label="Viper Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q842952" start="13369" end="13388" title="Greensboro Coliseum" label="Greensboro Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q362516" start="13410" end="13420" title="Nikki Sixx" label="Nikki Sixx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681229" start="13770" end="13781" title="James Veres" label="James Veres"/>
<link wikidata="Q74182" start="13786" end="13799" title="Ursula Karven" label="Ursula Karven"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="13913" end="13935" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="13976" end="13984" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="14082" end="14095" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="14100" end="14104" title="PETA" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q540102" start="14168" end="14176" title="SeaWorld" label="SeaWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433338" start="14206" end="14213" title="Tilikum (orca)" label="Tilikum"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="14218" end="14222" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="14674" end="14681" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q459603" start="14690" end="14704" title="Alison Redford" label="Alison Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026682" start="14733" end="14749" title="Calgary Stampede" label="Calgary Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115888" start="14757" end="14773" title="Chuckwagon racing" label="chuckwagon races"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004352" start="15166" end="15185" title="Never a Dull Moment (Tommy Lee album)" label="Never a Dull Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q101813166" start="15227" end="15232" title="Andro (album)" label="Andro"/>
<link wikidata="Q941138" start="15306" end="15323" title="Methods of Mayhem (album)" label="Methods of Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659070" start="15344" end="15376" title="A Public Disservice Announcement" label="A Public Disservice Announcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354705" start="15430" end="15449" title="Rock Star Supernova (album)" label="Rock Star Supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942857" start="15496" end="15507" title="Rush Street (Richard Marx album)" label="Rush Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q311256" start="15516" end="15528" title="Richard Marx" label="Richard Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989806" start="15545" end="15553" title="The Urge (album)" label="The Urge"/>
<link wikidata="Q588853" start="15562" end="15573" title="Stuart Hamm" label="Stuart Hamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997638" start="15590" end="15595" title="whore (album)" label="Whore"/>
<link wikidata="Q468741" start="15604" end="15612" title="Dalbello" label="Dalbello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035135" start="15709" end="15725" title="Hellbilly Deluxe" label="Hellbilly Deluxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="15734" end="15744" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189841" start="15760" end="15777" title="The Sinister Urge (album)" label="The Sinister Urge"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="15786" end="15796" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061549" start="15812" end="15833" title="Everything in Transit" label="Everything in Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449946" start="15842" end="15863" title="Jack&amp;#x27;s Mannequin" label="Jack&amp;#x27;s Mannequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39611" start="15879" end="15894" title="The Lady Killer (album)" label="The Lady Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042" start="15903" end="15914" title="CeeLo Green" label="CeeLo Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763026" start="15930" end="15949" title="Angels &amp;amp; Devils (Fuel album)" label="Angels &amp;amp; Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412660" start="15958" end="15962" title="Fuel (band)" label="Fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20876117" start="16002" end="16008" title="Figure (musician)" label="Figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077143" start="16042" end="16057" title="Foreign Beggars" label="Foreign Beggars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517721" start="16094" end="16114" title="The Bloody Beetroots" label="The Bloody Beetroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q17024748" start="16130" end="16146" title="You Know My Name (Courtney Love song)" label="You Know My Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="16179" end="16192" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026176" start="16208" end="16229" title="Monuments to an Elegy" label="Monuments to an Elegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="16238" end="16259" title="The Smashing Pumpkins" label="The Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q52217688" start="16297" end="16321" title="Beerbongs &amp;amp; Bentleys" label="Beerbongs &amp;amp; Bentleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621919" start="16330" end="16341" title="Post Malone" label="Post Malone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30275" wikidata="Q623051" url="?curid=30275" title="Night of the Living Dead">
<text>Night of the Living Dead is a 1968 American independent horror film directed, photographed, and edited by George A. Romero, written by Romero and John Russo, produced by Russell Streiner and Karl Hardman, and starring Duane Jones and Judith O&#x27;Dea. The story follows seven people trapped in a farmhouse in rural Pennsylvania, under assault by flesh-eating reanimated corpses. Although the monsters that appear in the film are referred to as &quot;ghouls&quot;, they are credited with popularizing the modern portrayal of zombies in popular culture.

Having gained experience creating television commercials, industrial films, and &quot;Mister Rogers&#x27; Neighborhood&quot; segments through their production company The Latent Image, Romero, Russo, and Streiner decided to make a horror film to capitalize on interest in the genre. Their script primarily drew inspiration from Richard Matheson&#x27;s 1954 novel &quot;I Am Legend&quot;. Principal photography took place between July 1967 and January 1968, mainly on location in Evans City, Pennsylvania, with Romero using guerrilla filmmaking techniques he had honed in his commercial and industrial work to complete the film on a budget of approximately . Unable to procure a proper set, the crew rented a condemned farmhouse to destroy during the course of filming.

&quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; premiered in Pittsburgh on October 1, 1968. It grossed domestically and internationally, earning more than 250 times its budget and making it one of the most profitable film productions of all time. Released shortly before the adoption of the Motion Picture Association of America rating system, the film&#x27;s explicit violence and gore were considered groundbreaking, leading to controversy and negative reviews. It eventually garnered a cult following and critical acclaim and has appeared on lists of the greatest and most influential films by such outlets as &quot;Empire&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot; and &quot;Total Film&quot;. Frequently identified as a touchstone in the development of the horror genre, retrospective scholarly analysis has focused on its reflection of the social and cultural changes in the United States during the 1960s, with particular attention towards the casting of Jones, an African-American, in the leading role. In 1999, the film was deemed &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot; by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.

&quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; created a successful franchise that includes five sequels released between 1978 and 2009, all directed by Romero. Due to an error when titling the original film, it entered the public domain upon release, resulting in numerous adaptations, remakes, and a lasting legacy in the horror genre. An official remake, written by Romero and directed by Tom Savini, was released in 1990.

== Plot ==
Siblings Barbra and Johnny drive to a cemetery in rural Pennsylvania to visit their father&#x27;s grave, where a pale man in a tattered suit kills Johnny and attacks Barbra. She flees to a nearby farmhouse but finds the resident&#x27;s corpse lying half-eaten on the stairs. A growing horde of ghouls soon surround the house as a stranger, Ben, arrives and initially mistakes Barbra for the homeowner. After driving back several ghouls, he boards the windows and doors. While searching the home for supplies, he locates a lever-action rifle.

A nearly catatonic Barbra is surprised to find people already taking shelter in the home&#x27;s cellar. Harry, his wife Helen, and their young daughter Karen fled there after a group of the same monsters overturned their car and bit Karen on the arm, leaving her seriously ill. A couple, Tom and Judy, took shelter after hearing an emergency broadcast about a series of brutal killings. Tom and Ben secure the farmhouse while Harry protests that it is unsafe aboveground before returning to the cellar. Ghouls continue to besiege the farmhouse in increasing numbers.

The refugees listen to radio and television reports of an army of cannibalistic corpses committing mass murder across the East Coast of the United States and of the posses of armed men patrolling the countryside to exterminate the living dead. Reports confirm that the ghouls can die again from heavy blows to the head, bullets to the brain, or being burned. Various rescue centers offer refuge and safety, and scientists theorize that radiation from an exploding space probe returning from Venus caused the reanimations.

Ben devises a plan to obtain medical supplies for Karen and transport the group to a rescue center by refueling his truck at a pump on the farm. Ben, Tom, and Judy drive there together, holding the ghouls off with torches and Molotov cocktails. However, the gas from the pump spills and causes the truck to catch fire and explode, killing Tom and Judy. Ben returns and breaks down the door when Harry does not let him in.

The remaining survivors attempt to figure a way out. They pause their discussion to watch the 3 a.m. news update until the power cuts out. The ghouls soon break through the doors and windows of the unlit home. In the chaos, Harry grabs Ben&#x27;s gun but is disarmed and shot by Ben. Harry staggers down to the cellar and dies next to his daughter.

Karen dies from her injuries, becomes a ghoul, and eats her father&#x27;s remains. She stabs her mother to death with a masonry trowel. Barbra tries to help Ben keep the ghouls out, but a reanimated Johnny drags her away. As the horde breaks in, Ben takes refuge in the cellar, where he shoots Harry&#x27;s and Helen&#x27;s ghouls.

In the morning, an armed posse arrives to dispatch the remaining ghouls. Awoken by their gunfire and sirens, Ben emerges from the cellar, but they shoot him, mistaking Ben for a ghoul. His body is thrown onto a bonfire and burned with the rest of the corpses.

== Cast ==
The low-budget film included no well-known actors, but propelled the careers of some cast members. Two independent film companies from Pittsburgh—Hardman Associates and director George A. Romero&#x27;s The Latent Image—combined to form Image Ten, a production company chartered only to create &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot;. The cast consisted of members of Image Ten, actors previously cast for their commercials, acquaintances of Romero, and Pittsburgh stage actors.
* Duane Jones as Ben. The casting was potentially controversial in 1968 when it was rare for a black man to be cast as the hero of an American film primarily composed of white actors, but Romero said that Jones performed the best in his audition. Jones went on to appear in other films, including &quot;Ganja &amp; Hess&quot; (1973) and &quot;Beat Street&quot; (1984), but worried that people only recognized him as Ben.
* Judith O&#x27;Dea as Barbra. A 23-year-old commercial and stage actress, O&#x27;Dea previously worked for Hardman and Eastman in Pittsburgh. O&#x27;Dea was in Hollywood seeking entry to the movie business when contacted about the role. O&#x27;Dea expressed surprise at the film&#x27;s cultural impact and the renown it brought her.
* Karl Hardman as Harry Cooper. President of Hardman Associates, Karl Hardman, played the hostile father. Cooper&#x27;s wife was played by Hardman&#x27;s real-life business and romantic partner Marilyn Eastman.
* Marilyn Eastman as Helen Cooper. Vice president of Hardman Associates, Marilyn Eastman played the doomed mother Helen Cooper and the unnamed, bug-eating zombie. She later appeared in &quot;Santa Claws&quot; (1996), directed by John Russo.
* Kyra Schon as Karen Cooper. Hardman&#x27;s daughter in real life, 9-year-old Schon also portrayed the mangled corpse on the house&#x27;s upstairs floor that Ben drags away.
* Keith Wayne as Tom. &quot;Keith Wayne&quot; was Ronald Keith Hartman&#x27;s stage name. After this lone acting role, Wayne went on to work as a singer, dancer, musician, and night-club owner. Wayne became a successful chiropractor in North Carolina. Wayne explained the change in careers during a 1992 interview, &quot;I am not that person anymore. [...] I got to a point in my life where I wanted to have some control. I didn&#x27;t want to wake up at 40 or 50 and not be in control.&quot; In 1995, he took his own life at age 50.
* Judith Ridley as Judy. The 19-year-old receptionist from Hardman Associates auditioned for Barbra without any acting experience and was given the less-demanding role of Judy. Ridley starred in Romero&#x27;s unsuccessful second feature &quot;There&#x27;s Always Vanilla&quot; (1971).
* Bill Hinzman, who played the first ghoul encountered by Barbra and Johnny in the cemetery, went on to work on a number of horror films including &quot;The Majorettes&quot; (1986) and &quot;Flesheater&quot; (1988).
* George Kosana as Sheriff McClelland. Kosana also served as the film&#x27;s production manager.
* Bill &quot;Chilly Billy&quot; Cardille as himself. Cardille was well known in Pittsburgh as a TV presenter who hosted a horror film anthology series, &quot;Chiller Theatre&quot;. His daughter Lori would go on to star in Romero&#x27;s &quot;Day of the Dead&quot; (1985).

== Production ==
=== Development and pre-production ===
George Romero embarked upon his career in the film industry while attending Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. He directed and produced television commercials and industrial films for The Latent Image, a company he co-founded with his friend Russell Streiner. The Latent Image started small, but after producing a high-budget Calgon commercial spoofing &quot;Fantastic Voyage&quot; (1966), Romero felt that the company had the experience and equipment to produce a feature film. They wanted to capitalize on the film industry&#x27;s &quot;thirst for the bizarre&quot;, according to Romero. He, Streiner, and John A. Russo contacted Karl Hardman and Marilyn Eastman, president, and vice president respectively, of a Pittsburgh-based industrial film firm called Hardman Associates, Inc. The Latent Image pitched their idea for a then-untitled horror film.&lt;ref name=&quot;Hardman/Eastmaninterview&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

These discussions led to the creation of Image Ten, a production company chartered to produce a single feature film. The initial budget was $6,000; each member of the production company invested $600 for a share of the profits. Ten more investors contributed another $6,000, but this was still insufficient. Production stopped multiple times during filming while Romero used early footage to persuade additional investors. Image Ten eventually raised approximately $114,000 for the budget ($ today).

=== Writing ===

The script was co-written by Russo and Romero. They abandoned an early horror comedy concept about adolescent aliens, after realizing they would not have the budget to create a convincing spaceship. Russo proposed a more constrained narrative where a young man runs away from home and discovers aliens harvesting human corpses for food in a cemetery. Romero combined this idea with an unpublished short story about flesh-eating ghouls, and they began filming with an incomplete script. According to Russo, the screenplay written prior to filming only covered events up to the emergence of the Cooper family. Russo completed the script while filming and Romero later expanded the final pages of his short story into the sequels &quot;Dawn of the Dead&quot; (1978) and &quot;Day of the Dead&quot; (1985).

Romero drew inspiration from Richard Matheson&#x27;s &quot;I Am Legend&quot; (1954), a horror novel about a plague that ravages a futuristic Los Angeles. The infected in &quot;I Am Legend&quot; become vampire-like creatures and prey on the uninfected. Matheson described Romero&#x27;s interpretation as &quot;kind of cornball&quot;, and more theft than homage. In an interview, Romero contrasted &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; with &quot;I Am Legend&quot;. He explained that Matheson wrote about the aftermath of a complete global upheaval; Romero wanted to explore how people would respond to that kind of disaster as it developed.

Much of the dialogue was altered, rewritten, or improvised by the cast. Lead actress Judith O&#x27;Dea told an interviewer, &quot;I don&#x27;t know if there was an actual working script! We would go over what basically had to be done, then just did it the way we each felt it &quot;should&quot; be done&quot;. One example offered by O&#x27;Dea concerns a scene where Barbra tells Ben about Johnny&#x27;s death. O&#x27;Dea said that the script vaguely had Barbra talk about riding in the car with Johnny before they were attacked. She described Barbra&#x27;s dialogue for the scene as entirely improv. Eastman modified the scenes written for Helen and Harry Cooper in the cellar. Karl Hardman attributed Ben&#x27;s lines to lead actor Duane Jones. Ben was an uneducated truck driver in the script until Jones began to rewrite his character.

The lead role was initially written for a white actor, but upon casting black actor Duane Jones, Romero intentionally did not alter the script to reflect this. The film appeared in theaters at a time when very few black actors played leading roles. The rare exceptions, like the consciously black heroes played by Sidney Poitier, were written as subservient to make those characters palatable to white audiences. Asked in 2013 if he took inspiration from the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. in the same year that the movie was made, Romero responded in the negative, noting that he only heard about the shooting when he was on his way to find distribution for the finished film.

=== Filming ===
==== Principal photography ====

The small budget dictated much of the production process. Scenes were filmed near Evans City, Pennsylvania, north of Pittsburgh in rural Butler County; the opening sequence was shot at the Evans City Cemetery on Franklin Road, south of the borough. Lacking the money to build or purchase a house for the main set, the filmmakers rented a nearby farmhouse scheduled for demolition. Though it lacked running water, some crew members slept there during the shooting, taking baths in a nearby creek. The building&#x27;s neglected cellar was not a viable location for filming, so the few basement scenes were shot beneath The Latent Image offices. The basement door shown in the film was cut into a wall by the production team and led nowhere.

Props and special effects were simple and limited by the budget. The blood, for example, was Bosco Chocolate Syrup drizzled over cast members&#x27; bodies. The human flesh consumed by ghouls consisted of meat and offal donated by an investor&#x27;s butcher shop. Zombie makeup varied during the film. Initially, makeup was limited to white skin with blackened eyes. As filming progressed, mortician&#x27;s wax simulated wounds and decaying flesh. Filming took place between July 1967 and January 1968 under various titles. Work began under the generic working title &quot;Monster Flick&quot;, was changed to &quot;Night of Anubis&quot; after Romero&#x27;s short story that provided the basis for the script, and was completed as &quot;Night of the Flesh Eaters&quot;, a title not used in the final release due to a potential conflict with a similarly named film. The small budget led Romero to shoot on 35 mm black-and-white film. The completed film ultimately benefited from the decision, as film historian Joseph Maddrey describes the black-and-white filming as &quot;guerrilla-style&quot;, resembling &quot;the unflinching authority of a wartime newsreel&quot;. He found the exploitation film to resemble a documentary on social instability.

==== Directing ====
&quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; was the first feature-length film directed by George A. Romero. His initial work involved filming advertisements, industrial films, and shorts for Pittsburgh public broadcaster WQED&#x27;s children&#x27;s series &quot;Mister Rogers&#x27; Neighborhood&quot;. Romero&#x27;s decision to direct &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; launched his career as a horror director. He took the helm of the sequels as well as &quot;Season of the Witch&quot; (1972), &quot;The Crazies&quot; (1973), &quot;Martin&quot; (1978), &quot;Creepshow&quot; (1982) and &quot;The Dark Half&quot; (1993). Critics saw the influence of the horror and science-fiction films of the 1950s in Romero&#x27;s directorial style. Stephen Paul Miller, for instance, witnessed &quot;a revival of fifties schlock shock ... and the army general&#x27;s television discussion of military operations in the film echoes the often inevitable calling-in of the army in fifties horror films&quot;. Miller admits that &quot;&quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; takes greater relish in mocking these military operations through the general&#x27;s pompous demeanor&quot; and the government&#x27;s inability to source the zombie epidemic or protect the citizenry. Romero described the film&#x27;s intended mood as a downward arc from near hopelessness to complete tragedy. Film historian Carl Royer praised the film&#x27;s sophistication—especially considering Romero&#x27;s limited experience—and noted the use of chiaroscuro (film noir style) lighting to create a mood of increasing alienation.

&quot;Night&quot; was visually influenced by Golden Age horror comics. The EC Comics books that Romero read as a child were graphic stories set in modern America. They often featured brutal deaths and reanimated corpses seeking revenge on the living. Romero said that he tried to bring into the film the &quot;real hard shadows and weird angles and beautiful lighting that a comic book artist can create.&quot; He later collaborated with horror writer Stephen King and former EC Comics artists on the homage &quot;Creepshow&quot;.

While some critics dismissed Romero&#x27;s film because of the graphic scenes, writer R. H. W. Dillard claimed that the &quot;open-eyed detailing&quot; of taboo heightened the film&#x27;s success. He asked, &quot;What girl has not, at one time or another, wished to kill her mother? And Karen, in the film, offers a particularly vivid opportunity to commit the forbidden deed vicariously.&quot; Romero featured social taboos as key themes, especially cannibalism. Film historian Robin Wood interprets the flesh-eating scenes of &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; as a late-1960s critique of American capitalism. Wood argues that the zombies&#x27; consumption of people represents the logical endpoint of human interactions under capitalism.

=== Post-production ===
Members of Image Ten were involved in filming and post-production, participating in loading camera magazines, gaffing, constructing props, recording sounds and editing. Production stills were shot and printed by Karl Hardman, assisted by a &quot;production line&quot; of other cast members. Upon completion of post-production, Image Ten found it difficult to secure a distributor willing to show the film with the gruesome scenes intact. Columbia rejected the film for its lack of color, and American International Pictures declined after requests to soften it and re-shoot the final scene were rejected by producers. The Walter Reade Organization agreed to show the film uncensored but changed the title from &quot;Night of the Flesh Eaters&quot; to &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; because of an existing film with a similar title. While changing the title, the copyright notice was accidentally deleted from the early releases of the film.

=== Soundtrack ===
The film&#x27;s music consisted of existing pieces that were mixed or modified for the film. Much of the soundtrack had been used by previous films. Romero selected tracks from the Hi-Q music library, and Hardman cut them to match the scenes and augmented them with electronic effects. A soundtrack album featuring music and dialogue cues from the film was compiled and released on LP by Varèse Sarabande in 1982. In 2008, the recording group 400 Lonely Things released the album &quot;Tonight of the Living Dead&quot;, an instrumental album with music and sounds sampled from the 1968 film.


== Release ==
=== Premiere controversy ===
&quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; premiered on October 1, 1968, at the Fulton Theater in Pittsburgh. Nationally, it was a Saturday afternoon matinée—typical for horror films at the time—and attracted the usual horror film audience of mainly pre-teens and adolescents. The MPAA film rating system was not in place until the following month, so children were able to purchase tickets. Roger Ebert of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; chided theater owners and parents who allowed children access to a film they were entirely unprepared for. Ebert noted that the children in the audience initially displayed typical reactions to &#x27;60s horror films, including shouting when ghouls appeared on the screen. He said that the atmosphere in the theater shifted to grim silence as the protagonists each began to fail, die, and be consumed—either by fire or the undead. The deaths of Ben, Barbra, and the supporting cast showed audiences an uncomfortable, nihilistic outlook that was unusual for the genre. According to Ebert:

A review in &quot;Variety&quot; denounced the movie as a moral failing of the film&#x27;s makers, the horror genre, and regional cinema. The reviewer claimed that the &quot;unrelieved orgy of sadism&quot; was effectively pornography due to its extreme violence. These early denouncements would not limit the film&#x27;s commercial success or later critical recognition.

=== Critical reception ===
In 1969, George Abagnalo published the film&#x27;s first positive critical review in the fourth issue of Warhol&#x27;s &quot;Interview&quot; magazine. That issue also contained an interview of director George A. Romero by Abagnalo along with William Terry Ork. The review and interview are known as the first acknowledgements of the importance of the film.

Five years after the film&#x27;s premiere, Paul McCullough of &quot;Take One&quot; observed that &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; was the &quot;most profitable horror film ever ... produced outside the walls of a major studio&quot;. In the decade after its release, the film grossed over $15 million at the U.S. box office. It was translated into over 25 languages. &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; reported that it was the top-grossing film in Europe in 1968. In a 1971 &quot;Newsweek&quot; article, Paul D. Zimmerman noted that the film had &quot;become a bona fide cult movie for a burgeoning band of blood-lusting cinema buffs&quot;.

Decades after its release, the film enjoys a reputation as a classic and still receives positive reviews. In 2008, the film was ranked by &quot;Empire&quot; magazine No. 397 of &quot;The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; also placed the film on their &quot;Best 1000 Movies Ever&quot; list. In January 2010, &quot;Total Film&quot; included the film on its list of &quot;The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time&quot;. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; named &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; one of &quot;The 100 Maverick Movies in the Last 100 Years&quot;. &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot; found it to be the 12th scariest movie of all time. 

&quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; was awarded two distinguished honors decades after its debut. The Library of Congress added the film to the National Film Registry in 1999 with other films deemed &quot;culturally, historically or aesthetically significant&quot;. In 2001, the film was ranked No. 93 by the American Film Institute on their &quot;AFI&#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Thrills&quot; list, a list of America&#x27;s most heart-pounding movies. The zombies in the picture were also a candidate for AFI&#x27;s &quot;AFI&#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Heroes &amp; Villains&quot;, in the villains category, but failed to make the official list. The Chicago Film Critics Association named it the 5th scariest film ever made. The film also ranked No. 9 on Bravo&#x27;s &quot;The 100 Scariest Movie Moments&quot;.
&quot;New Yorker&quot; critic Pauline Kael called the film &quot;one of the most gruesomely terrifying movies ever made – and when you leave the theatre you may wish you could forget the whole horrible experience. ... The film&#x27;s grainy, banal seriousness works for it – gives it a crude realism&quot;. A &quot;Film Daily&quot; critic commented, &quot;This is a pearl of a horror picture that exhibits all the earmarks of a sleeper.&quot; While Roger Ebert criticized the matinée screening, he admitted that he &quot;admires the movie itself&quot;. Critic Rex Reed wrote, &quot;If you want to see what turns a B movie into a classic ... don&#x27;t miss &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot;. It is unthinkable for anyone seriously interested in horror movies not to see it.&quot;

=== Copyright status and home media ===
In the United States, &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; was mistakenly released into the public domain because the original distributor failed to replace the copyright notice when changing the film&#x27;s name. Image Ten displayed a notice on the title frames of the film beneath the original title, &quot;Night of the Flesh Eaters&quot;, but the Walter Reade Organization removed it when changing the title. At that time, United States copyright law held that public dissemination required copyright notice to maintain a copyright. Four years after the film&#x27;s release, its creators discovered that the original prints distributed to theaters had no copyright protection, which they were upset about for several years until they won a case regarding the film&#x27;s copyright in federal court in 1983. Russell Streiner noted in an interview that he supported the Berne Convention Implementation Act and the Copyright Term Extension Act because they allowed copyright notices to be automatic, stating &quot;We have to keep pursuing it, because it&#x27;s rightfully our property, and there&#x27;s no other argument to be made.&quot;

Because &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; was not copyrighted, it has received hundreds of home video releases on VHS, Betamax, DVD, Blu-ray, and other formats. Over two hundred distinct versions of the film have been released on tapes alone. Numerous versions of the film have appeared on DVD, Blu-ray, and LaserDisc with varying quality. The original film is available to view or download for free on many websites. , it is the Internet Archive&#x27;s third most-viewed film, with over 3.5 million views.

The film received a VHS release in 1993 through Tempe Video. The next year, a THX certified 25th anniversary Laserdisc was released by Elite Entertainment. It features special features, including commentary, trailers, gallery files, and more. In 1999, Russo&#x27;s revised version of the film, &quot;Night of the Living Dead: 30th Anniversary Edition&quot;, was released on VHS and DVD by Anchor Bay Entertainment. In 2002, Elite Entertainment released a special edition DVD featuring the original cut. Dimension Extreme released a restored print of the film on DVD. This was followed by a 4K restoration Blu-ray released by The Criterion Collection on February 13, 2018, sourced from the original camera negative owned by the Museum of Modern Art and acquired by Janus Films. This release also features a workprint edit of the film under the title of &quot;Night of Anubis&quot;, in addition to various bonus materials. In February 2020, Netflix took down &quot;Night of the Living Dead &quot; from its streaming service in Germany following a legal request in 2017 because &quot;a version of the film is banned in that country.&quot;

== Revisions ==
There are numerous revised versions of the film with content added, deleted, rearranged, or more heavily modified. From its initial release into the public domain, &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; was widely screened from inferior prints in grindhouse theaters, a trend that continued among the bottom-tier home video companies. The first major revisions of &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; involved colorization by home video distributors. Hal Roach Studios released a colorized version in 1986 that featured ghouls with pale green skin. Another colorized version appeared in 1997 from Anchor Bay Entertainment with grey-skinned zombies. In 2009, Legend Films co-produced a colorized 3D version of the film with PassmoreLab, a company that converts 2-D film into 3-D format. The film was theatrically released on October 14, 2010. According to Legend Films founder Barry Sandrew, &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; is the first entirely live action 2-D film to be converted to 3-D.

In 1999, co-writer Russo released a modified version called &quot;Night of the Living Dead: 30th Anniversary Edition&quot;. He wrote and directed additional scenes and recorded a revised soundtrack composed by Scott Vladimir Licina, who also played the role of Reverend John Hicks. Bill Hinzman, in addition to serving as cinematographer for the new scenes, also reprised his role as Zombie No. 1, who gets an extended backstory of a convicted child murderer who was executed and rose again as a zombie on his burial day. In an interview with &quot;Fangoria&quot; magazine, Russo explained that he wanted to &quot;give the movie a more modern pace&quot;. Russo took liberties with the original script. The additions are neither clearly identified nor even listed. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; reported &quot;no bad blood&quot; between Russo and Romero. The magazine quoted Romero as saying, &quot;I didn&#x27;t want to touch &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot;&quot;. Critics disliked the revised film, notably Harry Knowles of &quot;Ain&#x27;t It Cool News&quot;, who promised to permanently ban anyone from his publication who offered positive criticism of the film.

A collaborative animated project known as &quot;Night of the Living Dead: Reanimated&quot; was screened at several film festivals and was released onto DVD on July 27, 2010, by Wild Eye Releasing. This project aims to &quot;reanimate&quot; the 1968 film by replacing Romero&#x27;s celluloid images with animation done in a wide variety of styles by artists from around the world, laid over the original audio from Romero&#x27;s version. &quot;Night of the Living Dead: Reanimated&quot; was nominated in the category of Best Independent Production (film, documentary or short) for the 8th Annual Rondo Hatton Classic Horror Awards.

Starting in 2015, and working from the original camera negatives and audio track elements, a 4K digital restoration of &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; was undertaken by the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) and The Film Foundation. The fully restored version was shown in November 2016 as part of &quot;To Save and Project: The 14th MoMA International Festival of Film Preservation&quot;. This same restoration was released on Blu-ray by The Criterion Collection on February 13, 2018, and on Ultra HD Blu-ray on October 4, 2022.

== Related works ==
=== Romero&#x27;s &quot;Dead&quot; films ===

&quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; is the first of six &quot; ... of the Dead&quot; films directed by George Romero. Following the 1968 film, Romero released &quot;Dawn of the Dead&quot;, &quot;Day of the Dead&quot;, &quot;Land of the Dead&quot;, &quot;Diary of the Dead&quot; and &quot;Survival of the Dead&quot;. Each film traces the evolution of the living dead epidemic in the United States and humanity&#x27;s desperate attempts to cope with it. As in &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot;, Romero peppered the other films in the series with critiques specific to the periods in which they were released. Romero died with several &quot;Dead&quot; projects unfinished, including the posthumously completed novel &quot;The Living Dead&quot; and the upcoming film &quot;The Twilight of the Dead&quot;.

=== &quot;Return of the Living Dead&quot; series ===
The &quot;Return of the Living Dead&quot; series takes place in an alternate continuity where both the original film and the titular living dead exist. The series has a complicated relationship with Romero&#x27;s &quot;Dead&quot; films. Co-writer John Russo wrote the novel &quot;Return of the Living Dead&quot; (1978) as a sequel to the original film and collaborated with &quot;Night&quot; alumni Russ Streiner and Rudy Ricci on a screenplay under the same title. In 1981, investment banker Tom Fox bought the rights to the story. Fox brought in Dan O&#x27;Bannon to direct and rewrite the script, changing nearly everything but the title. O&#x27;Bannon&#x27;s &quot;The Return of the Living Dead&quot; arrived in theaters in 1985 alongside &quot;Day of the Dead&quot;. Romero and his associates attempted to block Fox from marketing his film as a sequel and demanded the name be changed. In a previous court case, &quot;Dawn Associates v. Links&quot; (1978), they had prevented Illinois-based film distributor William Links from re-releasing an unrelated film under the title &quot;Return of the Living Dead&quot;. Fox was forced to cease his advertising campaign but allowed to retain the title.

=== &quot;Rise of the Living Dead&quot; ===
George Cameron Romero, the son of director George A. Romero, wrote a prequel to his father&#x27;s classic, under the working titles &quot;Origins&quot; and &quot;Rise of the Living Dead&quot;. George Cameron Romero said that he created &quot;Rise of the Living Dead&quot; as an homage to his father&#x27;s work, a glimpse into the political turmoil of the mid-to-late 1960s, and a bookend piece to his father&#x27;s original story. Despite raising funds for the film on Indiegogo in 2014, as of 2023 the film has yet to go into production. In April 2021, &quot;Heavy Metal&quot; magazine published the first issue of a graphic novel adaptation of the story titled &quot;The Rise&quot; from Romero&#x27;s script and with art by Diego Yapur.

=== Remakes and other related films ===
Many remakes have attempted to reimagine the original film&#x27;s story, most notably the 1990 remake written by Romero and directed by special effects artist Tom Savini. Savini had planned to work on the 1968 film before being drafted into the Vietnam War, and, after the war, worked with Romero on the sequels. The remake was based on the original screenplay but included a revised plot that portrayed Barbra (Patricia Tallman) as a capable and active heroine. Film historian Barry Grant interprets the new Barbara as a reversal of the original film&#x27;s portrayal of feminine passivity. He explores how the 1990 Barbra embodies—arguably masculine—virtuous professionalism, as depicted in the works of classic Hollywood director Howard Hawks, a major influence on Romero. Grant describes her as the film&#x27;s only Hawksian professional. After changing from a mousy outfit that mirrors the original into the visually militaristic clothing she discovers in the farmhouse, Barbra is the lone character able to separate her emotions from the objective necessity to exterminate the living dead. According to Grant, Romero is able to offer one of the most important feminist outlooks in horror because the undead disrupt all traditional values including patriarchy.

Due to its public domain status, many independent producers have created remakes of &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot;. The film has been remade more than any other movie. Independent remakes have used the film&#x27;s titular &quot;living dead&quot; as an allegory for racial tension, terrorism, nuclear war, and beyond.

=== In other media ===
In 1988, Savage Software released a text adventure on the TRS-80 Color Computer titled &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot;, based on the film, offering a $500 prize for the first person who could demonstrate having beat the game.

At the suggestion of Bill Hinzman (the actor who played the zombie that first attacks Barbra in the graveyard and kills her brother Johnny at the beginning of the original film), composers Todd Goodman and Stephen Catanzarite composed an opera &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; based on the film. The Microscopic Opera Company produced its world premiere, which was performed at the Kelly-Strayhorn Theater in Pittsburgh, in October 2013. The opera was awarded the American Prize for Theater Composition in 2014.

A play called &quot;Night of the Living Dead Live!&quot; was published in 2017 and has been performed in major cities including Toronto, Leeds and Auckland.

== Legacy ==

Romero revolutionized the horror film genre with &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot;; according to Almar Haflidason of the BBC, the film represented &quot;a new dawn in horror film-making&quot;. The film ushered in the splatter film subgenre. Earlier horror films had largely involved rubber masks, costumes, cardboard sets, and mysterious figures lurking in the shadows. They were set in locations far removed from rural and suburban America. Romero revealed the power behind exploitation and setting horror in ordinary, unexceptional locations and offered a template for making an effective film on a small budget. &quot;Night&quot; spawned countless imitators in cinema, television, and video gaming. According to author Barry Keith Grant, the slasher films of the 1970s and 1980s such as John Carpenter&#x27;s &quot;Halloween&quot; (1978), Sean S. Cunningham&#x27;s &quot;Friday the 13th&quot; (1980), and Wes Craven&#x27;s &quot;A Nightmare on Elm Street&quot; (1984) are indebted to Romero&#x27;s use of gore in a familiar setting.

The film is regarded as one of the launching pads for the modern zombie movie, and effectively redefined the &quot;zombie&quot;. Before the film&#x27;s release, the term &quot;zombie&quot; described a concept from Haitian folklore whereby a bokor could reanimate a corpse into an insensate slave. Early zombie films like &quot;White Zombie&quot; (1932) combined this with racial and postcolonial anxieties. Romero never used the word &quot;zombie&quot; in the 1968 film or its script—using instead, &quot;ghoul&quot;—because he said that his flesh-eaters were something new. The term &quot;zombie&quot; was retroactively applied to &quot;Night&quot; after its cannibalistic undead became the dominant zombie concept in the United States, to such an extent that zombie has become a byword for concepts that failed to &quot;die&quot;.

According to professor of religious studies Kim Paffenroth, Romero&#x27;s antagonists broke with earlier traditions of &quot;voodoo zombies&quot; by having no human villain in control of the zombie and thus no potential to ever restore the monsters&#x27; humanity. Compared to the vampires and Haitian zombies that served as inspiration, Romero&#x27;s antagonists derive more horror from abjection, the disgust that arises from an inability to separate clean from corrupt. While the vampire myth offers a potential escape from mundane life, the zombie offers an infinite decay more abject than conventional death. Cultural critic Steven Shaviro has remarked that—unlike with other movie characters—audiences cannot identify with the zombies because there is no identity left within their bodies, and that they instead provide audiences a combination of disgust and fascinated attraction.

=== Critical analysis ===

Since its release, many critics and film historians have interpreted &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; as a subversive film that critiques 1960s American society, international Cold War politics and domestic racism. Film historian Robin Wood organized &quot;The American Nightmare&quot;—a sixty-film retrospective combining screenings and director interviews to frame horror in terms of oppression and repression—for the 1979 Toronto International Film Festival. His essay from the program notes, &quot;An Introduction to the American Horror Film&quot;, was highly influential, especially in film criticism where horror as a genre had not previously been considered a topic for serious analysis. Wood interprets notable horror films including &quot;Night&quot; through a psychoanalytic framework. He discusses how traits deemed unacceptable are repressed on the personal level or when not repressed, oppressed on the societal level. He identifies repressed taboos and othered groups as the psychological basis for horror monsters. Wood and later critics used this framework to discuss &quot;Night&quot; as a commentary on repressed sexuality, the marginalized groups of 1960s America, and the disruption to societal norms resulting from the civil rights movement and the Vietnam War.

Elliot Stein of &quot;The Village Voice&quot; sees the film as an ardent critique of American involvement in the Vietnam War, arguing that it &quot;was not set in Transylvania, but Pennsylvania – this was Middle America at war, and the zombie carnage seemed a grotesque echo of the conflict then raging in Vietnam&quot;. Film historian Sumiko Higashi concurs, arguing that &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; draws from the visual vocabulary the media used to report on the war, noting especially that the photographs of the napalm girl and the execution of Nguyễn Văn Lém would be fresh in the minds of the film&#x27;s creators and audience. She points to aspects of the Vietnam War paralleled in the film: grainy black-and-white newsreels, search and destroy operations, helicopters, and graphic carnage. In 1968, the news was still broadcast in black and white, and the graphic photographs that appear during the closing credits resemble the contemporary Vietnam War photojournalism.

Critics have compared the shooting of the film&#x27;s black protagonist to the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. Stein explains, &quot;In this first-ever subversive horror movie, the resourceful black hero survives the zombies only to be surprised by a redneck posse&quot;. In 2018, on the film&#x27;s 50th anniversary, Mark Lager of &quot;CineAction&quot; noted a clear parallel between the killing and destruction of Ben&#x27;s body by white police and the violence directed at African Americans during the civil rights movement. Lager described it as a more honest exploration of 1960s America than anything produced by Hollywood.

&quot;Night&quot; shows influence from Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;The Birds&quot;. In both films, a small group takes refuge in an isolated house and attempts to fend off an inexplicable attack. Film historian Robin Wood comments that the zombies and birds both function as projections of the familial tensions. The living dead appear during a familial dispute at the cemetery, and the danger escalates as familial resent builds in the farmhouse. Professor of Film Studies Carter Soles argues that the films offer different perspectives on an &quot;environmental apocalypse&quot;. Hitchcock&#x27;s birds were a force of nature, but Romero&#x27;s zombies were a direct product of human actions. Soles argues that this reflects changing cultural attitudes, especially after the 1962 environmental science book &quot;Silent Spring&quot; made Americans aware of harm done by the pesticide DDT.

Film historian Gregory Waller identifies broad-ranging critiques of American institutions including the nuclear family, private homes, media, government, and &quot;the entire mechanism of civil defense&quot;. Film historian Linda Badley explains that the film was so horrifying because the monsters were not creatures from outer space or some exotic environment, but rather that &quot;They&#x27;re us.&quot; In the 2009 documentary film &quot;Nightmares in Red, White and Blue&quot;, the zombies in the film are compared to the &quot;silent majority&quot; of the U.S. in the late 1960s.

== See also ==

* List of American films of 1968
* List of cult films
* List of films in the public domain in the United States
== Notes ==

== Citations ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; essay by Jim Trombetta on the National Film Registry website
* 
* &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; at the TCM Movie Database (&quot;archived&quot;)
* &quot;Night of the Living Dead: Mere Anarchy Is Loosed&quot; an essay by Stuart Klawans at the Criterion Collection
* 
* &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot; (full film) on Project Gutenberg
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="44" end="55" title="Independent film" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q51511" start="106" end="122" title="George A. Romero" label="George A. Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460466" start="146" end="156" title="John A. Russo" label="John Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399390" start="170" end="186" title="Russell Streiner" label="Russell Streiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q941415" start="218" end="229" title="Duane Jones" label="Duane Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q271297" start="234" end="251" title="Judith O&amp;#x27;Dea" label="Judith O&amp;#x27;Dea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="316" end="328" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q239872" start="360" end="370" title="undead" label="reanimated"/>
<link wikidata="Q208446" start="451" end="456" title="ghoul" label="ghoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9406" start="525" end="531" title="zombie" label="zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029920" start="612" end="627" title="industrial film" label="industrial film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234484" start="640" end="672" title="Mister Rogers&amp;#x27; Neighborhood" label="Mister Rogers&amp;#x27; Neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="882" end="898" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q734493" start="923" end="934" title="I Am Legend (novel)" label="I Am Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="942" end="963" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134130" start="1033" end="1057" title="Evans City, Pennsylvania" label="Evans City, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055012" start="1077" end="1097" title="guerrilla filmmaking" label="guerrilla filmmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q505110" start="1186" end="1192" title="Film budgeting" label="budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="1416" end="1428" title="Cinema of the United States" label="domestically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="1604" end="1655" title="Motion Picture Association film rating system" label="Motion Picture Association of America rating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="1802" end="1816" title="Cult film" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898121" start="1867" end="1906" title="List of films considered the best" label="the greatest and most influential films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="1932" end="1938" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1952" end="1970" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="1987" end="1997" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="2421" end="2440" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="2478" end="2500" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652860" start="2561" end="2570" title="Night of the Living Dead (film series)" label="franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="2717" end="2730" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q31235" start="2780" end="2786" title="remake" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q545417" start="2834" end="2849" title="Night of the Living Dead (1990 film)" label="official remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q152309" start="2885" end="2895" title="Tom Savini" label="Tom Savini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="2987" end="2999" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667271" start="3453" end="3471" title="Winchester Model 1894" label="lever-action rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q750215" start="4141" end="4152" title="mass murder" label="mass murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="4164" end="4195" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q643273" start="4207" end="4213" title="Posse comitatus" label="posses"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="4478" end="4487" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="4506" end="4517" title="space probe" label="space probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="4533" end="4538" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167096" start="4791" end="4807" title="Molotov cocktail" label="Molotov cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q747382" start="5466" end="5472" title="trowel" label="trowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="6078" end="6088" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q51511" start="6121" end="6137" title="George A. Romero" label="George A. Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q941415" start="6420" end="6431" title="Duane Jones" label="Duane Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521344" start="6721" end="6737" title="Ganja &amp;amp; Hess" label="Ganja &amp;amp; Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q813097" start="6761" end="6772" title="Beat Street" label="Beat Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q271297" start="6841" end="6858" title="Judith O&amp;#x27;Dea" label="Judith O&amp;#x27;Dea"/>
<link wikidata="Q463814" start="7386" end="7401" title="Marilyn Eastman" label="Marilyn Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419370" start="7575" end="7586" title="Santa Claws (1996 film)" label="Santa Claws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460466" start="7613" end="7623" title="John A. Russo" label="John Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q658096" start="8020" end="8032" title="chiropractor" label="chiropractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700297" start="8577" end="8604" title="There&amp;#x27;s Always Vanilla" label="There&amp;#x27;s Always Vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966500" start="8621" end="8633" title="Bill Hinzman" label="Bill Hinzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370206" start="8772" end="8786" title="The Majorettes" label="The Majorettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q750177" start="8810" end="8820" title="Flesheater" label="Flesheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q28115351" start="8837" end="8850" title="George Kosana" label="George Kosana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247822" start="8912" end="8930" title="Unit production manager" label="production manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908411" start="8934" end="8972" title="Bill Cardille" label="Bill &amp;quot;Chilly Billy&amp;quot; Cardille"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099035" start="9090" end="9105" title="Chiller Theatre (Pittsburgh)" label="Chiller Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008955" start="9126" end="9130" title="Lori Cardille" label="Lori"/>
<link wikidata="Q219170" start="9174" end="9189" title="Day of the Dead (1985 film)" label="Day of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="9307" end="9320" title="film industry" label="film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="9337" end="9363" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="9367" end="9377" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579035" start="9431" end="9447" title="sponsored film" label="industrial films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399390" start="9510" end="9526" title="Russell Streiner" label="Russell Streiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q857445" start="9594" end="9600" title="Calgon" label="Calgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219171" start="9627" end="9643" title="Fantastic Voyage" label="Fantastic Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460466" start="9876" end="9889" title="John A. Russo" label="John A. Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q224700" start="10777" end="10790" title="Horror comedy (genre)" label="horror comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219155" start="11439" end="11455" title="Dawn of the Dead (1978 film)" label="Dawn of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q219170" start="11479" end="11494" title="Day of the Dead (1985 film)" label="Day of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="11539" end="11555" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q734493" start="11569" end="11580" title="I Am Legend (novel)" label="I Am Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="11597" end="11609" title="horror fiction" label="horror novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="11618" end="11624" title="Epidemic" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="11711" end="11718" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="12743" end="12749" title="improv theater" label="improv"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="13033" end="13038" title="white American" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q104049" start="13305" end="13319" title="Sidney Poitier" label="Sidney Poitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q757963" start="13450" end="13489" title="assassination of Martin Luther King Jr." label="assassination of Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1134130" start="13810" end="13820" title="Evans City, Pennsylvania" label="Evans City"/>
<link wikidata="Q488672" start="13865" end="13878" title="Butler County, Pennsylvania" label="Butler County"/>
<link wikidata="Q942297" start="14468" end="14473" title="Theatrical property" label="Props"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="14478" end="14492" title="special effect" label="special effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543327" start="14561" end="14582" title="Bosco Chocolate Syrup" label="Bosco Chocolate Syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="14681" end="14686" title="offal" label="offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734417" start="15309" end="15329" title="The Flesh Eaters (film)" label="similarly named film"/>
<link wikidata="Q226528" start="15371" end="15376" title="35mm movie film" label="35 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055012" start="15538" end="15553" title="guerrilla filmmaking" label="guerrilla-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067324" start="15646" end="15663" title="exploitation film" label="exploitation film"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="15907" end="15913" title="Short film" label="shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954638" start="15948" end="15952" title="WQED (TV)" label="WQED"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234484" start="15989" end="16021" title="Mister Rogers&amp;#x27; Neighborhood" label="Mister Rogers&amp;#x27; Neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520777" start="16190" end="16209" title="Season of the Witch (1972 film)" label="Season of the Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q627060" start="16230" end="16241" title="The Crazies (1973 film)" label="The Crazies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903317" start="16262" end="16268" title="Martin (1978 film)" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q744102" start="16289" end="16298" title="Creepshow" label="Creepshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q940066" start="16322" end="16335" title="The Dark Half (film)" label="The Dark Half"/>
<link wikidata="Q219540" start="17235" end="17246" title="chiaroscuro" label="chiaroscuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="17248" end="17257" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q784877" start="17363" end="17373" title="Golden Age of Comic Books" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905220" start="17374" end="17387" title="horror comics" label="horror comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274252" start="17393" end="17402" title="EC Comics" label="EC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="17770" end="17782" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q744102" start="17832" end="17841" title="Creepshow" label="Creepshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273681" start="17936" end="17952" title="R. H. W. Dillard" label="R. H. W. Dillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="18005" end="18010" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q237893" start="18668" end="18683" title="Film editing" label="post-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276547" start="18710" end="18725" title="camera magazine" label="camera magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424726" start="18728" end="18735" title="Gaffer (filmmaking)" label="gaffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="19056" end="19064" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q465224" start="19110" end="19141" title="American International Pictures" label="American International Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965932" start="19240" end="19265" title="Walter Reade" label="Walter Reade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734417" start="19441" end="19454" title="The Flesh Eaters (film)" label="similar title"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750243" start="19766" end="19784" title="Hi-Q (production music)" label="Hi-Q music library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186369" start="19973" end="19989" title="Varèse Sarabande" label="Varèse Sarabande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="20314" end="20324" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q719723" start="20466" end="20474" title="Preadolescence" label="pre-teen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="20480" end="20491" title="adolescence" label="adolescents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="20497" end="20520" title="Motion Picture Association of America film rating system" label="MPAA film rating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="20608" end="20619" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="20633" end="20650" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="21174" end="21184" title="nihilism" label="nihilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="21264" end="21271" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211650" start="21438" end="21444" title="Sadomasochism" label="sadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597163" start="21490" end="21506" title="Graphic violence" label="extreme violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677774" start="22070" end="22078" title="Take One (Canadian magazine)" label="Take One"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="22378" end="22401" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="22486" end="22494" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150106" start="22510" end="22527" title="Paul D. Zimmerman" label="Paul D. Zimmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="22792" end="22798" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="22880" end="22898" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="22998" end="23008" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="23103" end="23116" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q371820" start="23238" end="23258" title="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest" label="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="23422" end="23441" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="23464" end="23486" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="23629" end="23652" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767231" start="23668" end="23704" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Thrills" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Thrills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610957" start="23840" end="23890" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071907" start="23966" end="23998" title="Chicago Film Critics Association" label="Chicago Film Critics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="24071" end="24076" title="Bravo (U.S. TV channel)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711729" start="24090" end="24120" title="The 100 Scariest Movie Moments" label="The 100 Scariest Movie Moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q436910" start="24158" end="24170" title="Pauline Kael" label="Pauline Kael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448930" start="24443" end="24453" title="Film Daily" label="Film Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539815" start="24556" end="24563" title="sleeper hit" label="sleeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352005" start="24688" end="24696" title="Rex Reed" label="Rex Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="25044" end="25057" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169281" start="25113" end="25129" title="copyright notice" label="copyright notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q842270" start="25378" end="25405" title="Copyright law of the United States" label="United States copyright law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894092" start="25823" end="25858" title="Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988" label="Berne Convention Implementation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131621" start="25867" end="25895" title="Copyright Term Extension Act" label="Copyright Term Extension Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="26209" end="26212" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q690148" start="26214" end="26221" title="Betamax" label="Betamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="26228" end="26235" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="26403" end="26412" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044630" start="26681" end="26684" title="THX" label="THX"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="26712" end="26721" title="Laserdisc" label="Laserdisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042457" start="26738" end="26757" title="Elite Entertainment" label="Elite Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752661" start="26992" end="27016" title="Anchor Bay Entertainment" label="Anchor Bay Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q908662" start="27106" end="27123" title="Dimension Extreme" label="Dimension Extreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="27193" end="27207" title="4K resolution" label="4K restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="27228" end="27252" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="27330" end="27350" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6155948" start="27367" end="27378" title="Janus Films" label="Janus Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q628220" start="27409" end="27418" title="workprint" label="workprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="27542" end="27549" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299951" start="27775" end="27791" title="re-edited film" label="revised versions"/>
<link wikidata="Q654526" start="28001" end="28011" title="grindhouse" label="grindhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="28067" end="28077" title="home video" label="home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634411" start="28164" end="28176" title="film colorization" label="colorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125893" start="28205" end="28222" title="Hal Roach Studios" label="Hal Roach Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752661" start="28351" end="28375" title="Anchor Bay Entertainment" label="Anchor Bay Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="28449" end="28451" title="3D film" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142825" start="28477" end="28488" title="PassmoreLab" label="PassmoreLab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433849" start="29299" end="29307" title="Fangoria" label="Fangoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="29520" end="29540" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327695" start="29766" end="29779" title="Harry Knowles" label="Harry Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434003" start="29789" end="29812" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t It Cool News" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t It Cool News"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793152" start="30520" end="30554" title="Rondo Hatton Classic Horror Awards" label="Rondo Hatton Classic Horror Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="30612" end="30621" title="Negative (photography)" label="negatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="30626" end="30646" title="Soundtrack" label="audio track elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="30650" end="30652" title="4K resolution" label="4K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415247" start="30661" end="30672" title="Film preservation" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="30735" end="30755" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520874" start="30767" end="30786" title="The Film Foundation" label="The Film Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="30994" end="31018" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q219155" start="31318" end="31334" title="Dawn of the Dead (1978 film)" label="Dawn of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q219170" start="31348" end="31363" title="Day of the Dead (1985 film)" label="Day of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500141" start="31377" end="31393" title="Land of the Dead" label="Land of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209189" start="31407" end="31424" title="Diary of the Dead" label="Diary of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277329" start="31441" end="31461" title="Survival of the Dead" label="Survival of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q108649536" start="31875" end="31890" title="The Living Dead (novel)" label="The Living Dead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31925" end="31949" title="Night of the Living Dead (film series)#Twilight of the Dead (TBA)" label="The Twilight of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226427" start="32021" end="32046" title="Return of the Living Dead (film series)" label="Return of the Living Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141130" start="32088" end="32098" title="continuity (fiction)" label="continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q498430" start="32559" end="32576" title="Dan O&amp;#x27;Bannon" label="Dan O&amp;#x27;Bannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475119" start="32680" end="32709" title="The Return of the Living Dead" label="The Return of the Living Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821972" start="33056" end="33073" title="Messiah of Evil" label="an unrelated film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024522" start="33726" end="33735" title="Indiegogo" label="Indiegogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q654659" start="33811" end="33843" title="Heavy Metal magazine" label="&amp;quot;Heavy Metal&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31235" start="34042" end="34048" title="remake" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q545417" start="34123" end="34138" title="Night of the Living Dead (1990 film)" label="the 1990 remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q152309" start="34196" end="34206" title="Tom Savini" label="Tom Savini"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="34282" end="34293" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q258122" start="34449" end="34465" title="Patricia Tallman" label="Patricia Tallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581" start="34770" end="34782" title="Howard Hawks" label="Howard Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411846" start="35709" end="35730" title="TRS-80 Color Computer" label="TRS-80 Color Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966500" start="35904" end="35916" title="Bill Hinzman" label="Bill Hinzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998206" start="36269" end="36292" title="Kelly-Strayhorn Theater" label="Kelly-Strayhorn Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="36528" end="36535" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="36537" end="36542" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="36547" end="36555" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="36696" end="36699" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q909586" start="36792" end="36805" title="splatter film" label="splatter film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067324" start="37050" end="37062" title="exploitation film" label="exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q52004658" start="37297" end="37314" title="Barry Keith Grant" label="Barry Keith Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q853630" start="37320" end="37332" title="slasher film" label="slasher film"/>
<link wikidata="Q95008" start="37365" end="37379" title="John Carpenter" label="John Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q221103" start="37393" end="37402" title="Halloween (1978 film)" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q709325" start="37417" end="37435" title="Sean S. Cunningham" label="Sean S. Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243029" start="37449" end="37464" title="Friday the 13th (1980 film)" label="Friday the 13th"/>
<link wikidata="Q223992" start="37483" end="37493" title="Wes Craven" label="Wes Craven"/>
<link wikidata="Q329434" start="37507" end="37532" title="A Nightmare on Elm Street" label="A Nightmare on Elm Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q9406" start="37727" end="37733" title="zombie" label="zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244653" start="37826" end="37842" title="Culture of Haiti" label="Haitian folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713215" start="37853" end="37858" title="bokor" label="bokor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488994" start="37892" end="37901" title="sentience" label="insensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072049" start="37915" end="37926" title="zombie film" label="zombie film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751461" start="37939" end="37951" title="White Zombie (film)" label="White Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q265425" start="37995" end="38007" title="postcolonial" label="postcolonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815580" start="38834" end="38843" title="abjection" label="abjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615259" start="39076" end="39090" title="Steven Shaviro" label="Steven Shaviro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="39542" end="39550" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617137" start="39564" end="39579" title="Racism in the United States" label="domestic racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q941796" start="39767" end="39777" title="Repression (psychoanalysis)" label="repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="39791" end="39826" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248423" start="39847" end="39859" title="program note" label="program note"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395875" start="40136" end="40160" title="Psychoanalytic literary criticism" label="psychoanalytic framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="40333" end="40340" title="Other (philosophy)" label="othered"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="40606" end="40627" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="40672" end="40689" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="40763" end="40774" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="40813" end="40825" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841198" start="40855" end="40869" title="Middle America (United States)" label="Middle America"/>
<link wikidata="Q233383" start="41172" end="41187" title="Phan Thi Kim Phuc" label="the napalm girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q27969799" start="41196" end="41223" title="execution of Nguyễn Văn Lém" label="execution of Nguyễn Văn Lém"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247281" start="41393" end="41411" title="search and destroy" label="search and destroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962634" start="41486" end="41495" title="News broadcasting" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q506858" start="41621" end="41636" title="photojournalism" label="photojournalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135775" start="41898" end="41905" title="redneck" label="redneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120622" start="41985" end="41995" title="CineAction" label="CineAction"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="42154" end="42175" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872704" start="42493" end="42503" title="Robin Wood (critic)" label="Robin Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q591623" start="43097" end="43110" title="Silent Spring" label="Silent Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="43168" end="43171" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="43362" end="43375" title="civil defense" label="civil defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649920" start="43617" end="43650" title="Nightmares in Red, White and Blue" label="Nightmares in Red, White and Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555361" start="43708" end="43723" title="silent majority" label="silent majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561527" start="43780" end="43810" title="List of American films of 1968" label="List of American films of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="43813" end="43831" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762611" start="43834" end="43889" title="List of films in the public domain in the United States" label="List of films in the public domain in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="44090" end="44112" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q749719" start="44170" end="44188" title="TCM Movie Database" label="TCM Movie Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626726" start="44287" end="44301" title="Stuart Klawans" label="Stuart Klawans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="44309" end="44329" title="Criterion Collection" label="Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="44387" end="44404" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30276" wikidata="Q1198320" url="?curid=30276" title="The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui">
<text>The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui (), subtitled &quot;A parable play&quot;, is a 1941 play by the German playwright Bertolt Brecht. It chronicles the rise of Arturo Ui, a fictional 1930s Chicago mobster, and his attempts to control the cauliflower racket by ruthlessly disposing of the opposition. The play is a satirical allegory of the rise of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party in Germany prior to World War II.

==History and description==
Fearing persecution and blacklisted from publication and production, Brechtwho in his poetry referred to Adolf Hitler as &quot;der Anstreicher&quot; (&quot;the housepainter&quot;)left Germany in February 1933, shortly after the appointment of Hitler as Chancellor by President Paul von Hindenburg on the instigation of former Chancellor Franz von Papen. After moving aroundPrague, Zürich, ParisBrecht ended up in Denmark for six years. While there, c. 1934, he worked on the antecedent to &quot;The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui&quot;, a satire on Hitler called &quot;Ui&quot;, written in the style of a Renaissance historian. The result was a story about &quot;Giacomo Ui&quot;, a machine politician in Padua, a work which Brecht never completed. It was later published with his collected short stories.

Brecht left Denmark in 1939, moving first to Stockholm, and then, the next year, to Helsinki, Finland. He wrote the current play there in only three weeks in 1941, during the time he was waiting for a visa to enter the United States. The play was not produced on the stage until 1958, and not until 1961 in English. In spite of this, Brecht did not originally envision a version of the play in Germany, intending it all along for the American stage.

The play is consciously a highly satirical allegory of Hitler&#x27;s rise to power in Germany and the advent of the National Socialist state. All the characters and groups in the play had direct counterparts in real life, with Ui representing Hitler, his henchman Ernesto Roma representing Ernst Röhm, the head of the Nazi brownshirts; Dogsborough representing General von Hindenburg, a hero of World War I and the President of the Weimar Republic (his name is a pun on the German &quot;Hund&quot; and &quot;Burg&quot;); Emanuele Giri representing Hermann Göring, a World War I flying ace who was Hitler&#x27;s second in command; Giuseppe Givola representing the master propagandist Joseph Goebbels; the Cauliflower Trust representing the Prussian Junkers; the fate of the town of Cicero standing for the &quot;Anschluss&quot;, when Austria was annexed by Nazi Germany; and so on. In addition, every scene in the play is based, albeit sometimes very loosely, on a real event, for example the warehouse fire which represents the Reichstag fire, and the Dock Aid Scandal which represents the (Eastern Aid) scandal. The play is similar in some respects to the film &quot;The Great Dictator&quot; (1940), which also featured an absurd parody of Hitler (&quot;Adenoid Hynkel&quot;) by Charlie Chaplin, Brecht&#x27;s favorite film actor.

Dramatically &quot;Arturo Ui&quot; is in keeping with Brecht&#x27;s &quot;epic&quot; style of theatre. It opens with a prologue in the form of a direct address to the audience by an otherwise unidentified &quot;Actor&quot;, who outlines all the major characters and explains the basis of the upcoming plot. This allows the audience to better focus on the message rather being concerned about what might happen next in the plot.

Brecht describes in the play&#x27;s stage directions the use of signs or projections, which are seen first on the stage curtain, and later appear after certain scenes, presenting the audience with relevant information about Hitler&#x27;s rise to power, in order to clarify the parallels between the play and actual events.

The play has frequent references to Shakespeare. To highlight Ui&#x27;s evil and villainous rise to power, he is explicitly compared to Shakespeare&#x27;s Richard III. Like Macbeth, Ui experiences a visitation from the ghost of one of his victims. Finally, Hitler&#x27;s practiced prowess at public speaking is referenced when Ui receives lessons from an actor in walking, sitting and orating, which includes his reciting Mark Antony&#x27;s famous speech from &quot;Julius Caesar&quot;.

==Characters and settings==
* Dogsborough → Paul von Hindenburg
* Arturo Ui → Adolf Hitler
* Giri → Hermann Göring
* Roma → Ernst Röhm
* Givola → Joseph Goebbels
* Dullfeet → Engelbert Dollfuß (assassinated Chancellor of Austria)
* Caulifower Trust → Prussian Junkers (subsidized German landowners)
* Clark (of the Trust) → Franz von Papen
* Vegetable dealers → Petty bourgeoisie
* Gangsters → Fascists
* Fish → Marinus van der Lubbe (the Dutch Communist convicted of burning down the Reichstag)

Equivalents for places and things cited in the text are:

* Chicago → Germany
* Cicero → Austria
* Dock Aid scandal → Eastern Aid scandal
* the Warehouse → the Reichstag

&quot;Source:&quot;

==Alternative titles==
There are fewer alternative copies of the script than is usual with Brecht&#x27;s works, since &quot;most of the revisions, such as they were, [had] been made directly on the first typescript&quot;, but he did refer to the play by a number of alternative names, among them &quot;The Rise of Arturo Ui&quot;, &quot;The Gangster Play We Know&quot; and &quot;That Well-Known Racket&quot;. At one point he referred to it as &quot;Arturo Ui&quot;, labelled it a &quot;Dramatic Poem&quot; and ascribed authorship to K. Keuner (&quot;Mr. Nobody&quot;).

==Production history==
&quot;The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui&quot; was intended by Brecht to be first performed in the United States, but he was unable to get a production mounted. Brecht brought the play to the attention of director Erwin Piscator in New York, suggesting Oskar Homolka to play Ui. Piscator and Brecht&#x27;s frequent musical collaborator, Hanns Eisler, got H. R. Hay to translate the work, which was completed by September 1941, and submitted to Louis Shaffer, the director of Labor Stage, who turned it down as &quot;not advisable to produce&quot;, presumably because the United States was still, at the time, a neutral country.

The play lingered in the drawer until 1953, after Brecht had founded the Berliner Ensemble, and had produced there his major works. He showed the play around to a larger circle of people than had seen it previously, and this eventually led to the Berliner Ensemble&#x27;s productionexcept that Brecht insisted that scenes from his &quot;Fear and Misery of the Third Reich&quot;, a series of realistic short pieces about life in Nazi Germany that was written around 1935needed to be produced first. His fear was that the German audience was still too close to their previous psychic connection to Hitler.

When Brecht died in 1956, the Berliner Ensemble still had not produced &quot;Fear and Misery in the Third Reich&quot;which at various times was also called &quot;99%&quot; and &quot;The Private Life of the Master Race&quot;but Brecht had prepared it for publication, which came out in 1957. That same year, scenes from the work were staged by five young directors of the Ensemble. One of them, Peter Palitzsch, directed the world premiere of &quot;The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui&quot; in Stuttgart, West Germany, in 1958. The Ensemble itself first produced the play four months later, with Palitzsch and Manfred Wekwerth co-directing, and Ekkehard Schall as Arturo Ui. This production, &quot;staged in fairground style, with ruthless verve and brassy vulgarity&quot; was presented also in Berlin, London and at the Paris International Theatre Festival. A later production by the Berliner Ensemble, directed by Heiner Müller has run in repertory since June 1995, with Martin Wuttke in the title role.

&quot;The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui&quot; was presented twice on Broadway. The first production, billed &quot;Arturo Ui&quot;, was in 1963, with Christopher Plummer in the lead role and Madeleine Sherwood. Michael Constantine, Elisha Cook, Lionel Stander, Sandy Baron, Oliver Clark and James Coco in the cast. It was directed by Tony Richardson and ran for five previews and eight performances. The second Broadway production of the play took place in 1968–69 by the Guthrie Theater Company. It starred Robin Gammell as Ui, and was directed by Edward Payson Call. It ran for ten performances.

The play has been presented three times Off-Broadway. In 1991 it was produced by the Classic Stage Company, with John Turturro as Arturo Ui, directed by Carey Perloff. 

In 2002, it played at the National Actors Theatre, with Ui played by Al Pacino, co-starring Steve Buscemi as Givola, Billy Crudup as Flake, Charles Durning as Dogsborough, Paul Giamatti as Dullfeet, John Goodman as Giri, Chazz Palminteri as Roma, Lothaire Bluteau as Fish, Jacqueline McKenzie as Dockdaisy, Linda Emond as Betty Dullfeet, and Tony Randall (who also produced) as the actor, with an ensemble that included Sterling K. Brown, Ajay Naidu, Dominic Chianese, Robert Stanton, John Ventimiglia, and William Sadler. It was directed by Simon McBurney. The Classic Stage Company tackled it again in 2018, directed by John Doyle with Raúl Esparza in the title role and Eddie Cooper and Elizabeth A. Davis in the supporting cast. In 1986, the play was produced in Canada at the Stratford Festival, running for 46 performances with Maurice Godin in the lead role.

Most recently in 2017, Bruce Norris&#x27; adapted version of the play was performed at the Donmar Warehouse in London, with Lenny Henry starring as Arturo Ui, and directed by Simon Evans. 

The role of Ui has been played by such other notable actors as Peter Falk, Griff Rhys Jones, Leonard Rossiter, Antony Sher, Nicol Williamson, Henry Goodman Hugo Weaving, and Jean Vilar. Simon Callow discussed his interpretation of the role in his autobiography, &quot;Being an Actor&quot;, while Plummer explains why he felt he failed in the role on Broadway in his autobiography, &quot;In Spite of Me&quot;.

A production by the Sydney Old Tote Theatre Company was filmed for Australian television in 1972 with John Bell in the title role and Helen Morse as Dockdaisy.

==Critical response==
At the time of the first stage production, in Stuttgart, Siegfried Melchinger, a West German critic, called it a &quot;brilliant miscarriage&quot;, and complained that the play omitted the German people, echoing the complaint of the East German critic Lothar Kusche, who had read the play in manuscript. Brecht&#x27;s answer was, in part

&quot;Ui&quot; is a &quot;parable play&quot;, written with the aim of destroying the dangerous respect commonly felt for great killers. The circle described has been deliberately restricted; it is confined to the plane of state, industrialists, Junkers and petty bourgeois. This is enough to achieve the desired objective. The play does not pretend to give a complete account of the historical situation in the 1930s.

In his 1992 study, &quot;Hitler: The Führer and the People&quot;, J. P. Stern, a professor of German literature, rejects both &quot;Arturo Ui&quot; and Chaplin&#x27;s &quot;The Great Dictator&quot;, writing: &quot;[T]he true nature of [Hitler] is trivialized and obscured rather than illuminated by the antics of Charles Chaplin and the deeply unfunny comedy of Bertolt Brecht.&quot;

The play was listed in 1999 as No. 54 on &quot;Le Monde&quot; 100 Books of the Century.

==In popular culture==
Lines from the play are quoted at the end of &quot;Cross of Iron&quot;, a 1977 drama war film directed by Sam Peckinpah: &quot;Do not rejoice in his defeat, you men. For though the world has stood up and stopped the bastard, the bitch that bore him is in heat again&quot;.

In the final episode of the first season of &quot;Being Human&quot;, the vampire Herrick quotes the play shortly before the werewolf George kills him: &quot;The world was almost won by such an ape! The nations put him where his kind belong. But don&#x27;t rejoice too soon at your escape – The womb he crawled from is still going strong.&quot; This mocks the heroes&#x27; hopes of stopping his plans for world domination and asserts the villains&#x27; rise to power is inevitable.

==References==
Notes
Bibliography

==External links==
* 
* , BBC 1972 version with Nicol Williamson and Jill Townsend
* Photos and production details for 1960s Leonard Rossiter theatre adaptation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="104" end="114" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="115" end="129" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="186" end="193" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="194" end="201" title="organized crime" label="mobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537" start="235" end="246" title="cauliflower" label="cauliflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="247" end="253" title="racketeering" label="racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="311" end="320" title="satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="321" end="329" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="345" end="357" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="366" end="376" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="397" end="409" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="545" end="557" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="693" end="703" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="717" end="736" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150552" start="777" end="792" title="Franz von Papen" label="Franz von Papen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1043" end="1054" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218690" start="1121" end="1139" title="machine politics" label="machine politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="1143" end="1148" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q170404" start="1446" end="1450" title="Visa (document)" label="visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="1729" end="1738" title="satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="1739" end="1747" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1812" end="1836" title="Nazi Germany" label="National Socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q247297" start="1951" end="1959" title="henchman" label="henchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q58583" start="1986" end="1996" title="Ernst Röhm" label="Ernst Röhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="2014" end="2030" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Nazi brownshirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="2128" end="2143" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="2244" end="2258" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="2379" end="2394" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q170365" start="2435" end="2451" title="Prussian Junkers" label="Prussian Junkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q578221" start="2477" end="2483" title="Cicero, Illinois" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="2507" end="2516" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2552" end="2564" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153992" start="2724" end="2738" title="Reichstag fire" label="Reichstag fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q616815" start="2787" end="2798" title="Eastern Aid" label="Eastern Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q109116" start="2864" end="2882" title="The Great Dictator" label="The Great Dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="2976" end="2991" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q722600" start="3097" end="3130" title="Epic theatre" label="&amp;quot;epic&amp;quot; style of theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="3818" end="3829" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q652011" start="3937" end="3948" title="Richard III (play)" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q10322723" start="3955" end="3962" title="Macbeth (character)" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="4204" end="4215" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q215750" start="4248" end="4261" title="Julius Caesar (play)" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="4314" end="4333" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4348" end="4360" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="4370" end="4384" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q58583" start="4394" end="4404" title="Ernst Röhm" label="Ernst Röhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="4416" end="4431" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734" start="4445" end="4462" title="Engelbert Dollfuß" label="Engelbert Dollfuß"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006398" start="4477" end="4498" title="Chancellor of Austria" label="Chancellor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170365" start="4521" end="4537" title="Prussian Junkers" label="Prussian Junkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q150552" start="4594" end="4609" title="Franz von Papen" label="Franz von Papen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157888" start="4682" end="4703" title="Marinus van der Lubbe" label="Marinus van der Lubbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q153992" start="4738" end="4764" title="Reichstag fire" label="burning down the Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="4837" end="4844" title="Weimar Republic" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="4856" end="4863" title="First Austrian Republic" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q616815" start="4885" end="4904" title="Eastern Aid" label="Eastern Aid scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151897" start="4927" end="4936" title="Reichstag building" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q60978" start="5764" end="5778" title="Erwin Piscator" label="Erwin Piscator"/>
<link wikidata="Q79044" start="5803" end="5816" title="Oskar Homolka" label="Oskar Homolka"/>
<link wikidata="Q78704" start="5887" end="5899" title="Hanns Eisler" label="Hanns Eisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244847" start="6025" end="6036" title="Labor Stage" label="Labor Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q914092" start="6146" end="6157" title="Neutrality Acts of the 1930s" label="at the time"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969638" start="6161" end="6176" title="Neutral powers during World War II" label="neutral country"/>
<link wikidata="Q534914" start="6252" end="6269" title="Berliner Ensemble" label="Berliner Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077417" start="7178" end="7193" title="Peter Palitzsch" label="Peter Palitzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="7274" end="7283" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709881" start="7390" end="7406" title="Manfred Wekwerth" label="Manfred Wekwerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q90893" start="7425" end="7440" title="Ekkehard Schall" label="Ekkehard Schall"/>
<link wikidata="Q57426" start="7696" end="7709" title="Heiner Müller" label="Heiner Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q65922" start="7753" end="7766" title="Martin Wuttke" label="Martin Wuttke"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="7855" end="7863" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q190523" start="7935" end="7954" title="Christopher Plummer" label="Christopher Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q275324" start="7976" end="7994" title="Madeleine Sherwood" label="Madeleine Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291127" start="7996" end="8015" title="Michael Constantine" label="Michael Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330714" start="8017" end="8028" title="Elisha Cook" label="Elisha Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q589753" start="8030" end="8044" title="Lionel Stander" label="Lionel Stander"/>
<link wikidata="Q112973" start="8046" end="8057" title="Sandy Baron" label="Sandy Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087453" start="8059" end="8071" title="Oliver Clark" label="Oliver Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q769205" start="8076" end="8086" title="James Coco" label="James Coco"/>
<link wikidata="Q52411" start="8119" end="8134" title="Tony Richardson" label="Tony Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027239" start="8257" end="8272" title="Guthrie Theater" label="Guthrie Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q23542443" start="8293" end="8306" title="Robin Gammell" label="Robin Gammell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="8424" end="8436" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128221" start="8469" end="8490" title="Classic Stage Company" label="Classic Stage Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q244234" start="8497" end="8510" title="John Turturro" label="John Turturro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039211" start="8537" end="8550" title="Carey Perloff" label="Carey Perloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970170" start="8580" end="8603" title="National Actors Theatre" label="National Actors Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="8623" end="8632" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q104061" start="8646" end="8659" title="Steve Buscemi" label="Steve Buscemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313650" start="8671" end="8683" title="Billy Crudup" label="Billy Crudup"/>
<link wikidata="Q329784" start="8694" end="8709" title="Charles Durning" label="Charles Durning"/>
<link wikidata="Q208649" start="8726" end="8739" title="Paul Giamatti" label="Paul Giamatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q215072" start="8753" end="8765" title="John Goodman" label="John Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q338812" start="8775" end="8791" title="Chazz Palminteri" label="Chazz Palminteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q948844" start="8801" end="8817" title="Lothaire Bluteau" label="Lothaire Bluteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q253358" start="8827" end="8846" title="Jacqueline McKenzie" label="Jacqueline McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q276184" start="8861" end="8872" title="Linda Emond" label="Linda Emond"/>
<link wikidata="Q286717" start="8896" end="8908" title="Tony Randall" label="Tony Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295000" start="8974" end="8991" title="Sterling K. Brown" label="Sterling K. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q412643" start="8993" end="9003" title="Ajay Naidu" label="Ajay Naidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q460688" start="9005" end="9021" title="Dominic Chianese" label="Dominic Chianese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249537" start="9023" end="9037" title="Robert Stanton (actor)" label="Robert Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338401" start="9039" end="9055" title="John Ventimiglia" label="John Ventimiglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152542" start="9061" end="9075" title="William Sadler (actor)" label="William Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q705602" start="9096" end="9110" title="Simon McBurney" label="Simon McBurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230052" start="9176" end="9186" title="John Doyle (director)" label="John Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q747697" start="9192" end="9204" title="Raúl Esparza" label="Raúl Esparza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335944" start="9227" end="9239" title="Eddie Cooper (actor)" label="Eddie Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362255" start="9244" end="9262" title="Elizabeth A. Davis" label="Elizabeth A. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q367149" start="9335" end="9353" title="Stratford Festival" label="Stratford Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300864" start="9388" end="9401" title="Maurice Godin (actor)" label="Maurice Godin"/>
<link wikidata="Q991754" start="9444" end="9456" title="Bruce Norris (playwright)" label="Bruce Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296262" start="9512" end="9528" title="Donmar Warehouse" label="Donmar Warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="9532" end="9538" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175896" start="9545" end="9556" title="Lenny Henry" label="Lenny Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q98133190" start="9596" end="9607" title="Simon Evans (director)" label="Simon Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q484881" start="9674" end="9684" title="Peter Falk" label="Peter Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546589" start="9686" end="9702" title="Griff Rhys Jones" label="Griff Rhys Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q967062" start="9704" end="9720" title="Leonard Rossiter" label="Leonard Rossiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q432362" start="9722" end="9733" title="Antony Sher" label="Antony Sher"/>
<link wikidata="Q725374" start="9735" end="9751" title="Nicol Williamson" label="Nicol Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132807" start="9753" end="9766" title="Henry Goodman" label="Henry Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42204" start="9767" end="9779" title="Hugo Weaving" label="Hugo Weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q952945" start="9785" end="9795" title="Jean Vilar" label="Jean Vilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q731187" start="9797" end="9809" title="Simon Callow" label="Simon Callow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085237" start="10048" end="10072" title="Old Tote Theatre Company" label="Old Tote Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q120176544" start="10088" end="10117" title="The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui (1972 television play)" label="Australian television in 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221426" start="10123" end="10132" title="John Bell (Australian actor)" label="John Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610584" start="10155" end="10166" title="Helen Morse" label="Helen Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106716" start="11028" end="11039" title="J. P. Stern" label="J. P. Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q40734" start="11388" end="11433" title="Le Monde&amp;#x27;s 100 Books of the Century" label="&amp;quot;Le Monde&amp;quot; 100 Books of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q699679" start="11510" end="11523" title="Cross of Iron" label="Cross of Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q51461" start="11565" end="11578" title="Sam Peckinpah" label="Sam Peckinpah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031748" start="11783" end="11794" title="Being Human (British TV series)" label="Being Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q725374" start="12298" end="12314" title="Nicol Williamson" label="Nicol Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193082" start="12319" end="12332" title="Jill Townsend" label="Jill Townsend"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30277" wikidata="Q212495" url="?curid=30277" title="The Threepenny Opera">
<text>The Threepenny Opera ( ) is a 1928 German &quot;play with music&quot; by Bertolt Brecht, adapted from a translation by Elisabeth Hauptmann of John Gay&#x27;s 18th-century English ballad opera, &quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot;, and four ballads by François Villon, with music by Kurt Weill. Although there is debate as to how much, if any, contribution Hauptmann might have made to the text, Brecht is usually listed as sole author.

The work offers a socialist critique of the capitalist world. It opened on 31 August 1928 at Berlin&#x27;s Theater am Schiffbauerdamm.

With influences from jazz and German dance music, songs from &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot; have been widely covered and become standards, most notably &quot;&quot; (&quot;The Ballad of Mack the Knife&quot;) and &quot;&quot; (&quot;Pirate Jenny&quot;).

&quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot; has been performed in the United Kingdom, the United States, France, Russia, Italy, and Hungary. It has also been adapted to film and radio. The German-language version from 1928 entered the public domain in the US in 2024.

== Background ==
=== Origins ===
In the winter of 1927–28, Elisabeth Hauptmann, Brecht&#x27;s lover at the time, received a copy of Gay&#x27;s play from friends in England and, fascinated by the female characters and its critique of the condition of the London poor, began translating it into German. Brecht at first took little interest in her translation project, but in April 1928 he attempted to interest the impresario Ernst Josef Aufricht in a play he was writing called &quot;Fleischhacker&quot;, which he had, in fact, already promised to another producer. Aufricht was seeking a production to launch his new theatre company at the Theater am Schiffbauerdamm in Berlin, but was not impressed by the sound of &quot;Fleischhacker&quot;. Brecht immediately proposed a translation of &quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot; instead, claiming that he himself had been translating it . He delivered Hauptmann&#x27;s translation to Aufricht, who immediately signed a contract for it. Brecht proposed Weill to write the music, and spent the next four months writing the libretto. 

Brecht used four songs by the French poet François Villon. Rather than translate the French himself, he used the translations by (), the same source he had been using since his earliest plays.

The first act of both works begins with the same melody (&quot;Peachum&#x27;s Morning Chorale&quot;/&quot;An Old Woman Clothed In Gray&quot;), but that is the only material Weill borrowed from the melodies Johann Christoph Pepusch arranged for &quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot;. The title &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot; was determined only a week before the opening; it had been previously announced as simply &quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot; (in English), with the subtitle &quot;Die Luden-Oper&quot; (&quot;The Pimp&#x27;s Opera&quot;).

Writing in 1929, Weill made the political and artistic intents of the work clear:
With the &quot;Dreigroschenoper&quot; we reach a public which either did not know us at all or thought us incapable of captivating listeners ... Opera was founded as an aristocratic form of art ... If the framework of opera is unable to withstand the impact of the age, then this framework must be destroyed ... In the &quot;Dreigroschenoper&quot;, reconstruction was possible insofar as here we had a chance of starting from scratch.

Weill claimed at the time that &quot;music cannot further the action of the play or create its background&quot;, but achieves its proper value when it interrupts the action at the right moments.&quot;

=== Music ===
Weill&#x27;s score shows the influence of jazz and German dance music of the time. The orchestration involves a small ensemble with a good deal of doubling-up on instruments (in the original performances, for example, some 7 players covered a total of 23 instrumental parts, though modern performances typically use a few more players).

== Premieres ==
=== Germany ===
&quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot; was first performed at the Theater am Schiffbauerdamm in 1928 on a set designed by Caspar Neher. Despite an initially poor reception, it became a great success, playing 400 times in the next two years. The performance was a springboard for one of the best known interpreters of Brecht and Weill&#x27;s work, Lotte Lenya, who was married to Weill. Ironically, the production became a great favourite of Berlin&#x27;s &quot;smart set&quot; – Count Harry Kessler recorded in his diary meeting at the performance an ambassador and a director of the Dresdner Bank (and their wives), and concluded &quot;One simply has to have been there.&quot;

Critics did not fail to notice that Brecht had included the four Villon songs translated by Ammer. Brecht responded by saying that he had &quot;a fundamental laxity in questions of literary property.&quot;

By 1933, when Weill and Brecht were forced to leave Germany by the Nazi seizure of power, the play had been translated into 18 languages and performed more than 10,000 times on European stages.

=== United Kingdom ===
In the United Kingdom, the first fully staged performance was given on 9 February 1956, under Berthold Goldschmidt, although there had been a concert performance in 1933, and a semi-staged performance on 28 July 1938. In between, on 8 February 1935 Edward Clark conducted the first British broadcast of the work. It received scathing reviews from Ernest Newman and other critics. But the most savage criticism came from Weill himself, who described it privately as &quot;the worst performance imaginable … the whole thing was completely misunderstood&quot;. But his criticisms seem to have been for the concept of the piece as a Germanised version of &quot;The Beggar&#x27;s Opera&quot;, rather than for Clark&#x27;s conducting of it, of which Weill made no mention.

=== United States ===
America was introduced to the work by the film version of G. W. Pabst, which opened in New York in 1931.

The first American production, adapted into English by Gifford Cochran and Jerrold Krimsky and staged by Francesco von Mendelssohn, featured Robert Chisholm as Macheath. It opened on Broadway at the Empire Theatre, on April 13, 1933, and closed after 12 performances. Mixed reviews praised the music but slammed the production, with the critic Gilbert Gabriel calling it &quot;a dreary enigma&quot;.

=== France ===
A French version produced by Gaston Baty and written by Ninon Steinhof and André Mauprey was presented in October 1930 at the Théâtre Montparnasse in Paris. It was rendered as &#x27;; (&#x27;, or &quot;four pennies&quot; being the idiomatically equivalent French expression for &quot;Threepenny&quot;).

=== Russia ===
In 1930 the work premiered in Moscow at the Kamerny Theatre, directed by Alexander Tairov. It was the only one of Brecht&#x27;s works to be performed in Russia during his lifetime. &quot;Izvestia&quot; disapproved: &quot;It is high time that our theatres ceased playing homage to petit-bourgeois bad taste and instead turned to more relevant themes.&quot;

=== Italy ===
The first Italian production, titled &quot;L&#x27;opera da tre soldi&quot; and directed by Giorgio Strehler, premiered at the Piccolo Teatro in Milan on 27 February 1956 in the presence of Bertolt Brecht. The cast included: Tino Carraro (Mackie), Mario Carotenuto (Peachum), (Polly), Milly (Jenny), (Chief of Police). The conductor was Bruno Maderna. Set designs were by Luciano Damiani and Teo Otto; costume design by Ezio Frigerio.

=== Hungary ===
The first Hungarian performance of the play was at the Comedy Theatre of Budapest (Vígszínház), on 6 September 1930. It was titled &quot;A koldus operája&quot;, which is a reference to Gay&#x27;s original opera. The play was translated by Jenő Heltai, who mixed Weill and Pepusch&#x27; s music, and also Brecht and Gay&#x27;s texts too. The director was Ernő Szabolcs, the cast included: Pál Jávor (Mackie), Franciska Gaal (Polly), Gerő Mály (Peachum), Ella Gombaszögi (Mrs. Peachum).

== Roles ==
== Synopsis ==

=== Overview ===
Set in Victorian London, the play focuses on Macheath, an amoral antihero who leads a criminal gang, committing robbery, arson, rape and murder.

Macheath (&quot;Mackie,&quot; or &quot;Mack the Knife&quot;) marries Polly Peachum. This displeases her father, who controls the beggars of London, and he endeavours to have Macheath hanged. His attempts are hindered by the fact that the Chief of Police, Tiger Brown, is Macheath&#x27;s old army comrade. Still, Peachum exerts his influence and eventually gets Macheath arrested and sentenced to hang. Macheath escapes this fate via a &quot;deus ex machina&quot; moments before the execution when, in an unrestrained parody of a happy ending, a messenger from the Queen arrives to pardon Macheath and grant him the title of baron. The details of the original 1928 text have often been substantially modified in later productions.

A draft narration by Brecht for a concert performance begins: &quot;You are about to hear an opera for beggars. Since this opera was intended to be as splendid as only beggars can imagine, and yet cheap enough for beggars to be able to watch, it is called the &quot;Threepenny Opera&quot;.&quot;

=== Prologue ===
A street singer entertains the crowd with the illustrated murder ballad or Bänkelsang, titled &quot;Die Moritat von Mackie Messer&quot; (&quot;Ballad of Mack the Knife&quot;). As the song concludes, a well-dressed man leaves the crowd and crosses the stage. This is Macheath, alias &quot;Mack the Knife&quot;.

=== Act 1 ===
The story begins in the shop of Jonathan Jeremiah Peachum, the boss of London&#x27;s beggars, who outfits and trains the beggars in return for a slice of their takings from begging. In the first scene, the extent of Peachum&#x27;s iniquity is immediately exposed. Filch, a new beggar, is obliged to bribe his way into the profession and agree to pay over to Peachum 50 percent of whatever he made; the previous day he had been severely beaten up for begging within the area of jurisdiction of Peachum&#x27;s protection racket.

After finishing with the new man, Peachum becomes aware that his grown daughter Polly did not return home the previous night. Peachum, who sees his daughter as his own private property, concludes that she has become involved with Macheath. This does not suit Peachum at all, and he becomes determined to thwart this relationship and destroy Macheath.

The scene shifts to an empty stable where Macheath himself is preparing to marry Polly once his gang has stolen and brought all the necessary food and furnishings. No vows are exchanged, but Polly is satisfied, and everyone sits down to a banquet. Since none of the gang members can provide fitting entertainment, Polly gets up and sings &quot;Seeräuberjenny&quot;, a revenge fantasy in which she is a scullery maid turning pirate queen to order the execution of her bosses and customers. The gang becomes nervous when the Chief of Police, Tiger Brown, arrives, but it&#x27;s all part of the act; Brown had served with Mack in England&#x27;s colonial wars and had intervened on numerous occasions to prevent the arrest of Macheath over the years. The old friends duet in the &quot;Kanonen-Song&quot; (&quot;Cannon Song&quot; or &quot;Army Song&quot;). In the next scene, Polly returns home and defiantly announces that she has married Macheath by singing the &quot;Barbarasong&quot; (&quot;Barbara Song&quot;). She stands fast against her parents&#x27; anger, but she inadvertently reveals Brown&#x27;s connections to Macheath which her parents subsequently use to their advantage.

=== Act 2 ===
Polly warns Macheath that her father will try to have him arrested. He is finally convinced that Peachum has enough influence to do it and makes arrangements to leave London, explaining the details of his bandit &quot;business&quot; to Polly so she can manage it in his absence. Before he leaves town, he stops at his favorite brothel, where he sees his ex-lover, Jenny. They sing the &quot;Zuhälterballade&quot; (&quot;Pimp&#x27;s Ballad&quot;, one of the Villon songs translated by Ammer) about their days together, but Macheath doesn&#x27;t know Mrs Peachum has bribed Jenny to turn him in. Despite Brown&#x27;s apologies, there&#x27;s nothing he can do, and Macheath is dragged away to jail. After he sings the &quot;Ballade vom angenehmen Leben&quot; (&quot;Ballad of the Pleasant Life&quot;), another Villon/Ammer song, another girlfriend, Lucy (Brown&#x27;s daughter) and Polly show up at the same time, setting the stage for a nasty argument that builds to the &quot;Eifersuchtsduett&quot; (&quot;Jealousy Duet&quot;). After Polly leaves, Lucy engineers Macheath&#x27;s escape. When Mr Peachum finds out, he confronts Brown and threatens him, telling him that he will unleash all of his beggars during Queen Victoria&#x27;s coronation parade, ruining the ceremony and costing Brown his job.

=== Act 3 ===
Jenny comes to the Peachums&#x27; shop to demand her money for the betrayal of Macheath, which Mrs Peachum refuses to pay. Jenny reveals that Macheath is at Suky Tawdry&#x27;s house. When Brown arrives, determined to arrest Peachum and the beggars, he is horrified to learn that the beggars are already in position and only Mr Peachum can stop them. To placate Peachum, Brown&#x27;s only option is to arrest Macheath and have him executed. In the next scene, Macheath is back in jail and desperately trying to raise a sufficient bribe to get out again, even as the gallows are being assembled.

Soon it becomes clear that neither Polly nor the gang members can, or are willing to, raise any money, and Macheath prepares to die. He laments his fate and poses the &#x27;Marxist&#x27; questions: &quot;What&#x27;s picking a lock compared to buying shares? What&#x27;s breaking into a bank compared to founding one? What&#x27;s murdering a man compared to employing one?&quot; (These questions did not appear in the original version of the work, but first appeared in the musical &quot;Happy End&quot;, another Brecht/Weill/Hauptmann collaboration, in 1929 – they may in fact have been written not by Brecht, but by Hauptmann).

Macheath asks everyone for forgiveness (&quot;Grave Inscription&quot;). Then a sudden and intentionally comical reversal: Peachum announces that in this opera mercy will prevail over justice and that a messenger on horseback will arrive (&quot;Walk to Gallows&quot;); Brown arrives as that messenger and announces that Macheath has been pardoned by the queen and granted a title, a castle and a pension. The cast then sings the Finale, which ends with a plea that wrongdoing not be punished too harshly as life is harsh enough.

== Musical numbers ==

=== Prelude ===
1. Ouverture
2. Die Moritat von Mackie Messer (&quot;The Ballad of Mack the Knife&quot; – Street singer)

=== Act 1 ===
3. Morgenchoral des Peachum (Peachum&#x27;s Morning Choral – Peachum, Mrs Peachum)
4. Anstatt dass-Song (Instead of Song – Peachum, Mrs Peachum)
5. Hochzeits-Lied (Wedding Song – Four Gangsters)
6. Seeräuberjenny (Pirate Jenny – Polly)
7. Kanonen-Song (Cannon Song – Macheath, Brown)
8. Liebeslied (Love Song – Polly, Macheath)
9. Barbarasong (Barbara Song – Polly)
10. I. Dreigroschenfinale (First Threepenny Finale – Polly, Peachum, Mrs Peachum)

=== Act 2 ===
11. Melodram (Melodrama – Macheath)
11a. Polly&#x27;s Lied (Polly&#x27;s Song – Polly)
12. Ballade von der sexuellen Hörigkeit (Ballad of Sexual Dependency – Mrs Peachum)
13. Zuhälterballade (Pimp&#x27;s Ballad or Tango Ballad – Jenny, Macheath)
14. Ballade vom angenehmen Leben (Ballad of the Pleasant Life – Macheath)
15. Eifersuchtsduett (Jealousy Duet – Lucy, Polly)
15b. Arie der Lucy (Aria of Lucy – Lucy)
16. II. Dreigroschenfinale (Second Threepenny Finale – Macheath, Mrs Peachum, Chorus)

=== Act 3 ===
17. Lied von der Unzulänglichkeit menschlichen Strebens (Song of the Insufficiency of Human Struggling – Peachum)
17a. Reminiszenz (Reminiscence)
18. Salomonsong (Solomon Song – Jenny)
19. Ruf aus der Gruft (Call from the Grave – Macheath)
20. Grabschrift (Grave Inscription – Macheath)
20a. Gang zum Galgen (Walk to Gallows – Peachum)
21. III. Dreigroschenfinale (Third Threepenny Finale – Brown, Mrs Peachum, Peachum, Macheath, Polly, Chorus)

== Reception ==
=== Opera or musical theatre? ===
The ambivalent nature of &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot;, derived from an 18th-century ballad opera but conceived in terms of 20th-century musical theatre, has led to discussion as to how it can best be characterised. According to critic and musicologist Hans Keller, the work is &quot;the weightiest possible opera for highbrows and the most full-blooded highbrow musical for lowbrows&quot;.

The Weill authority Stephen Hinton notes that &quot;generic ambiguity is a key to the work&#x27;s enduring success&quot;, and points out the work&#x27;s deliberate hybrid status: For Weill [&quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot;] was not just &#x27;the most consistent reaction to [Richard] Wagner&#x27;; it also marked a positive step towards an operatic reform. By explicitly and implicitly shunning the more earnest traditions of the opera house, Weill created a mixed form which incorporated spoken theatre and popular musical idioms. Parody of operatic convention – of Romantic lyricism and happy endings – constitutes a central device.

=== &quot;Mack the Knife&quot; ===
The work&#x27;s opening and closing lament, &quot;Die Moritat von Mackie Messer,&quot; was written just before the Berlin premiere, when actor Harald Paulsen (Macheath) threatened to quit if his character did not receive an introduction; this creative emergency resulted in what would become the work&#x27;s most popular song, later translated into English by Marc Blitzstein as &quot;Mack the Knife&quot;, and now a jazz standard that Louis Armstrong, Bobby Darin, Ella Fitzgerald, Sonny Rollins, Frank Sinatra, Peggy Lee, Michael Bublé, Robbie Williams and countless others have performed. In 2015, the Library of Congress added the recordings of &quot;Mack the Knife&quot; by Louis Armstrong and Bobby Darin to the National Recording Registry. It has been named one of the hundred most popular songs of the twentieth century.

In 1986, American fast-food chain McDonald&#x27;s launched an advertising campaign featuring a new mascot &quot;Mac Tonight&quot; loosely based on the lyrics &quot;Mack the Knife&quot; featuring a parody of the song. The advert, which was associated with a 10% increase in later diners in some Californian restaurants at the time, led to a lawsuit by Bobby Darin&#x27;s son, Dodd Mitchell Darin. The lawsuit concerned the parody created by McDonald&#x27;s stated that it was in violation of copyright law. The case was settled outside of court without requiring a court hearing. Following this the mascot was mostly dropped from McDonalds marketing.

=== &quot;Pirate Jenny&quot; ===
&quot;Pirate Jenny&quot; is another well-known song from the work, which has since been recorded by Nina Simone, Judy Collins, Tania Tsanaklidou, and Marc Almond, among others. In addition, Steeleye Span recorded it under the alternative title &quot;The Black Freighter&quot;. Recently, the drag queen Sasha Velour has made an adaptation by the same name for an installment of One Dollar Drags, an anthology of short films.

=== &quot;The Second Threepenny Finale&quot; ===
Under the title &quot;What Keeps Mankind Alive?&quot;, this number has been recorded by the Pet Shop Boys on the B-side of their 1993 single &quot;Can You Forgive Her?&quot;, and on two albums. Tom Waits covered it on two albums, and William S. Burroughs performed it in a 1994 documentary.

== Revivals ==

=== Germany ===
After World War II the first stage performance in Berlin was a rough production of &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot; at the Theater am Schiffbauerdamm. Wolf Von Eckardt described the 1945 performance where audience members climbed over ruins and passed through a tunnel to reach the open-air auditorium deprived of its ceiling. In addition to the smell of dead bodies trapped beneath the rubble, Eckardt recollects the actors themselves were &quot;haggard, starved, [and] in genuine rags. Many of the actors ... had only just been released from concentration camp. They sang not well, but free.&quot; Barrie Kosky produced the work again at the Theater am Schiffbauerdamm in 2021. The production travelled to the Ruhrfestspiele in 2022, the Internationaal Theater Amsterdam, Teatro Argentina, Rome, the Edinburgh International Festival in 2023, and to the 2024 Adelaide Festival.

=== France ===
The Pabst film &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot; was shown in its French version in 1931. In 1937 there was a production by Ernst Josef Aufricht at the Théâtre de l&#x27;Étoile which failed, though Brecht himself had attended rehearsals. The work was not revived in France until after World War II.

=== United Kingdom ===
In London, West End and Off-West End revivals include:
* Royal Court Theatre, 9 February to 20 March 1956 and Aldwych Theatre, from 21 March 1956. Directed by Sam Wanamaker. With Bill Owen as Macheath, Daphne Anderson as Polly.
* Prince of Wales Theatre and Piccadilly Theatre, opening 10 February 1972. With Vanessa Redgrave, Diana Quick and Barbara Windsor.
* National Theatre (Olivier Theatre), 13 March 1986. New translation by Robert David MacDonald, directed by Peter Wood. With Tim Curry as Macheath, Sally Dexter as Polly, Joanna Foster as Lucy and Eve Polycarpou (Adam) as Jenny.
* Donmar Warehouse, 1994. Translation by Robert David MacDonald (book) and Jeremy Sams (lyrics). With Tom Hollander as Macheath and Sharon Small as Polly. This production released a cast recording as was nominated for Best Musical Revival and Best Supporting Performance in a Musical (for Tara Hugo as Jenny) at the 1995 Laurence Olivier Awards.
* National Theatre (Cottesloe Theatre) and UK Tour, February 2003. Translation by Jeremy Sams (lyrics) and Anthony Meech (book), directed by Tim Baker.
* National Theatre (Olivier Theatre), 18 May to 1 October 2016. New adaptation by Simon Stephens, directed by Rufus Norris. With Rory Kinnear as Macheath, Rosalie Craig as Polly, Nick Holder as Peachum, Haydn Gwynne as Mrs Peachum (nominated for Best Actress in a Supporting Role in a Musical at the 2017 Laurence Olivier Awards), Sharon Small as Jenny, Peter de Jersey as Brown. This production was broadcast live to cinemas worldwide through NT Live on 22 September.
In 2014, the Robert David MacDonald and Jeremy Sams translation (previously used in 1994 at the Donmar Warehouse) toured the UK, presented by the Graeae Theatre Company with Nottingham Playhouse, New Wolsey Theatre Ipswich, Birmingham Repertory Theatre and West Yorkshire Playhouse.

=== United States ===
In 1946, four performances of the work were given at the University of Illinois in Urbana, and Northwestern University gave six performances in 1948 in Evanston, Illinois. In 1952, Leonard Bernstein conducted a concert performance of the work at the Brandeis University Creative Arts Festival in the Adolph Ullman Amphitheatre, Waltham, Massachusetts, to an audience of nearly 5,000. Marc Blitzstein, who translated the work, narrated.

At least five Broadway and Off-Broadway revivals have been mounted in New York City.
* In 1956, Lotte Lenya won a Tony Award for her role as Jenny, the only time an off-Broadway performance has been so honored, in Blitzstein&#x27;s somewhat softened version of &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot;, which played Off-Broadway at the Theater de Lys in Greenwich Village for a total of 2,707 performances, beginning with an interrupted 96-performance run in 1954 and resuming in 1955. Blitzstein had translated the work into English, and toned down some of its acerbities. Over the course of its run, the production featured Scott Merrill as Macheath; Edward Asner as Mr. Peachum; Charlotte Rae (later Carole Cook, billed as Mildred Cook, then Jane Connell) as Mrs. Peachum; Jo Sullivan Loesser as Polly; Bea Arthur as Lucy; Jerry Orbach as PC Smith, the Street Singer and Mack; John Astin as Readymoney Matt/Matt of the Mint; and Jerry Stiller as Crookfinger Jake.
* A nine-month run in 1976–77 had a new translation by Ralph Manheim and John Willett for Joe Papp&#x27;s New York Shakespeare Festival at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center, directed by Richard Foreman, with Raul Julia as Macheath, Blair Brown as Lucy, and Ellen Greene as Jenny. The production rescinded some of Blitzstein&#x27;s modifications. Critics were divided: Clive Barnes called it &quot;the most interesting and original thing that Joe Papp ... has produced&quot; whilst John Simon wrote &quot;I cannot begin to list all the injuries done to Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill&#x27;s masterpiece.&quot;
* A 1989 Broadway production, billed as &quot;3 Penny Opera&quot;, translated by Michael Feingold, starred Sting as Macheath. Its cast also featured Georgia Brown as Mrs Peachum, Maureen McGovern as Polly, Kim Criswell as Lucy, KT Sullivan as Suky Tawdry and Ethyl Eichelberger as the Street Singer. The production was unsuccessful.
* Liberally adapted by playwright Wallace Shawn, the work was brought back to Broadway by the Roundabout Theatre Company at Studio 54 in March 2006 with Alan Cumming playing Macheath, Nellie McKay as Polly, Cyndi Lauper as Jenny, Jim Dale as Mr Peachum, Ana Gasteyer as Mrs Peachum, Carlos Leon as Filch, Adam Alexi-Malle as Jacob and Brian Charles Rooney as a male Lucy. Included in the cast were drag performers. The director was Scott Elliott, the choreographer Aszure Barton, and, while not adored by the critics, the production was nominated for the &quot;Best Musical Revival&quot; Tony award. Jim Dale was also Tony-nominated for Best Supporting Actor. The run ended on June 25, 2006.
* The Brooklyn Academy of Music presented a production directed by Robert Wilson and featuring the Berliner Ensemble for only a few performances in October 2011. The play was presented in German with English supertitles using the 1976 translation by John Willett. The cast included Stefan Kurt as Macheath, Stefanie Stappenbeck as Polly and Angela Winkler as Jenny. &quot;The Village Voice&quot; review said the production &quot;turn[ed] Brecht and Weill&#x27;s middle-class wake-up call into dead entertainment for rich people. His gelid staging and pallid, quasi-abstract recollections of Expressionist-era design suggested that the writers might have been trying to perpetrate an artsified remake of Kander and Ebb&#x27;s &quot;Cabaret&quot;.

Regional productions include:
* Boston&#x27;s Charles Playhouse, April 27 through June 6, 1982. Adapted by Marc Blitzstein and directed by Geraldine Fitzgerald, the production starred Elly Stone, Timothy Landfield, Jessica James, and Maryann Plunkett.
* The Williamstown Theatre Festival, Massachusetts, in June and July 2003. Directed by Peter Hunt, the musical starred Jesse L. Martin as Mack, Melissa Errico as Polly, David Schramm as Peachum, Karen Ziemba as Lucy Brown and Betty Buckley as Jenny. The production received favorable reviews.

== Film adaptations ==
German director G. W. Pabst made a 1931 German- and French-language version simultaneously, a common practice in the early days of sound films.

Another version, , was directed by Wolfgang Staudte in West Germany in 1963, starring Curd Jürgens as Macheath, Hildegard Knef as Jenny, Gert Fröbe as Peachum, and Sammy Davis Jr. as Moritat singer.

In 1989 an American version (renamed &quot;Mack the Knife&quot;) was released, directed by Menahem Golan, with Raul Julia as Macheath, Richard Harris as Peachum, Julie Walters as Mrs Peachum, Bill Nighy as Tiger Brown, Julia Migenes as Jenny, and Roger Daltrey as the Street Singer.

== Radio adaptations ==
In 2009, BBC Radio 3 in collaboration with the BBC Philharmonic broadcast a complete radio production of the Michael Feingold translation directed by Nadia Molinari with the music performed by the BBC Philharmonic. The cast included Joseph Millson as Macheath, Elen Rhys as Polly/Whore, Ruth Alexander-Rubin as Mrs Peachum/Whore, Zubin Varla as Mr. Peachum/Rev. Kimball, Rosalie Craig as Lucy/Whore, Ute Gfrerer as Jenny, Conrad Nelson as Tiger Brown and HK Gruber as the Ballad Singer.

== English Translations ==
* Gifford Cochran and Jerrold Krimsky, 1933: 
* Desmond Vesey (book) and Eric Bentley (lyrics), 1949:
* Marc Blitzstein, 1954: 
* John Willett and Ralph Manheim, 1976: 
* Jeremy Sams (lyrics) and Robert David Macdonald (book), 1994: 
* Wallace Shawn, 2005:
* Brian Vinero, 2024: 

== Recordings ==
Recordings are in German, unless otherwise specified.
* &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot;, 1930, on Telefunken. Abridged/incomplete. Lotte Lenya (Jenny), Erika Helmke (Polly), Willy Trenk-Trebitsch (Macheath), Kurt Gerron (Moritatensänger; Brown), and Erich Ponto (Peachum). Band, conducted by Theo Mackeben. Released on CD by Teldec Classics in 1990.
* &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot;, 1954, on Decca Broadway 159 463. In English. Lyrics by Marc Blitzstein. The 1950s Broadway cast, starring Jo Sullivan (Polly Peachum), Lotte Lenya (Jenny), Charlotte Rae (Mrs Peachum), Scott Merrill (Macheath), Gerald Price (Street Singer), and Martin Wolfson (Peachum). Bea Arthur sings Lucy, normally a small role, here assigned an extra number. Complete recording of the score, without spoken dialogues. Conducted by Samuel Matlowsky.
* &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot;, 1955, on Vanguard 8057, with Anny Felbermayer, , Jenny Miller, Rosette Anday, Helge Rosvaenge, Alfred Jerger, and Liane Augustin. Vienna State Opera Orchestra conducted by F. Charles Adler.
* &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot;, 1958, on CBS MK 42637. Lenya, who also supervised the production, Johanna von Koczian, Trude Hesterberg, Erich Schellow, Wolfgang Neuss, and Willy Trenk-Trebitsch, Arndt Chorus, Sender Freies Berlin Orchestra, conducted by Wilhelm Brückner-Rüggeberg. Complete recording of the score, without spoken dialogues.
* &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot;, 1966, conducted by Wolfgang Rennert on Philips. With Karin Hübner, , , Hans Korte, , and Franz Kutschera.
* &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot;, 1976, on Columbia PS 34326. Conducted by Stanley Silverman. In English, new translation by Ralph Manheim and John Willett. Starring the New York Shakespeare Festival cast, including Raul Julia (Macheath), Ellen Greene (Jenny), Caroline Kava (Polly), Blair Brown (Lucy), C. K. Alexander (Peachum) and Elizabeth Wilson (Mrs Peachum)
* &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot;, 1968, on Polydor 00289 4428349 (2 CDs). Hannes Messemer (MM), Helmut Qualtinger (P), Berta Drews (MsP), Karin Baal (Polly), Martin Held (B), Hanne Wieder (J), Franz Josef Degenhardt (Mor). Conducted by James Last. The only recording, up to the present, that contains the complete spoken dialogue.
* &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot;, 1988, on Decca 430 075. René Kollo (Macheath), Mario Adorf (Peachum), Helga Dernesch (Mrs Peachum), Ute Lemper (Polly), Milva (Jenny), Wolfgang Reichmann (Tiger Brown), (Lucy), (Herald). RIAS Berlin Sinfonietta, John Mauceri.
* &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot;, 1990, on Koch International Classics 37006. Manfred Jung (Macheath), Stephanie Myszak (Polly), Anelia Shoumanova (Jenny), Herrmann Becht (Peachum), Anita Herrmann (Mrs Peachum), Eugene Demerdjiev (Brown), Waldemar Kmentt (Street Singer); Bulgarian Television and Radio Mixed Choir and Symphony Orchestra, Victor C. Symonette
* &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot;, 1994, on CDJAY 1244. In English. Donmar Warehouse (London) production. Translated by Robert David Macdonald (lyrics translated by Jeremy Sams). Conducted by Gary Yershon. With Sharon Small (Polly Peachum), Tara Hugo (Jenny), Natasha Bain (Lucy Brown), Tom Hollander (Macheath), Simon Dormandy (Tiger Brown), Beverley Klein (Mrs Peachum) and Tom Mannion (Mr Peachum).
* &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot;, 1997, on Capriccio. Conducted by Jan Latham-König, with Ulrike Steinsky, Gabriele Ramm, Jane Henschel, , Rolf Wollrad, and Peter Nikolaus Kante.
* &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot;, 1999, BMG Classics 74321-66133, Ensemble Modern, HK Gruber (conductor, Mr Peachum), Max Raabe (Macheath), Sona MacDonald (Polly), Nina Hagen (Mrs Peachum), Timna Brauer (Jenny), (Tiger Brown)

== See also ==

* &quot;Threepenny Novel&quot; (1934)
* Story adapted to Brazilian scenario by Chico Buarque, having Rio instead of London, as &quot;Ópera do Malandro&quot; (1979)
* &quot;The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, Volume III: Century&quot;

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* &quot;Die Dreigroschenoper&quot;, Kurt Weill Foundation for Music
* Information on &quot;The Threepenny Opera&quot; English version, marc-blitzstein.org
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212495" start="22" end="22" title="The Threepenny Opera" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="73" end="87" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q73781" start="119" end="138" title="Elisabeth Hauptmann" label="Elisabeth Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q321660" start="142" end="150" title="John Gay" label="John Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q119272" start="179" end="191" title="ballad opera" label="ballad opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472110" start="199" end="222" title="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera" label="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q849" start="250" end="265" title="François Villon" label="François Villon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="281" end="291" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="454" end="463" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="480" end="490" title="capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q632381" start="543" end="569" title="Theater am Schiffbauerdamm" label="Theater am Schiffbauerdamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="593" end="597" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849904" start="702" end="711" title="Standard (music)" label="standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q51801270" start="760" end="774" title="Mack the Knife" label="Mack the Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197803" start="806" end="818" title="Pirate Jenny" label="Pirate Jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q124246025" start="1052" end="1083" title="2024 in American public domain" label="public domain in the US in 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q73781" start="1145" end="1164" title="Elisabeth Hauptmann" label="Elisabeth Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358871" start="1510" end="1530" title="Ernst Josef Aufricht" label="Ernst Josef Aufricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q632381" start="1726" end="1752" title="Theater am Schiffbauerdamm" label="Theater am Schiffbauerdamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q849" start="2206" end="2221" title="François Villon" label="François Villon"/>
<link wikidata="Q371825" start="2564" end="2588" title="Johann Christoph Pepusch" label="Johann Christoph Pepusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="2878" end="2882" title="Pimp" label="Pimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="3681" end="3685" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q85745" start="4125" end="4137" title="Caspar Neher" label="Caspar Neher"/>
<link wikidata="Q93604" start="4350" end="4361" title="Lotte Lenya" label="Lotte Lenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q70618" start="4488" end="4501" title="Harry Graf Kessler" label="Harry Kessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258529" start="4587" end="4600" title="Dresdner Bank" label="Dresdner Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="4956" end="4977" title="Nazi seizure of power" label="Nazi seizure of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q213910" start="5201" end="5221" title="Berthold Goldschmidt" label="Berthold Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342308" start="5356" end="5368" title="Edward Clark (conductor)" label="Edward Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356476" start="5454" end="5467" title="Ernest Newman" label="Ernest Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472110" start="5764" end="5787" title="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera" label="The Beggar&amp;#x27;s Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q693798" start="5939" end="5951" title="The Threepenny Opera (film)" label="film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q55421" start="5955" end="5966" title="G. W. Pabst" label="G. W. Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441287" start="6108" end="6133" title="Francesco von Mendelssohn" label="Francesco von Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="6186" end="6194" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032135" start="6202" end="6216" title="Empire Theatre (41st Street)" label="Empire Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560915" start="6347" end="6362" title="Gilbert Gabriel" label="Gilbert Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132720" start="6448" end="6459" title="Gaston Baty" label="Gaston Baty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759995" start="6494" end="6507" title="André Mauprey" label="André Mauprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527526" start="6545" end="6565" title="Théâtre Montparnasse" label="Théâtre Montparnasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q184511" start="6650" end="6655" title="idiom" label="idiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798042" start="6703" end="6713" title="Threepence (British coin)" label="Threepenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211519" start="6782" end="6797" title="Kamerny Theatre" label="Kamerny Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q981151" start="6811" end="6827" title="Alexander Tairov" label="Alexander Tairov"/>
<link wikidata="Q753932" start="6925" end="6933" title="Izvestia" label="Izvestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q737794" start="7200" end="7216" title="Giorgio Strehler" label="Giorgio Strehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q371138" start="7235" end="7249" title="Piccolo Teatro (Milan)" label="Piccolo Teatro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991603" start="7333" end="7345" title="Tino Carraro" label="Tino Carraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q463732" start="7356" end="7372" title="Mario Carotenuto" label="Mario Carotenuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858025" start="7393" end="7398" title="Milly (actress)" label="Milly"/>
<link wikidata="Q351383" start="7445" end="7458" title="Bruno Maderna" label="Bruno Maderna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873294" start="7480" end="7495" title="Luciano Damiani" label="Luciano Damiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q124839" start="7500" end="7508" title="Teo Otto" label="Teo Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q328177" start="7528" end="7541" title="Ezio Frigerio" label="Ezio Frigerio"/>
<link wikidata="Q897802" start="7615" end="7641" title="Comedy Theatre of Budapest" label="Comedy Theatre of Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q505550" start="7948" end="7957" title="Pál Jávor (actor)" label="Pál Jávor"/>
<link wikidata="Q216144" start="7968" end="7982" title="Franciska Gaal" label="Franciska Gaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q739128" start="7992" end="8001" title="Gerő Mály" label="Gerő Mály"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011730" start="8013" end="8028" title="Ella Gombaszögi" label="Ella Gombaszögi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="8098" end="8107" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036723" start="8136" end="8144" title="Captain Macheath" label="Macheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="8156" end="8164" title="antihero" label="antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="8633" end="8637" title="hanging" label="hang"/>
<link wikidata="Q203698" start="8678" end="8693" title="deus ex machina" label="deus ex machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="8719" end="8728" title="execution" label="execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="8754" end="8760" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="8818" end="8824" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q241501" start="9328" end="9367" title="cantastoria" label="illustrated murder ballad or Bänkelsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197803" start="10831" end="10845" title="Pirate Jenny" label="Seeräuberjenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="12894" end="12908" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637808" start="12916" end="12926" title="Coronation of Queen Victoria" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="13766" end="13773" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584256" start="14080" end="14089" title="Happy End (musical)" label="Happy End"/>
<link wikidata="Q51801270" start="14858" end="14872" title="Mack the Knife" label="Mack the Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197803" start="15125" end="15137" title="Pirate Jenny" label="Pirate Jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036588" start="15814" end="15838" title="What Keeps Mankind Alive?" label="Second Threepenny Finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q119272" start="16471" end="16483" title="ballad opera" label="ballad opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="16523" end="16538" title="musical theatre" label="musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q114576" start="16639" end="16650" title="Hans Keller" label="Hans Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757850" start="16704" end="16712" title="highbrow" label="highbrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18686833" start="16798" end="16812" title="Stephen Hinton" label="Stephen Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="17053" end="17069" title="Richard Wagner" label="[Richard] Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="17346" end="17354" title="romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108867" start="17593" end="17607" title="Harald Paulsen" label="Harald Paulsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q918359" start="17810" end="17825" title="Marc Blitzstein" label="Marc Blitzstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q51801270" start="17835" end="17849" title="Mack the Knife" label="Mack the Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q591990" start="17867" end="17880" title="jazz standard" label="jazz standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="17886" end="17901" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q311267" start="17903" end="17914" title="Bobby Darin" label="Bobby Darin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="17916" end="17931" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q299208" start="17933" end="17946" title="Sonny Rollins" label="Sonny Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="17948" end="17961" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q229139" start="17963" end="17972" title="Peggy Lee" label="Peggy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q153694" start="17974" end="17987" title="Michael Bublé" label="Michael Bublé"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="17989" end="18004" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="18168" end="18195" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="18314" end="18329" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761818" start="18342" end="18362" title="advertising campaign" label="advertising campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722371" start="18392" end="18403" title="Mac Tonight" label="Mac Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="18620" end="18627" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q311267" start="18631" end="18642" title="Bobby Darin" label="Bobby Darin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="18771" end="18784" title="Copyright" label="copyright law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197803" start="18970" end="18982" title="Pirate Jenny" label="Pirate Jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="19064" end="19075" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q254576" start="19077" end="19089" title="Judy Collins" label="Judy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q437592" start="19091" end="19108" title="Tania Tsanaklidou" label="Tania Tsanaklidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q452166" start="19114" end="19125" title="Marc Almond" label="Marc Almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413921" start="19154" end="19167" title="Steeleye Span" label="Steeleye Span"/>
<link wikidata="Q29913296" start="19266" end="19278" title="Sasha Velour" label="Sasha Velour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036588" start="19460" end="19485" title="What Keeps Mankind Alive?" label="What Keeps Mankind Alive?"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="19530" end="19543" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q255517" start="19585" end="19605" title="Can You Forgive Her? (song)" label="Can You Forgive Her?"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="19632" end="19641" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="19672" end="19692" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q632381" start="19885" end="19911" title="Theater am Schiffbauerdamm" label="Theater am Schiffbauerdamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q55676144" start="19913" end="19929" title="Wolf Von Eckardt" label="Wolf Von Eckardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q808911" start="20362" end="20374" title="Barrie Kosky" label="Barrie Kosky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175069" start="20474" end="20488" title="Ruhrfestspiele" label="Ruhrfestspiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261170" start="20502" end="20534" title="Internationaal Theater Amsterdam" label="Internationaal Theater Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q588377" start="20536" end="20552" title="Teatro Argentina" label="Teatro Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151919" start="20564" end="20596" title="Edinburgh International Festival" label="Edinburgh International Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681709" start="20622" end="20639" title="Adelaide Festival" label="Adelaide Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q55421" start="20661" end="20666" title="G. W. Pabst" label="Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q693798" start="20678" end="20698" title="The Threepenny Opera (film)" label="The Threepenny Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358871" start="20780" end="20800" title="Ernst Josef Aufricht" label="Ernst Josef Aufricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205474" start="20808" end="20832" title="Théâtre de l&amp;#x27;Étoile" label="Théâtre de l&amp;#x27;Étoile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="20990" end="20998" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016513" start="21003" end="21015" title="Off West End" label="Off-West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169370" start="21036" end="21055" title="Royal Court Theatre" label="Royal Court Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783531" start="21089" end="21104" title="Aldwych Theatre" label="Aldwych Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370307" start="21138" end="21151" title="Sam Wanamaker" label="Sam Wanamaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903321" start="21158" end="21167" title="Bill Owen (actor)" label="Bill Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221590" start="21181" end="21196" title="Daphne Anderson" label="Daphne Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q587234" start="21209" end="21232" title="Prince of Wales Theatre" label="Prince of Wales Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190566" start="21237" end="21255" title="Piccadilly Theatre" label="Piccadilly Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q347879" start="21288" end="21304" title="Vanessa Redgrave" label="Vanessa Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150442" start="21306" end="21317" title="Diana Quick" label="Diana Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q449062" start="21322" end="21337" title="Barbara Windsor" label="Barbara Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="21341" end="21357" title="Royal National Theatre" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434909" start="21411" end="21433" title="Robert David MacDonald" label="Robert David MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q52392" start="21464" end="21473" title="Tim Curry" label="Tim Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405117" start="21487" end="21499" title="Sally Dexter" label="Sally Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205826" start="21510" end="21523" title="Joanna Foster" label="Joanna Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735294" start="21536" end="21550" title="Eve Polycarpou" label="Eve Polycarpou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296262" start="21570" end="21586" title="Donmar Warehouse" label="Donmar Warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181852" start="21643" end="21654" title="Jeremy Sams" label="Jeremy Sams"/>
<link wikidata="Q312124" start="21670" end="21683" title="Tom Hollander" label="Tom Hollander"/>
<link wikidata="Q449956" start="21700" end="21712" title="Sharon Small" label="Sharon Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500788" start="21786" end="21806" title="Laurence Olivier Award for Best Musical Revival" label="Best Musical Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500803" start="21811" end="21851" title="Laurence Olivier Award for Best Performance in a Supporting Role in a Musical" label="Best Supporting Performance in a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972297" start="21884" end="21912" title="1995 Laurence Olivier Awards" label="1995 Laurence Olivier Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="21916" end="21932" title="Royal National Theatre" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="22068" end="22084" title="Royal National Theatre" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q363488" start="22148" end="22162" title="Simon Stephens" label="Simon Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378076" start="22176" end="22188" title="Rufus Norris" label="Rufus Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320782" start="22195" end="22207" title="Rory Kinnear" label="Rory Kinnear"/>
<link wikidata="Q18685547" start="22221" end="22234" title="Rosalie Craig" label="Rosalie Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683790" start="22269" end="22281" title="Haydn Gwynne" label="Haydn Gwynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870588" start="22312" end="22358" title="Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role in a Musical" label="Best Actress in a Supporting Role in a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864610" start="22366" end="22394" title="2017 Laurence Olivier Awards" label="2017 Laurence Olivier Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q449956" start="22397" end="22409" title="Sharon Small" label="Sharon Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177890" start="22420" end="22435" title="Peter de Jersey" label="Peter de Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336948" start="22510" end="22517" title="National Theatre Live" label="NT Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296262" start="22631" end="22647" title="Donmar Warehouse" label="Donmar Warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592165" start="22681" end="22703" title="Graeae Theatre Company" label="Graeae Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063678" start="22709" end="22729" title="Nottingham Playhouse" label="Nottingham Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012459" start="22731" end="22749" title="New Wolsey Theatre" label="New Wolsey Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916786" start="22759" end="22787" title="Birmingham Repertory Theatre" label="Birmingham Repertory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987042" start="22792" end="22816" title="West Yorkshire Playhouse" label="West Yorkshire Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="22898" end="22920" title="University of Illinois" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q462184" start="22924" end="22930" title="Urbana, Illinois" label="Urbana"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="22936" end="22959" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q462799" start="22993" end="23011" title="Evanston, Illinois" label="Evanston, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="23022" end="23039" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402474" start="23091" end="23133" title="Leonard Bernstein Festival of the Creative Arts" label="Brandeis University Creative Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q49190" start="23169" end="23191" title="Waltham, Massachusetts" label="Waltham, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q918359" start="23225" end="23240" title="Marc Blitzstein" label="Marc Blitzstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="23292" end="23300" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="23305" end="23317" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q93604" start="23374" end="23385" title="Lotte Lenya" label="Lotte Lenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="23392" end="23402" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="23443" end="23455" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697298" start="23606" end="23620" title="Lucille Lortel Theatre" label="Theater de Lys"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="23624" end="23641" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q154421" start="23923" end="23935" title="Edward Asner" label="Edward Asner"/>
<link wikidata="Q266335" start="23952" end="23965" title="Charlotte Rae" label="Charlotte Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044672" start="23973" end="23984" title="Carole Cook" label="Carole Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833214" start="24015" end="24027" title="Jane Connell" label="Jane Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204422" start="24046" end="24065" title="Jo Sullivan Loesser" label="Jo Sullivan Loesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q138576" start="24076" end="24086" title="Bea Arthur" label="Bea Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q421707" start="24096" end="24108" title="Jerry Orbach" label="Jerry Orbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q458464" start="24150" end="24160" title="John Astin" label="John Astin"/>
<link wikidata="Q316857" start="24202" end="24215" title="Jerry Stiller" label="Jerry Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287827" start="24292" end="24305" title="Ralph Manheim" label="Ralph Manheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702160" start="24310" end="24322" title="John Willett" label="John Willett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480583" start="24327" end="24335" title="Joe Papp" label="Joe Papp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013975" start="24343" end="24372" title="New York Shakespeare Festival" label="New York Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q176205" start="24380" end="24403" title="Vivian Beaumont Theater" label="Vivian Beaumont Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="24407" end="24421" title="Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149500" start="24435" end="24450" title="Richard Foreman" label="Richard Foreman"/>
<link wikidata="Q317654" start="24457" end="24467" title="Raul Julia" label="Raul Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242709" start="24481" end="24492" title="Blair Brown" label="Blair Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q513009" start="24506" end="24518" title="Ellen Greene" label="Ellen Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134493" start="24617" end="24629" title="Clive Barnes" label="Clive Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257894" start="24730" end="24740" title="John Simon (critic)" label="John Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q110819875" start="24938" end="24954" title="Michael Feingold" label="Michael Feingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="24964" end="24969" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q537076" start="25006" end="25019" title="Georgia Brown (English singer)" label="Georgia Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q273216" start="25036" end="25052" title="Maureen McGovern" label="Maureen McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408514" start="25063" end="25075" title="Kim Criswell" label="Kim Criswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560596" start="25085" end="25096" title="KT Sullivan" label="KT Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15527336" start="25116" end="25134" title="Ethyl Eichelberger" label="Ethyl Eichelberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q311068" start="25224" end="25237" title="Wallace Shawn" label="Wallace Shawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371225" start="25284" end="25310" title="Roundabout Theatre Company" label="Roundabout Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q607212" start="25314" end="25323" title="Studio 54" label="Studio 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q316629" start="25343" end="25355" title="Alan Cumming" label="Alan Cumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q454975" start="25374" end="25386" title="Nellie McKay" label="Nellie McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="25397" end="25409" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689081" start="25420" end="25428" title="Jim Dale" label="Jim Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844979" start="25444" end="25456" title="Ana Gasteyer" label="Ana Gasteyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678631" start="25495" end="25511" title="Adam Alexi-Malle" label="Adam Alexi-Malle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963332" start="25525" end="25545" title="Brian Charles Rooney" label="Brian Charles Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812227" start="25655" end="25668" title="Aszure Barton" label="Aszure Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q72912" start="25888" end="25913" title="Brooklyn Academy of Music" label="Brooklyn Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q541526" start="25949" end="25962" title="Robert Wilson (director)" label="Robert Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q534914" start="25981" end="25998" title="Berliner Ensemble" label="Berliner Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702160" start="26132" end="26144" title="John Willett" label="John Willett"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="26254" end="26271" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797748" start="26585" end="26599" title="Kander and Ebb" label="Kander and Ebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024739" start="26607" end="26626" title="Cabaret (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Cabaret&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081687" start="26675" end="26692" title="Charles Playhouse" label="Charles Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q918359" start="26736" end="26751" title="Marc Blitzstein" label="Marc Blitzstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q236396" start="26768" end="26788" title="Geraldine Fitzgerald" label="Geraldine Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366224" start="26813" end="26823" title="Elly Stone" label="Elly Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781118" start="26863" end="26879" title="Maryann Plunkett" label="Maryann Plunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021310" start="26887" end="26916" title="Williamstown Theatre Festival" label="Williamstown Theatre Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174448" start="26968" end="26978" title="Peter H. Hunt" label="Peter Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q728496" start="27000" end="27015" title="Jesse L. Martin" label="Jesse L. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q536974" start="27025" end="27039" title="Melissa Errico" label="Melissa Errico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018765" start="27050" end="27063" title="David Schramm (actor)" label="David Schramm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11837826" start="27076" end="27088" title="Karen Ziemba" label="Karen Ziemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q271782" start="27107" end="27120" title="Betty Buckley" label="Betty Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55421" start="27214" end="27225" title="G. W. Pabst" label="G. W. Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q693798" start="27233" end="27273" title="The Threepenny Opera (film)" label="1931 German- and French-language version"/>
<link wikidata="Q69159" start="27378" end="27394" title="Wolfgang Staudte" label="Wolfgang Staudte"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="27398" end="27410" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q57584" start="27429" end="27441" title="Curd Jürgens" label="Curd Jürgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q57604" start="27455" end="27469" title="Hildegard Knef" label="Hildegard Knef"/>
<link wikidata="Q76943" start="27480" end="27490" title="Gert Fröbe" label="Gert Fröbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q297816" start="27507" end="27522" title="Sammy Davis Jr." label="Sammy Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3274701" start="27586" end="27600" title="Mack the Knife (1989 film)" label="Mack the Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q542003" start="27634" end="27647" title="Menahem Golan" label="Menahem Golan"/>
<link wikidata="Q317654" start="27654" end="27664" title="Raul Julia" label="Raul Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106775" start="27678" end="27692" title="Richard Harris" label="Richard Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="27705" end="27718" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q207179" start="27735" end="27745" title="Bill Nighy" label="Bill Nighy"/>
<link wikidata="Q443747" start="27762" end="27775" title="Julia Migenes" label="Julia Migenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q311672" start="27790" end="27803" title="Roger Daltrey" label="Roger Daltrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="27860" end="27871" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q795551" start="27898" end="27914" title="BBC Philharmonic" label="BBC Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810251" start="28084" end="28098" title="Joseph Millson" label="Joseph Millson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23731514" start="28112" end="28121" title="Elen Rhys" label="Elen Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q227574" start="28181" end="28192" title="Zubin Varla" label="Zubin Varla"/>
<link wikidata="Q18685547" start="28222" end="28235" title="Rosalie Craig" label="Rosalie Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279385" start="28273" end="28286" title="Conrad Nelson" label="Conrad Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q598959" start="28306" end="28315" title="Heinz Karl Gruber" label="HK Gruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q918359" start="28470" end="28485" title="Marc Blitzstein" label="Marc Blitzstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181852" start="28537" end="28548" title="Jeremy Sams" label="Jeremy Sams"/>
<link wikidata="Q311068" start="28602" end="28615" title="Wallace Shawn" label="Wallace Shawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q325635" start="28763" end="28773" title="Telefunken" label="Telefunken"/>
<link wikidata="Q93604" start="28796" end="28807" title="Lotte Lenya" label="Lotte Lenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354384" start="28817" end="28829" title="Erika Helmke" label="Erika Helmke"/>
<link wikidata="Q88627" start="28839" end="28860" title="Willy Trenk-Trebitsch" label="Willy Trenk-Trebitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60905" start="28873" end="28884" title="Kurt Gerron" label="Kurt Gerron"/>
<link wikidata="Q92072" start="28915" end="28926" title="Erich Ponto" label="Erich Ponto"/>
<link wikidata="Q71532" start="28957" end="28970" title="Theo Mackeben" label="Theo Mackeben"/>
<link wikidata="Q456999" start="28990" end="28996" title="Teldec" label="Teldec"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="29060" end="29065" title="Decca Records" label="Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204422" start="29157" end="29168" title="Jo Sullivan" label="Jo Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93604" start="29186" end="29197" title="Lotte Lenya" label="Lotte Lenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q266335" start="29207" end="29220" title="Charlotte Rae" label="Charlotte Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q138576" start="29322" end="29332" title="Bea Arthur" label="Bea Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034661" start="29534" end="29542" title="Vanguard Records" label="Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216386" start="29554" end="29570" title="Anny Felbermayer" label="Anny Felbermayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q572925" start="29588" end="29601" title="Rosette Anday" label="Rosette Anday"/>
<link wikidata="Q643553" start="29603" end="29618" title="Helge Rosvaenge" label="Helge Rosvaenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645221" start="29620" end="29633" title="Alfred Jerger" label="Alfred Jerger"/>
<link wikidata="Q446684" start="29639" end="29653" title="Liane Augustin" label="Liane Augustin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209937" start="29655" end="29673" title="Vienna State Opera" label="Vienna State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497512" start="29697" end="29713" title="Frederick Charles Adler" label="F. Charles Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q90057" start="29817" end="29836" title="Johanna von Koczian" label="Johanna von Koczian"/>
<link wikidata="Q99888" start="29838" end="29854" title="Trude Hesterberg" label="Trude Hesterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353140" start="29856" end="29870" title="Erich Schellow" label="Erich Schellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q101868" start="29872" end="29886" title="Wolfgang Neuss" label="Wolfgang Neuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q88627" start="29892" end="29913" title="Willy Trenk-Trebitsch" label="Willy Trenk-Trebitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q692419" start="29929" end="29949" title="Sender Freies Berlin" label="Sender Freies Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q87195" start="29974" end="30000" title="Wilhelm Brückner-Rüggeberg" label="Wilhelm Brückner-Rüggeberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590961" start="30116" end="30132" title="Wolfgang Rennert" label="Wolfgang Rennert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729458" start="30150" end="30162" title="Karin Hübner" label="Karin Hübner"/>
<link wikidata="Q97712" start="30168" end="30178" title="Hans Korte" label="Hans Korte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30186" end="30201" title="Franz Kutschera (actor)" label="Franz Kutschera"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="30248" end="30256" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21598344" start="30280" end="30297" title="Stanley Silverman" label="Stanley Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287827" start="30330" end="30343" title="Ralph Manheim" label="Ralph Manheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702160" start="30348" end="30360" title="John Willett" label="John Willett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013975" start="30375" end="30404" title="New York Shakespeare Festival" label="New York Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q317654" start="30421" end="30431" title="Raul Julia" label="Raul Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q513009" start="30444" end="30456" title="Ellen Greene" label="Ellen Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221076" start="30466" end="30479" title="Caroline Kava" label="Caroline Kava"/>
<link wikidata="Q242709" start="30489" end="30500" title="Blair Brown" label="Blair Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006611" start="30509" end="30524" title="C. K. Alexander" label="C. K. Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q944952" start="30539" end="30555" title="Elizabeth Wilson" label="Elizabeth Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q155152" start="30615" end="30622" title="Polydor Records" label="Polydor"/>
<link wikidata="Q73138" start="30646" end="30661" title="Hannes Messemer" label="Hannes Messemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45233" start="30668" end="30685" title="Helmut Qualtinger" label="Helmut Qualtinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q76031" start="30691" end="30702" title="Berta Drews" label="Berta Drews"/>
<link wikidata="Q89507" start="30710" end="30720" title="Karin Baal" label="Karin Baal"/>
<link wikidata="Q112253" start="30730" end="30741" title="Martin Held" label="Martin Held"/>
<link wikidata="Q120570" start="30747" end="30759" title="Hanne Wieder" label="Hanne Wieder"/>
<link wikidata="Q77745" start="30765" end="30787" title="Franz Josef Degenhardt" label="Franz Josef Degenhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q57213" start="30808" end="30818" title="James Last" label="James Last"/>
<link wikidata="Q62286" start="30963" end="30973" title="René Kollo" label="René Kollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61322" start="30986" end="30997" title="Mario Adorf" label="Mario Adorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q79030" start="31009" end="31023" title="Helga Dernesch" label="Helga Dernesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60659" start="31039" end="31049" title="Ute Lemper" label="Ute Lemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q241835" start="31059" end="31064" title="Milva" label="Milva"/>
<link wikidata="Q113880" start="31074" end="31092" title="Wolfgang Reichmann" label="Wolfgang Reichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q670693" start="31126" end="31130" title="Rundfunk im amerikanischen Sektor" label="RIAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182015" start="31151" end="31163" title="John Mauceri" label="John Mauceri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889543" start="31245" end="31257" title="Manfred Jung" label="Manfred Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q88847" start="31406" end="31421" title="Waldemar Kmentt" label="Waldemar Kmentt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181852" start="31692" end="31703" title="Jeremy Sams" label="Jeremy Sams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526209" start="31719" end="31731" title="Gary Yershon" label="Gary Yershon"/>
<link wikidata="Q449956" start="31738" end="31750" title="Sharon Small" label="Sharon Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q312124" start="31814" end="31827" title="Tom Hollander" label="Tom Hollander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518638" start="31840" end="31854" title="Simon Dormandy" label="Simon Dormandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816707" start="31903" end="31914" title="Tom Mannion" label="Tom Mannion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036232" start="31974" end="31983" title="Capriccio (record label)" label="Capriccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783021" start="32021" end="32036" title="Ulrike Steinsky" label="Ulrike Steinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152371" start="32053" end="32066" title="Jane Henschel" label="Jane Henschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q598309" start="32178" end="32193" title="Ensemble Modern" label="Ensemble Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q598959" start="32195" end="32204" title="Heinz Karl Gruber" label="HK Gruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q62615" start="32230" end="32239" title="Max Raabe" label="Max Raabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q87597" start="32252" end="32266" title="Sona MacDonald" label="Sona MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q159099" start="32276" end="32286" title="Nina Hagen" label="Nina Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q78912" start="32302" end="32314" title="Timna Brauer" label="Timna Brauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798044" start="32363" end="32379" title="Threepenny Novel" label="Threepenny Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q333632" start="32434" end="32447" title="Chico Buarque" label="Chico Buarque"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078785" start="32488" end="32505" title="Ópera do Malandro" label="Ópera do Malandro"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32527" end="32585" title="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, Volume III: Century" label="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, Volume III: Century"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30278" wikidata="Q243430" url="?curid=30278" title="Terence Hill">
<text>Terence Hill (born Mario Girotti; 29 March 1939) is an Italian actor, film director, screenwriter and film producer. He began his career as a child actor and gained international fame for starring roles in action and comedy films, many with his long-time film partner and friend Bud Spencer. During the height of his popularity, Hill was among Italy&#x27;s highest-paid actors.

His most widely seen films include comic and standard spaghetti Westerns, some based on popular novels by German author Karl May about the Wild West. Of these, the most famous are &quot;Lo chiamavano Trinità&quot; (&quot;They Call Me Trinity&quot;, 1970); ...&quot;continuavano a chiamarlo Trinità&quot; (&quot;Trinity Is Still My Name&quot;, 1971), the highest grossing Italian film at that time; and &quot;Il mio nome è Nessuno&quot; (&quot;My Name Is Nobody&quot;, 1973), co-starring Henry Fonda. Hill also went on to a successful television career in Italy, most notably playing the title character in the long-running Rai 1 series &quot;Don Matteo&quot; from 2000 until 2022.

==Early life==
Hill was born on 29 March 1939 in Venice, Italy. Hill&#x27;s mother, Hildegard Girotti (&quot;née&quot; Thieme), was German, from Dresden; his father, Girolamo Girotti, was Italian, and a chemist by occupation.

During his childhood, Hill lived in the small town of Lommatzsch, Saxony. He was there up to the end of World War II.

==Career==
===Child actor===
He was discovered at the age of 12 by Italian filmmaker Dino Risi at a swimming meet, and he became a child actor, appearing in Risi&#x27;s &quot;Vacation with a Gangster&quot; (1951) as Gianni, the orphan gang leader. &quot;They were looking for a boy gang leader and they found me,&quot; he later said.

He had small roles in &quot;Voice of Silence&quot; (1953) with Jean Marais, &quot;Too Young for Love&quot; (1953), and &quot;It Happened in the Park&quot; (1953).

He was in &quot;Golden Vein&quot; (1954) with Märta Torén and Richard Basehart, &quot;The Abandoned&quot; (1955) and &quot;Folgore Division&quot; (1955).

===Leading man===
Girotti had his first lead in &quot;Guaglione&quot; (1956). He could also be seen in &quot;Mamma sconosciuta&quot; (1956), &quot;I vagabondi delle stelle&quot; (1956), &quot;La grande strada azzurra&quot; (1956) with Yves Montand and Alida Valli, and &quot;Lazzarella&quot; (1957).

Girotti did &quot;Anna of Brooklyn&quot; (1958) with Gina Lollobrigida, &quot;The Sword and the Cross&quot; (1958) with Yvonne de Carlo (playing Lazarus of Bethany), and a TV version of &quot;The Picture of Dorian Gray&quot; (1958).

He had support parts in &quot;Il padrone delle ferriere&quot; (1959) with Virna Lisi, &quot;Juke box - Urli d&#x27;amore&quot; (1959), and &quot;Hannibal&quot; (1959) with Victor Mature and Carlo Pedersoli, who would later become known as Bud Spencer. Girotti had the lead roles in &quot;Spavaldi e innamorati&quot; (1959) and &quot;Cerasella&quot; (1959), a teen comedy.

It was back to support roles with &quot;Carthage in Flames&quot; (1960), &quot;Un militare e mezzo&quot; (1960), and &quot;The Story of Joseph and His Brethren&quot; (1961) with Geoffrey Horne and Robert Morley, directed by Irving Rapper.

Girotti had support parts in &quot;The Wonders of Aladdin&quot; (1961) with Donald O&#x27;Connor and directed by Henry Levin and Mario Bava, &quot;Pecado de amor&quot; (1961), &quot;Seven Seas to Calais&quot; (1962) with Rod Taylor, and &quot;The Shortest Day&quot; (1963).

Girotti secured a substantial supporting role in Luchino Visconti&#x27;s film epic &quot;The Leopard&quot; (1963) alongside Burt Lancaster and Alain Delon, in which he unsuccessfully tries to court the daughter of Lancaster&#x27;s character. During this time he studied classical literature for three years at an Italian university.

===Germany===
In 1964, he returned to Germany and there appeared in a series of Heimatfilme, adventure and Western films, based on novels by German author Karl May. These included &quot;Last of the Renegades&quot; (1964) with Lex Barker; three films with Stewart Granger, &quot;Amongst Vultures&quot; (1964), &quot;The Oil Prince&quot; (1965) and &quot;Old Surehand&quot; (1965); &quot;Shots in 3/4 Time&quot; (1965); &quot;Duel at Sundown&quot; (1965) with Peter Van Eyck; &quot;Call of the Forest&quot; (1965), an Austrian movie; &quot;Die Nibelungen, Teil 1 - Siegfried&quot; (1965) and &quot;Die Nibelungen, Teil 2 - Kriemhilds Rache&quot; (1967).

In 1967, he returned to Italy to make &quot;Io non protesto, io amo&quot; (1967), co starring Caterina Caselli.

===Partnership with Bud Spencer===
Girotti then appeared alongside Bud Spencer (then known as Carlo Pedersoli) in Giuseppe Colizzi&#x27;s spaghetti Western &quot;God Forgives... I Don&#x27;t!&quot; (1967). (Although Girotti appeared in the same movie as Pedersoli in &quot;Hannibal&quot; in 1959, they did not meet during filming.) At the time, cast and crew in Westerns frequently adopted American names to give the film a better chance of selling in non-Italian speaking countries; Girotti changed his name to &quot;Terence Hill&quot;. He picked the name from a list of 20 he was given, the story about using his wife&#x27;s name was a publicity idea. The film was a huge hit – the most popular film of the year in Italy – and established him as a star.
Hill followed it with a &quot;musicarello&quot;, &quot;The Crazy Kids of the War&quot; (1967) with Rita Pavone, then did a Western, &quot;Django, Prepare a Coffin&quot; (1968) for director Ferdinando Baldi, a sequel to &quot;Django&quot; (1966) with Hill playing the role done by Franco Nero in the original; it co-starred Horst Frank and George Eastman (and would be featured, much later, at the 64th Venice Film Festival, in 2007).

Hill was a leading man in a musical Western &quot;Crazy Westerners&quot; (1968), again with Rita Pavone, then was reunited with Spencer in &quot;Ace High&quot; (1968), a sequel to &quot;God Forgives&quot; with a cast including several American actors such as Eli Wallach. Hill did &quot;The Tough and the Mighty&quot; (1968), a biopic of Graziano Mesina, then a second sequel to &quot;God Forgives&quot;, &quot;Boot Hill&quot; (1969), co-starring Spencer and Woody Strode.

Hill did &quot;The Wind&#x27;s Fierce&quot; (1970) then had a huge hit with Spencer with the comedy Western &quot;They Call Me Trinity&quot; (1971). Hill did a swashbuckler, &quot;Blackie the Pirate&quot; (1971), in which Spencer had a small role; they reteamed properly for a &quot;Trinity&quot; sequel, &quot;Trinity Is Still My Name&quot; (1972). It was even more popular than the original and had a successful release in the USA.

Hill did a modern-day crime drama &quot;The Hassled Hooker&quot; (1972) and a comedy Western without Spencer, &quot;Man of the East&quot; (1972). He and Spencer did &quot;... All the Way, Boys!&quot; (1972), their first non-Western though it was still a comic adventure film.

===International films===
Hill has stated in interviews that &quot;My Name Is Nobody&quot; (1973), in which he co-starred with Henry Fonda, is his personal favorite of all his films. The film was based on an idea by Sergio Leone.

Hill again starred with Spencer in &quot;Watch Out, We&#x27;re Mad&quot; (1974) and &quot;Two Missionaries&quot; (1974) then without him in the spaghetti Western &quot;A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe&quot; (1975). He moved from Italy to live in the US and settled in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, in the Berkshires.

Dino De Laurentiis cast Hill in his first English-language film, &quot;Mr. Billion&quot; (1977), directed by Jonathan Kaplan for 20th Century Fox, co-starring Valerie Perrine and Jackie Gleason. It was a box office flop.

After returning to Italy for &quot;Crime Busters&quot; (1977) with Spencer, Hill then made another English-language movie, &quot;March or Die&quot; (1977), an $8 million French Foreign Legion tale for Lew Grade, co starring Gene Hackman and Catherine Deneuve. It was a box office disappointment.

Despite his fluency in Italian and English, Hill was usually dubbed by other actors in both languages. In the Italian versions of his films, various actors provided his voice until the late 1960s, where he was primarily dubbed by Sergio Graziani; he was voiced by Pino Locchi from 1970 to 1983, and by Michele Gammino from 1983 to 1996. For English dubs, Lloyd Battista dubbed him in six films, including the &quot;Cat Stevens and Hutch Bessy&quot; trilogy, while Roger Browne dubbed him in most of his early 1970s films (&quot;They Call Me Trinity&quot; to &quot;A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe&quot;); from &quot;Mr. Billion&quot; onward, Hill dubbed his own English voice.

Hill and Spencer starred in &quot;Odds and Evens&quot; (1978), &quot;I&#x27;m for the Hippopotamus&quot; (1979), &quot;Who Finds a Friend Finds a Treasure&quot; (1981), and &quot;Go for It&quot; (1983). Without Spencer, Hill made &quot;Org&quot; (1979), which he also produced, and &quot;Super Fuzz&quot; (1980).

===Director===
Hill did &quot;The World of Don Camillo&quot; (1984), which he also produced and directed. He teamed with Spencer for &quot;Double Trouble&quot; (1984), and &quot;Miami Supercops&quot; (1985), then did &quot;They Call Me Renegade&quot; (1987), based on a story by Hill.

===Television===

Hill turned director for &quot;Lucky Luke&quot; (1991) in which he starred and that was shot in the United States; it led to a TV series of the same name.

He reunited with Spencer one last time for &quot;Troublemakers&quot; (1994) which Hill also directed. He did &quot;Virtual Weapon&quot; (1997) with Marvelous Marvin Hagler.

In 2000, he landed the leading role in the Italian television series &quot;Don Matteo&quot; (2000–present), about an inspirational parish priest who assists the Carabinieri in solving crimes local to his community. This role earned Hill an international &quot;Outstanding Actor of the Year&quot; award at the 42nd Monte Carlo Television Festival, alongside ones for the series, and for producer Alessandro Jacchia at that festival.

During the series&#x27; run he appeared in TV movies &quot;L&#x27;uomo che sognava con le aquile&quot; (2009), &quot;Riding the Dark&quot; (2009), &quot;Doc West&quot; (2009), and &quot;Triggerman&quot; (2009); he co-directed the last two.

In the summer of 2010, Hill filmed another Italian television series for the Italian state television channel Rai Uno, this time entitled &quot;Un passo dal cielo&quot; (&quot;One Step from Heaven&quot;), playing a local chief of the state foresters in the region of Alto Adige, with a second season filmed in 2012.

Hill directed the 2018 film &quot;My Name Is Thomas&quot;, which he also appeared in. The same year, the co-op beat &#x27;em up videogame &quot;Bud Spencer &amp; Terence Hill: Slaps and Beans&quot; was released.

==Personal life==
Hill is married to Lori Hill (&quot;née&quot; Zwicklbauer) and they have had two sons together; Jess (born 1969) and Ross (1973–1990). Ross was killed in a car accident in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, U.S., in 1990, while Hill was preparing to film &quot;Lucky Luke&quot; (1991) on the Bonanza Creek Ranch near Santa Fe, New Mexico.

He holds American citizenship, and in November 2022, he also attained a German citizenship by descent from the German consulate-general in Los Angeles without requiring a naturalization test.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Video games===
===Music Video===
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q243430" start="0" end="12" title="Terence Hill" label="Terence Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q243430" start="19" end="32" title="Terence Hill" label="Mario Girotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646344" start="245" end="267" title="Terence Hill and Bud Spencer" label="long-time film partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q221074" start="279" end="290" title="Bud Spencer" label="Bud Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212781" start="433" end="450" title="spaghetti Western" label="spaghetti Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q22714" start="499" end="507" title="Karl May" label="Karl May"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="518" end="527" title="American frontier" label="Wild West"/>
<link wikidata="Q598709" start="600" end="620" title="They Call Me Trinity" label="They Call Me Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q589001" start="690" end="714" title="Trinity Is Still My Name" label="Trinity Is Still My Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q964009" start="822" end="839" title="My Name Is Nobody" label="My Name Is Nobody"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="866" end="877" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q258131" start="1002" end="1007" title="Rai 1" label="Rai 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239303" start="1021" end="1031" title="Don Matteo" label="Don Matteo"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="1110" end="1116" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="1193" end="1199" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="1206" end="1213" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="1264" end="1271" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8734" start="1342" end="1352" title="Lommatzsch" label="Lommatzsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="1354" end="1360" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1392" end="1404" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q53034" start="1492" end="1501" title="Dino Risi" label="Dino Risi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163902" start="1582" end="1606" title="Vacation with a Gangster" label="Vacation with a Gangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939569" start="1770" end="1786" title="Voice of Silence (1953 film)" label="Voice of Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q168359" start="1805" end="1816" title="Jean Marais" label="Jean Marais"/>
<link wikidata="Q20004776" start="1824" end="1842" title="Too Young for Love (1953 film)" label="Too Young for Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011833" start="1867" end="1890" title="It Happened in the Park" label="It Happened in the Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213477" start="1922" end="1933" title="Golden Vein" label="Golden Vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661773" start="1952" end="1963" title="Märta Torén" label="Märta Torén"/>
<link wikidata="Q963593" start="1968" end="1984" title="Richard Basehart" label="Richard Basehart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108858" start="1992" end="2005" title="The Abandoned (1955 film)" label="The Abandoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712040" start="2029" end="2045" title="Folgore Division" label="Folgore Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822655" start="2253" end="2277" title="La grande strada azzurra" label="La grande strada azzurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q106057" start="2296" end="2308" title="Yves Montand" label="Yves Montand"/>
<link wikidata="Q106940" start="2313" end="2324" title="Alida Valli" label="Alida Valli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828227" start="2336" end="2346" title="Lazzarella (film)" label="Lazzarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547086" start="2380" end="2396" title="Anna of Brooklyn" label="Anna of Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q56009" start="2415" end="2432" title="Gina Lollobrigida" label="Gina Lollobrigida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788153" start="2440" end="2463" title="The Sword and the Cross" label="The Sword and the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q286339" start="2482" end="2497" title="Yvonne de Carlo" label="Yvonne de Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q539890" start="2507" end="2525" title="Lazarus of Bethany" label="Lazarus of Bethany"/>
<link wikidata="Q82464" start="2554" end="2580" title="The Picture of Dorian Gray" label="The Picture of Dorian Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224443" start="2626" end="2651" title="Il padrone delle ferriere" label="Il padrone delle ferriere"/>
<link wikidata="Q106627" start="2670" end="2680" title="Virna Lisi" label="Virna Lisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576167" start="2741" end="2749" title="Hannibal (1959 film)" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q358317" start="2768" end="2781" title="Victor Mature" label="Victor Mature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664985" start="2929" end="2938" title="Cerasella" label="Cerasella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940586" start="3009" end="3027" title="Carthage in Flames" label="Carthage in Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003928" start="3048" end="3067" title="Un militare e mezzo" label="Un militare e mezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203227" start="3092" end="3128" title="The Story of Joseph and His Brethren" label="The Story of Joseph and His Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101081" start="3147" end="3161" title="Geoffrey Horne" label="Geoffrey Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q965379" start="3166" end="3179" title="Robert Morley" label="Robert Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q323243" start="3193" end="3206" title="Irving Rapper" label="Irving Rapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q937303" start="3244" end="3266" title="The Wonders of Aladdin" label="The Wonders of Aladdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q348345" start="3285" end="3305" title="Donald O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Donald O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q939550" start="3322" end="3333" title="Henry Levin (film director)" label="Henry Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55438" start="3338" end="3348" title="Mario Bava" label="Mario Bava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158603" start="3356" end="3370" title="Pecado de amor (film)" label="Pecado de amor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283372" start="3391" end="3411" title="Seven Seas to Calais" label="Seven Seas to Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q308459" start="3430" end="3440" title="Rod Taylor" label="Rod Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223684" start="3452" end="3468" title="The Shortest Day" label="The Shortest Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q13888" start="3533" end="3549" title="Luchino Visconti" label="Luchino Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q596623" start="3573" end="3584" title="The Leopard (1963 film)" label="The Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q160528" start="3608" end="3622" title="Burt Lancaster" label="Burt Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q106529" start="3627" end="3638" title="Alain Delon" label="Alain Delon"/>
<link wikidata="Q304538" start="3898" end="3908" title="Heimatfilm" label="Heimatfilm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3925" end="3937" title="Western (genre)#Film" label="Western film"/>
<link wikidata="Q22714" start="3973" end="3981" title="Karl May" label="Karl May"/>
<link wikidata="Q521876" start="4004" end="4025" title="Last of the Renegades" label="Last of the Renegades"/>
<link wikidata="Q520819" start="4044" end="4054" title="Lex Barker" label="Lex Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q310150" start="4073" end="4088" title="Stewart Granger" label="Stewart Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q895543" start="4096" end="4112" title="Amongst Vultures" label="Amongst Vultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q785492" start="4133" end="4147" title="The Oil Prince" label="The Oil Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q316151" start="4171" end="4183" title="Old Surehand" label="Old Surehand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497343" start="4204" end="4221" title="Shots in 3/4 Time" label="Shots in 3/4 Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q822995" start="4242" end="4257" title="Duel at Sundown (film)" label="Duel at Sundown"/>
<link wikidata="Q66418" start="4276" end="4290" title="Peter Van Eyck" label="Peter Van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255585" start="4298" end="4316" title="Call of the Forest (1965 film)" label="Call of the Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801189" start="4515" end="4538" title="Io non protesto, io amo" label="Io non protesto, io amo"/>
<link wikidata="Q266617" start="4565" end="4581" title="Caterina Caselli" label="Caterina Caselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q221074" start="4651" end="4662" title="Bud Spencer" label="Bud Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q348371" start="4698" end="4714" title="Giuseppe Colizzi" label="Giuseppe Colizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212781" start="4722" end="4739" title="spaghetti Western" label="spaghetti Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070548" start="4746" end="4775" title="God Forgives... I Don&amp;#x27;t!" label="God Forgives... I Don&amp;#x27;t!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576167" start="4857" end="4865" title="Annibale (film)" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3868655" start="5370" end="5381" title="musicarello" label="musicarello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822300" start="5395" end="5420" title="The Crazy Kids of the War" label="The Crazy Kids of the War"/>
<link wikidata="Q263442" start="5439" end="5450" title="Rita Pavone" label="Rita Pavone"/>
<link wikidata="Q840565" start="5478" end="5502" title="Django, Prepare a Coffin" label="Django, Prepare a Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q722900" start="5529" end="5545" title="Ferdinando Baldi" label="Ferdinando Baldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q241811" start="5565" end="5571" title="Django (1966 film)" label="Django"/>
<link wikidata="Q311716" start="5620" end="5631" title="Franco Nero" label="Franco Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q496339" start="5663" end="5674" title="Horst Frank" label="Horst Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q330224" start="5679" end="5693" title="George Eastman (actor)" label="George Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="5742" end="5762" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q882468" start="5825" end="5841" title="Crazy Westerners" label="Crazy Westerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q848252" start="5920" end="5928" title="Ace High (1968 film)" label="Ace High"/>
<link wikidata="Q104067" start="6034" end="6045" title="Eli Wallach" label="Eli Wallach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198395" start="6062" end="6086" title="The Tough and the Mighty" label="The Tough and the Mighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776032" start="6113" end="6128" title="Graziano Mesina" label="Graziano Mesina"/>
<link wikidata="Q555722" start="6186" end="6195" title="Boot Hill (film)" label="Boot Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q609860" start="6234" end="6246" title="Woody Strode" label="Woody Strode"/>
<link wikidata="Q471775" start="6264" end="6286" title="The Wind&amp;#x27;s Fierce" label="The Wind&amp;#x27;s Fierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q598709" start="6363" end="6383" title="They Call Me Trinity" label="They Call Me Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q943961" start="6429" end="6447" title="Blackie the Pirate" label="Blackie the Pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q589001" start="6560" end="6584" title="Trinity Is Still My Name" label="Trinity Is Still My Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420968" start="6724" end="6742" title="The Hassled Hooker" label="The Hassled Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q736144" start="6800" end="6815" title="Man of the East" label="Man of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q232044" start="6855" end="6877" title="... All the Way, Boys!" label="... All the Way, Boys!"/>
<link wikidata="Q964009" start="7028" end="7045" title="My Name Is Nobody" label="My Name Is Nobody"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="7088" end="7099" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q164562" start="7177" end="7189" title="Sergio Leone" label="Sergio Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q232261" start="7233" end="7258" title="Watch Out, We&amp;#x27;re Mad" label="Watch Out, We&amp;#x27;re Mad"/>
<link wikidata="Q232083" start="7282" end="7298" title="Two Missionaries" label="Two Missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q521907" start="7360" end="7393" title="A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe" label="A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q250628" start="7580" end="7591" title="Mr. Billion" label="Mr. Billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703212" start="7618" end="7633" title="Jonathan Kaplan" label="Jonathan Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q259461" start="7668" end="7683" title="Valerie Perrine" label="Valerie Perrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q454200" start="7688" end="7702" title="Jackie Gleason" label="Jackie Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q232166" start="7766" end="7779" title="Crime Busters" label="Crime Busters"/>
<link wikidata="Q910695" start="7860" end="7872" title="March or Die (film)" label="March or Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q336801" start="7932" end="7941" title="Lew Grade" label="Lew Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q150943" start="7955" end="7967" title="Gene Hackman" label="Gene Hackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q106418" start="7972" end="7989" title="Catherine Deneuve" label="Catherine Deneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="8089" end="8095" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="dubbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273093" start="8258" end="8273" title="Sergio Graziani" label="Sergio Graziani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3905269" start="8292" end="8303" title="Pino Locchi" label="Pino Locchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856620" start="8330" end="8345" title="Michele Gammino" label="Michele Gammino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649395" start="8383" end="8397" title="Lloyd Battista" label="Lloyd Battista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646346" start="8492" end="8504" title="Roger Browne" label="Roger Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q521907" start="8592" end="8625" title="A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe" label="A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180638" start="8741" end="8755" title="Odds and Evens (film)" label="Odds and Evens"/>
<link wikidata="Q970386" start="8776" end="8805" title="I&amp;#x27;m for the Hippopotamus" label="I&amp;#x27;m for the Hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q231967" start="8826" end="8861" title="Who Finds a Friend Finds a Treasure" label="Who Finds a Friend Finds a Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q232175" start="8886" end="8895" title="Go for It (1983 film)" label="Go for It"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062054" start="8995" end="9005" title="Super Fuzz" label="Super Fuzz"/>
<link wikidata="Q908533" start="9051" end="9075" title="The World of Don Camillo" label="The World of Don Camillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q597579" start="9160" end="9174" title="Non c&amp;#x27;è due senza quattro" label="Double Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q942657" start="9199" end="9214" title="Miami Supercops" label="Miami Supercops"/>
<link wikidata="Q467379" start="9244" end="9265" title="They Call Me Renegade" label="They Call Me Renegade"/>
<link wikidata="Q751099" start="9356" end="9366" title="Lucky Luke (1991 film)" label="Lucky Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165306" start="9452" end="9478" title="Lucky Luke (1992 TV series)" label="TV series of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q473829" start="9530" end="9543" title="Troublemakers (1994 film)" label="Troublemakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527933" start="9596" end="9610" title="Virtual Weapon" label="Virtual Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q560421" start="9629" end="9652" title="Marvelous Marvin Hagler" label="Marvelous Marvin Hagler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239303" start="9730" end="9740" title="Don Matteo" label="Don Matteo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="9786" end="9799" title="Priesthood in the Catholic Church" label="parish priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="9816" end="9827" title="Carabinieri" label="Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249934" start="9964" end="10000" title="Monte-Carlo Television Festival" label="42nd Monte Carlo Television Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610070" start="10050" end="10068" title="Alessandro Jacchia" label="Alessandro Jacchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258131" start="10439" end="10446" title="Rai 1" label="Rai Uno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351744" start="10473" end="10491" title="Un passo dal cielo" label="Un passo dal cielo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134650" start="10563" end="10578" title="State Forestry Corps" label="state foresters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="10596" end="10606" title="South Tyrol" label="Alto Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q30889321" start="10680" end="10697" title="My Name Is Thomas" label="My Name Is Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q401831" start="10757" end="10773" title="beat &amp;#x27;em up" label="beat &amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10790" end="10837" title="Bud Spencer &amp;amp; Terence Hill: Slaps and Beans" label="Bud Spencer &amp;amp; Terence Hill: Slaps and Beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q222705" start="11049" end="11075" title="Stockbridge, Massachusetts" label="Stockbridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q751099" start="11131" end="11141" title="Lucky Luke (1991 film)" label="Lucky Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="11187" end="11207" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q333015" start="11301" end="11311" title="jus sanguinis" label="by descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="11349" end="11360" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="11381" end="11395" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30280" wikidata="Q45192" url="?curid=30280" title="The Hound of the Baskervilles">
<text>The Hound of the Baskervilles is the third of the four crime novels by British writer Arthur Conan Doyle featuring the detective Sherlock Holmes. Originally serialised in &quot;The Strand Magazine&quot; from August 1901 to April 1902, it is set largely in Dartmoor, Devon, in England&#x27;s West Country and follows Holmes and Watson investigating the legend of a fearsome, diabolical hound of supernatural origin. This was the first appearance of Holmes since his apparent death in &quot;The Final Problem&quot;, and the success of &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; led to the character&#x27;s eventual revival.

One of the most famous stories ever written, in 2003, the book was listed as number 128 of 200 on the BBC&#x27;s The Big Read poll of the UK&#x27;s &quot;best-loved novel&quot;. In 1999, a poll of &quot;Sherlockians&quot; ranked it as the best of the four Holmes novels.

==Plot==
In London, 1889, Dr. James Mortimer asks for the aid of Sherlock Holmes, beginning by reading him a legend that has run in the Baskerville family since the time of the English Civil War, when Sir Hugo Baskerville kidnapped a farmer&#x27;s daughter. When the girl escaped, Hugo pursued her, swearing a curse upon himself in his mad rage. Hugo&#x27;s companions later found the girl dead of fear, and Hugo killed by a demonic hound. The dog is said to have haunted Dartmoor ever since, causing the premature death of many Baskervilles.

Mortimer explains that his friend, the philanthropic baronet Sir Charles Baskerville, took the legend very seriously. Sir Charles, who had a weak heart, had retired to Baskerville Hall in 1887, after amassing a fortune in South Africa. When the baronet&#x27;s body was later found in a yew alley, with an expression of horror on his face, the death was attributed to cardiac arrest; however, Mortimer had secretly noticed large canine paw prints near the body. Sir Charles had been the eldest of three Baskerville brothers, and Sir Henry, the Canadian son of the deceased second brother, is Sir Charles&#x27; heir. The rather immoral third brother, Rodger, died of yellow fever in South America in 1876. Mortimer, the executor of Sir Charles&#x27;s will, fears it might not be wise to bring Sir Henry to Dartmoor, in view of the possible supernatural dangers. 

Though Holmes dismisses the legend as a fairy-tale, he meets with Sir Henry when the new baronet arrives in London. It transpires that strange things are already happening to Sir Henry; one of his old boots has been stolen, he has received an anonymous letter warning him against the moor, and someone has been following him in a hansom. Mortimer reveals that Sir Henry&#x27;s inheritance is about 
£740,000 (equivalent to £ in ); in view of these high stakes, Holmes asks Watson to act as Sir Henry&#x27;s bodyguard, and to investigate things in Dartmoor.

Upon arriving in Dartmoor, Watson, Mortimer and Sir Henry learn that Selden, a convicted murderer, has escaped from Princetown Prison and is loose on the moor. At Baskerville Hall, they are introduced to John and Eliza Barrymore, the married butler and housekeeper. Watson sends detailed accounts of his investigations to Holmes, particularly focusing on the neighbourhood residents. The Stapleton siblings stand out; Jack is over-friendly, drops hints about the hound, and warns Watson against attempting to cross the dangerous Grimpen Mire. His sister Beryl, without his knowledge, repeatedly tries to get Sir Henry to flee back to London. Another neighbour, Mr. Frankland, is a perpetual busybody and troublemaker, including threatening to bring a lawsuit against Dr. Mortimer for excavating nearby barrows. Sir Henry falls in love with Beryl Stapleton, though her brother strongly objects to the romance.

Barrymore repeatedly sends candlelight signals to someone on the moor. Following Barrymore one night, Watson and Sir Henry discover that Selden is Mrs. Barrymore&#x27;s younger brother, and that she and her husband have been leaving food out for him. During an unsuccessful attempt to catch Selden, Watson sees a strange man standing on a tor. 

Watson and Sir Henry learn from Barrymore that Frankland&#x27;s estranged daughter Laura had once written to Sir Charles. After a failed attempt to interrogate Laura, Watson investigates the man on the tor and learns that it is Holmes, who has been investigating in secret to hide his direct involvement. Holmes reveals that Jack Stapleton is the murderer, and Beryl is his wife, abused and forced into posing as his sister; however, Holmes does not have enough proof to convince the authorities.

Holmes and Watson hear a man fleeing from a baying hound, and later find that Selden has fallen from a cliff and died. Barrymore had given Selden Sir Henry&#x27;s discarded clothes, and Stapleton&#x27;s hound, having been set on the trail with Sir Henry&#x27;s stolen boot, had confused the scent. Later, after dining at Baskerville Hall, Holmes reveals to Watson that the portrait of Sir Hugo Baskerville bears a remarkable resemblance to Stapleton.

Holmes decides to use an unwitting Sir Henry as bait; he orders him to visit Stapleton that evening, and then walk across the moor on foot. Holmes and Watson then pretend to leave for London, but instead hide near Stapleton&#x27;s house with Inspector Lestrade of Scotland Yard. Despite thick fog, they manage to kill the hound when Stapleton unleashes it after Sir Henry. They go to Stapleton&#x27;s house to arrest him, but find he has bound his wife to a column and fled into the mire, presumably drowning. Holmes remarks that he considers Stapleton one of his most cunning adversaries.

Sir Henry and Dr. Mortimer depart on a sea voyage, to repair the baronet&#x27;s shattered nerves. After they leave, Holmes explains to Watson that Jack Stapleton was really Rodger Baskerville II, the secret son of Sir Charles&#x27; youngest brother. A physical and spiritual throwback to Sir Hugo Baskerville, Rodger II had bought a savage black hound and painted it with phosphorus to make it look diabolical; either by fright or direct attack, he hoped the dog would remove all the other heirs so that he could inherit the Baskerville fortune. He had promised Laura marriage, and convinced her to lure Sir Charles out of his house on the night of the murder. Unable to save Sir Charles, Beryl had sent the anonymous letter to Sir Henry to thwart her husband&#x27;s further schemes.

==Origins and background==
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle wrote this story shortly after returning to his home, Undershaw in Surrey, from South Africa, where he had worked as a volunteer physician at the Langman Field Hospital in Bloemfontein during the Second Boer War. He had not written about Sherlock Holmes in eight years, having killed off the character in the 1893 story &quot;The Final Problem&quot;. Although &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; is set before the latter events, two years later Doyle brought Holmes back for good, explaining in &quot;The Adventure of the Empty House&quot; that Holmes had faked his own death. As a result, the character of Holmes occupies a liminal space between being alive and dead, which further adds to the gothic elements of the novel.

He was assisted with the legend of the hound and local colour by a &quot;Daily Express&quot; journalist named Bertram Fletcher Robinson (1870–1907), with whom he explored Dartmoor in June 1901; Robinson received a royalty payment that amounted to over 500 pounds by the end of 1901.

Doyle may also have been inspired by his own earlier story (written and published in 1898) of a terrifying giant wolf, &quot;The King of the Foxes&quot;.

==Inspiration==
The author’s ideas came from the legend of Squire Richard Cabell of Brook Hall, in the parish of Buckfastleigh, Devon, which was the fundamental inspiration for the Baskerville tale of a hellish hound and a cursed country squire. Cabell&#x27;s tomb survives in the town of Buckfastleigh.

Cabell lived for hunting, and was what in those days was described as a &quot;monstrously evil man&quot;. He gained this reputation, among other things, for immorality and having sold his soul to the Devil. There was also a rumour that he had murdered his wife, Elizabeth Fowell, a daughter of Sir Edmund Fowell, 1st Baronet (1593–1674), of Fowelscombe. On 5 July 1677, he died and was buried in the sepulchre. The night of his interment saw a phantom pack of hounds come baying across the moor to howl at his tomb. From that night on, he could be found leading the phantom pack across the moor, usually on the anniversary of his death. If the pack were not out hunting, they could be found ranging around his grave howling and shrieking. To try to lay the soul to rest, the villagers built a large building around the tomb, and to be doubly sure a huge slab was placed over the top.

Moreover, Devon&#x27;s folklore includes tales of a fearsome supernatural dog known as the Yeth hound that Doyle may have heard.

Weller (2002) believes that Baskerville Hall is based on one of three possible houses on or near Dartmoor: Fowelscombe in the parish of Ugborough, the seat of the Fowell Baronets; Hayford Hall, near Buckfastleigh (also owned by John King (d.1861) of Fowelscombe) and Brook Hall, in the parish of Buckfastleigh, about two miles east of Hayford, the actual home of Richard Cabell. It has also been claimed that Baskerville Hall is based on a property in Mid Wales, built in 1839 by one Thomas Mynors Baskerville. The house was formerly named Clyro Court and was renamed Baskerville Hall towards the end of the 19th century. Arthur Conan Doyle was apparently a family friend who often stayed there and may have been aware of a local legend of the hound of the Baskervilles.

Still other tales claim that Doyle was inspired by a holiday in North Norfolk, where the tale of Black Shuck is well known. The Gothic-revival style Cromer Hall, where Doyle stayed, also closely resembles Doyle&#x27;s vivid descriptions of Baskerville Hall.

James Lynam Molloy, a friend of Doyle&#x27;s, and author of &quot;Love&#x27;s Old Sweet Song&quot;, married Florence Baskerville, daughter of Henry Baskerville of Crowsley Park, Oxfordshire. The gates to the park had statues of hell hounds, spears through their mouths. Above the lintel there was another statue of a hell hound.

==Technique==
The novel incorporates five plots: the ostensible &#x27;curse&#x27; story, the two red-herring subplots concerning Selden and the other stranger living on the moor, the actual events occurring to Baskerville as narrated by Watson, and the hidden plot to be discovered by Holmes. The structure of the novel starting and ending in the familiar setting in London is used to ‘delimit the uncanny world associated with the Gothic landscape of the moors&#x27;, with varying degrees of success. Doyle wrote that the novel was originally conceived as a straight &#x27;Victorian creeper&#x27; in the style of Le Fanu, with the idea of introducing Holmes as the &quot;deus ex machina&quot; arising only later.

==Publication==
&quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; was first serialised in &quot;The Strand Magazine&quot; in 1901. It was well-suited for this type of publication, as individual chapters end in cliffhangers. It was printed in the United Kingdom as a novel in March 1902 by George Newnes Ltd. It was published in the same year in the United States by McClure, Philips &amp; Co.

===Original manuscript ===
In 1902, Doyle&#x27;s original manuscript of the book was broken up into individual leaves as part of a promotional campaign by Doyle&#x27;s American publisher – they were used in window displays by individual booksellers. Out of an estimated 185–190 leaves, only 37 are known to still exist, including all the leaves from Chapter 11, held by the New York Public Library. Other leaves are owned by university libraries in the United States and by private collectors. Four of the known survivors are in unknown locations, including one that was stolen.

A newly rediscovered example was sold at auction in 2012 for US$158,500. Another one was sold in 2021 for $423,000. The existence of the 37th leaf became publicly known in 2018; it was put up for auction in 2022, but did not sell.

== Adaptations ==
&quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; has been adapted in various forms of media.

===Film and television adaptations===
Over 20 film and television versions of &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; have been made.
===Audio===

Edith Meiser adapted the novel as six episodes of the radio series &quot;The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes&quot;. The episodes aired in February and March 1932, with Richard Gordon as Sherlock Holmes and Leigh Lovell as Dr. Watson. Another dramatisation of the story aired in November and December 1936, with Gordon as Holmes and Harry West as Watson.

The story was also adapted by Meiser as six episodes of &quot;The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes&quot; with Basil Rathbone as Holmes and Nigel Bruce as Watson. The episodes aired in January and February 1941.

A dramatisation of the novel by Felix Felton aired on the BBC Light Programme in 1958 as part of the 1952–1969 radio series, with Carleton Hobbs as Sherlock Holmes and Norman Shelley as Dr. Watson. A different production of &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot;, also adapted by Felton and starring Hobbs and Shelley with a different supporting cast, aired in 1961 on the BBC Home Service.

The novel was adapted as an episode of &quot;CBS Radio Mystery Theater&quot;. The episode, which aired in 1977, starred Kevin McCarthy as Holmes and Lloyd Battista as Watson.

&quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; has been adapted for radio for the BBC by Bert Coules on two occasions. The first starred Roger Rees as Holmes, Crawford Logan as Watson and Matt Zimmerman as Sir Henry and was broadcast in 1988 on BBC Radio 4. Following its good reception, Coules proposed further radio adaptations, which eventually led to the 1989–1998 radio series of dramatisations of the entire canon, starring Clive Merrison as Holmes and Michael Williams as Watson. The second adaptation of &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot;, featuring this pairing, was broadcast in 1998, and also featured Judi Dench as Mrs. Hudson and Donald Sinden as Sir Charles Baskerville.

Clive Nolan and Oliver Wakeman adapted &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; as a progressive rock album in 2002, with narration by Robert Powell.

&quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; was adapted as three episodes of the American radio series &quot;The Classic Adventures of Sherlock Holmes&quot;, with John Patrick Lowrie as Holmes and Lawrence Albert as Watson. The episodes first aired in March 2008.

In 2011, Big Finish Productions released their adaptation of the book as part of their second series of Holmes dramas. Holmes was played by Nicholas Briggs, and Watson was played by Richard Earl.

In 2014, L.A. Theatre Works released their production, starring Seamus Dever as Holmes, Geoffrey Arend as Watson, James Marsters as Sir Henry, Sarah Drew as Beryl Stapleton, Wilson Bethel as Stapleton, Henri Lubatti as Dr. Mortimer, Christopher Neame as Sir Charles and Frankland, Moira Quirk as Mrs. Hudson &amp; Mrs. Barrymore, and Darren Richardson as Barrymore.

In 2017, Bleak December released an abridged full-cast production for Cadabra Records with Sir Derek Jacobi as Holmes.

In 2020, Lions Den Theatre released a new adaptation of the novel written and directed by Keith Morrison on the company&#x27;s YouTube channel. An early version of the play was performed in various locations around Nova Scotia in 2018.

In 2021, Audible released a dramatisation by George Mann and Cavan Scott, starring Colin Salmon as Holmes and Stephen Fry as Watson.

In 2022, &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; was adapted and conducted as a &quot;concert drama&quot; by Neil Brand, with the music directed by Timothy Brock, and performed by the BBC Symphony Orchestra. Mark Gatiss and Sanjeev Bhaskar played Holmes and Watson, respectively. The production was recorded at the Barbican Hall on 20 December, and was broadcast on BBC Radio 3 on 22 January 2023. A filmed recording of the reading was broadcast for BBC Four on 25 December 2023.

===Stage===
Prolific playwright Tim Kelly adapted the story for the stage in 1976. One production was at Boston&#x27;s Theater Loft in 1982.

In 2007, Peepolykus Theatre Company premiered a new adaptation of &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; at West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds. Adapted by John Nicholson and Steven Canny, the production involves only three actors and was praised by critics for its physical comedy. Following a UK tour, it transferred to the Duchess Theatre in London&#x27;s West End. &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; described it as a ‘wonderfully delightful spoof’, while &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; praised its ‘mad hilarity that will make you feel quite sane’. This adaptation continues to be presented by both amateur and professional companies around the world.

Stage performances have also been performed in the UK in dramatisations by Joan Knight, Claire Malcolmson, Harry Meacher, and Roger Sansom, among others. Meacher&#x27;s version has been produced three times, each time with himself the actor playing Holmes.

Ken Ludwig authored an adaptation entitled &quot;&quot; which premiered as a co-production at Arena Stage (Washington, D.C.) in January 2015 and McCarter Theatre Center in March 2015.

In 2021, an adaption for the stage by Steven Canny and John Nicholson for Peepolykus, directed by Tim Jackson &amp; Lotte Wakeman toured the UK produced by Original Theatre Company and Bolton&#x27;s Octagon Theatre. It was a continuation the adaptation that was directed by Lotte Wakeman for English Theatre, Frankfurt, Jermyn St Theatre and Octagon, Bolton.

In 2022, to commemorate the book&#x27;s 120th anniversary, a new staging was produced in the form of a live radio play reading, adapted by Martin Parsons, and starring Colin Baker and Terry Molloy as Holmes and Watson. The tour has continued on and off into 2025.

===Video games===
&quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; is utilised in the final case in &quot;The Great Ace Attorney: Adventures&quot; in which the protagonist teams up with Herlock Sholmes (Sherlock Holmes in the original Japanese version) to investigate mysteries based on various entries in the Holmes chronology. In particular, the manuscript of &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; is a key part of the case.

&quot;Sherlock Holmes and the Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; is a casual game by Frogwares. It departs from the original plot by introducing clear supernatural elements. Despite its non-canonical plot, it received good reviews.

==See also==

* Baskerville effect
* Edinburgh Phrenological Society
* &quot;Le Monde&quot; 100 Books of the Century
* Princetown#Geography
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; (Part I) at BFRonline.biz.
* &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; (Part II) at BFRonline.biz.
* &quot;The Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; (Conclusion) at BFRonline.biz.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="55" end="66" title="Detective fiction" label="crime novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="86" end="104" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="129" end="144" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="157" end="167" title="serial (literature)" label="serialised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126800" start="177" end="196" title="The Strand Magazine" label="The Strand Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="256" end="264" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="266" end="271" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="291" end="303" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q187349" start="327" end="333" title="Dr. Watson" label="Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321618" start="374" end="390" title="Black dog (folklore)" label="diabolical hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q228119" start="489" end="506" title="The Final Problem" label="The Final Problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q775274" start="735" end="747" title="The Big Read" label="The Big Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="906" end="912" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="1071" end="1088" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321618" start="1319" end="1332" title="Black dog (folklore)" label="demonic hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="1366" end="1374" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="1477" end="1490" title="philanthropy" label="philanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="1491" end="1498" title="baronet" label="baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1660" end="1672" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038225" start="1724" end="1727" title="yew" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="1805" end="1819" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1981" end="1989" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="2103" end="2115" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2119" end="2132" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q654437" start="2156" end="2164" title="executor" label="executor"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="2187" end="2191" title="Will and testament" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="2340" end="2350" title="Fairy tale" label="fairy-tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583962" start="2630" end="2636" title="hansom" label="hansom"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="2699" end="2700" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635157" start="2974" end="2991" title="Princetown Prison" label="Princetown Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q36449705" start="3395" end="3399" title="Mire" label="Mire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225656" start="3653" end="3667" title="Dartmoor kistvaens" label="nearby barrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343179" start="4107" end="4110" title="Tor (rock formation)" label="tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067723" start="5306" end="5324" title="Inspector Lestrade" label="Inspector Lestrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q184619" start="5328" end="5341" title="Scotland Yard" label="Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="6027" end="6037" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883765" start="6544" end="6553" title="Undershaw" label="Undershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="6557" end="6563" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="6570" end="6582" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="6662" end="6674" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="6686" end="6701" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q228119" start="6816" end="6833" title="The Final Problem" label="The Final Problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171427" start="6997" end="7029" title="The Adventure of the Empty House" label="The Adventure of the Empty House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825499" start="7121" end="7134" title="liminal space" label="liminal space"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="7295" end="7308" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895770" start="7332" end="7357" title="Bertram Fletcher Robinson" label="Bertram Fletcher Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="7436" end="7451" title="royalty payment" label="royalty payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19091543" start="7631" end="7652" title="The King of the Foxes" label="The King of the Foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28549756" start="7727" end="7741" title="Richard Cabell" label="Richard Cabell"/>
<link wikidata="Q999649" start="7774" end="7787" title="Buckfastleigh" label="Buckfastleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q999649" start="7950" end="7963" title="Buckfastleigh" label="Buckfastleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="8166" end="8171" title="Devil" label="Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526480" start="8260" end="8290" title="Sir Edmund Fowell, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Edmund Fowell, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476473" start="8307" end="8318" title="Fowelscombe" label="Fowelscombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321618" start="8942" end="8952" title="Yeth hound" label="Yeth hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247552" start="9117" end="9126" title="Ugborough" label="Ugborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476359" start="9144" end="9159" title="Fowell Baronets" label="Fowell Baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974340" start="9248" end="9258" title="Brook Hall" label="Brook Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545713" start="9817" end="9830" title="North Norfolk" label="North Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q880558" start="9850" end="9861" title="Black Shuck" label="Black Shuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187594" start="9902" end="9913" title="Cromer Hall" label="Cromer Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15498202" start="10012" end="10030" title="James Lynam Molloy" label="James Lynam Molloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690005" start="10078" end="10104" title="Love&amp;#x27;s Old Sweet Song" label="Love&amp;#x27;s Old Sweet Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189587" start="10175" end="10188" title="Crowsley Park" label="Crowsley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q326467" start="10956" end="10963" title="Sheridan Le Fanu" label="Le Fanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q203698" start="11014" end="11029" title="deus ex machina" label="deus ex machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126800" start="11145" end="11164" title="The Strand Magazine" label="The Strand Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q665478" start="11259" end="11270" title="cliffhanger" label="cliffhanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q84709400" start="11338" end="11355" title="George Newnes Ltd" label="George Newnes Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q255731" start="11554" end="11560" title="Leaf (books)" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="11817" end="11840" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q60361108" start="12509" end="12521" title="Edith Meiser" label="Edith Meiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q60789157" start="12582" end="12615" title="The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (radio series)" label="The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q76446170" start="12675" end="12689" title="Richard Gordon (actor)" label="Richard Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753486" start="12924" end="12961" title="The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes" label="The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q336865" start="12973" end="12987" title="Basil Rathbone" label="Basil Rathbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q728050" start="13002" end="13013" title="Nigel Bruce" label="Nigel Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16079026" start="13107" end="13119" title="Felix Felton" label="Felix Felton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347264" start="13133" end="13152" title="BBC Light Programme" label="BBC Light Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q97169169" start="13176" end="13198" title="Sherlock Holmes (1952 radio series)" label="1952–1969 radio series"/>
<link wikidata="Q609758" start="13205" end="13219" title="Carleton Hobbs" label="Carleton Hobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q609931" start="13243" end="13257" title="Norman Shelley" label="Norman Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631716" start="13451" end="13467" title="BBC Home Service" label="BBC Home Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126204" start="13515" end="13540" title="CBS Radio Mystery Theater" label="CBS Radio Mystery Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q281404" start="13590" end="13604" title="Kevin McCarthy (actor)" label="Kevin McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649395" start="13619" end="13633" title="Lloyd Battista" label="Lloyd Battista"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895024" start="13730" end="13741" title="Bert Coules" label="Bert Coules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750774" start="13778" end="13788" title="Roger Rees" label="Roger Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182893" start="13800" end="13814" title="Crawford Logan" label="Crawford Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789574" start="13829" end="13843" title="Matt Zimmerman (actor)" label="Matt Zimmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="13886" end="13897" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563165" start="14000" end="14022" title="List of BBC Radio Sherlock Holmes dramatisations" label="1989–1998 radio series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247700" start="14071" end="14085" title="Clive Merrison" label="Clive Merrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929848" start="14100" end="14116" title="Michael Williams (actor)" label="Michael Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="14261" end="14271" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q432316" start="14291" end="14304" title="Donald Sinden" label="Donald Sinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490893" start="14334" end="14345" title="Clive Nolan" label="Clive Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q945977" start="14350" end="14364" title="Oliver Wakeman" label="Oliver Wakeman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14379" end="14408" title="The Hound of the Baskervilles (album)" label="The Hound of the Baskervilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q504982" start="14470" end="14483" title="Robert Powell" label="Robert Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002608" start="14593" end="14634" title="The Classic Adventures of Sherlock Holmes" label="The Classic Adventures of Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809532" start="14647" end="14666" title="John Patrick Lowrie" label="John Patrick Lowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905688" start="14758" end="14780" title="Big Finish Productions" label="Big Finish Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025114" start="14889" end="14904" title="Nicholas Briggs" label="Nicholas Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456238" start="14955" end="14973" title="L.A. Theatre Works" label="L.A. Theatre Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q926705" start="15010" end="15022" title="Seamus Dever" label="Seamus Dever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195" start="15034" end="15048" title="Geoffrey Arend" label="Geoffrey Arend"/>
<link wikidata="Q312885" start="15060" end="15074" title="James Marsters" label="James Marsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q236759" start="15089" end="15099" title="Sarah Drew" label="Sarah Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q527771" start="15120" end="15133" title="Wilson Bethel" label="Wilson Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q466789" start="15179" end="15196" title="Christopher Neame" label="Christopher Neame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894745" start="15227" end="15238" title="Moira Quirk" label="Moira Quirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q256164" start="15404" end="15420" title="Sir Derek Jacobi" label="Sir Derek Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q366651" start="15679" end="15686" title="Audible (service)" label="Audible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542111" start="15715" end="15726" title="George Mann (writer)" label="George Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054855" start="15731" end="15742" title="Cavan Scott" label="Cavan Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q460898" start="15753" end="15765" title="Colin Salmon" label="Colin Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="15780" end="15791" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988311" start="15915" end="15925" title="Neil Brand" label="Neil Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807076" start="15954" end="15967" title="Timothy Brock" label="Timothy Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q795630" start="15990" end="16012" title="BBC Symphony Orchestra" label="BBC Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q560286" start="16014" end="16025" title="Mark Gatiss" label="Mark Gatiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472307" start="16030" end="16045" title="Sanjeev Bhaskar" label="Sanjeev Bhaskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q653858" start="16121" end="16134" title="Barbican Hall" label="Barbican Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="16172" end="16183" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803762" start="16319" end="16328" title="Tim Kelly (playwright)" label="Tim Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="16392" end="16398" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987042" start="16540" end="16564" title="West Yorkshire Playhouse" label="West Yorkshire Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="16568" end="16573" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614548" start="16605" end="16617" title="Steven Canny" label="Steven Canny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189589" start="16696" end="16711" title="physical comedy" label="physical comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311299" start="16756" end="16771" title="Duchess Theatre" label="Duchess Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="16775" end="16797" title="West End of London" label="London&amp;#x27;s West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="16805" end="16824" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="16893" end="16909" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671027" start="17190" end="17203" title="Harry Meacher" label="Harry Meacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388044" start="17341" end="17351" title="Ken Ludwig" label="Ken Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788912" start="17435" end="17446" title="Arena Stage" label="Arena Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="17448" end="17464" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4453426" start="17486" end="17509" title="McCarter Theatre" label="McCarter Theatre Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q440963" start="18054" end="18065" title="Colin Baker" label="Colin Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704808" start="18070" end="18082" title="Terry Molloy" label="Terry Molloy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18250" end="18284" title="The Great Ace Attorney: Adventures" label="The Great Ace Attorney: Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687047" start="18330" end="18345" title="Herlock Sholmes (Ace Attorney)" label="Herlock Sholmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050023" start="18643" end="18654" title="casual game" label="casual game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541023" start="18658" end="18667" title="Frogwares" label="Frogwares"/>
<link wikidata="Q584455" start="18822" end="18840" title="Baskerville effect" label="Baskerville effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338241" start="18843" end="18874" title="Edinburgh Phrenological Society" label="Edinburgh Phrenological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q40734" start="18877" end="18922" title="Le Monde&amp;#x27;s 100 Books of the Century" label="&amp;quot;Le Monde&amp;quot; 100 Books of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18925" end="18945" title="Princetown#Geography" label="Princetown#Geography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30281" wikidata="Q7801031" url="?curid=30281" title="Tien Gow">
<text>Tien Gow or Tin Kau () is the name of Chinese gambling games played with either a pair of dice or a set of 32 Chinese dominoes. In these games, Heaven is the top rank of the civil suit, while Nine is the top rank of the military suit. The civil suit was originally called the Chinese (華) suit while the military suit was called the barbarian (夷) suit (see Wen and wu and Hua–Yi distinction) but this was changed during the Qing dynasty to avoid offending the ruling Manchus. The highly idiosyncratic and culture-specific suit-system of these games is likely the conceptual origin of suits, an idea that later is used for playing cards. Play is counter-clockwise.

==Dice game==

Throwing Heaven and Nine (掷天九), or &quot;Kwat-P&#x27;ai&quot; (骨牌) as reported by Ng Kwai-shang in 1886, is a game of chance where players try to beat each other with a higher combination from a pair of Chinese dice with red 1 and 4 pips. Of the 21 possible combinations, 11 are ranked in a &quot;civil&quot; suit and 10 are ranked in a &quot;military&quot; suit.
The ranks from highest to lowest are:
*Civil: Heaven (6-6); Earth (1-1); Mankind (4-4); Harmony (1-3); Plum Flower (5-5); Long Threes (3-3); Bench (2-2); Tiger&#x27;s Head (5-6); Red Head Ten (4-6); Long Leg Seven (1-6); Red Mallet Six (1-5)
*Military: Nines (3-6 or 4-5); Eights (3-5 or 2-6); Sevens (2-5 or 3-4); Six (2-4); Fives (2-3 or 1-4); Final Three (1-2)

After the wager is set, the banker throws the dice into a bowl which sets the suit. The banker automatically wins if they throw the highest rank within the suit (Heaven or Nine) but loses if they throw the lowest rank (Red Mallet Six or Final Three).

For any other combination, the other players each throw the dice and try to beat the banker&#x27;s throw within the same suit. If they throw the wrong suit, then they get to throw again until they &quot;follow suit&quot;. Those that throw lower than the banker will have to pay them. According to R.C. Bell, if there is a tie, no money is exchanged.

The opponents keep throwing until one manages to beat the banker and gets paid. The player to the right of the banker becomes the next banker and starts the following round after new stakes are set.

==Domino games==

In the domino games, there are two copies of each Civil tile. They have been available in playing card format since the beginning of the 17th century.

===Turning Heaven and Nine===
Turning Heaven and Nine (扭天九) is a simple two player trick-taking game of chance. The 32 dominoes are mixed then stacked, face-down, in eight piles of four tiles each. The first player takes a domino from the top of a pile and turns it over while the second player takes the one below it and reveals it for comparison.

If the second player draws a higher-ordered tile of the same suit, they take both tiles and lead the next trick. Otherwise, the first player takes both tiles; this mechanic is analogous to the card game War but with an added requirement to follow suit. The game continues in this manner until all tiles have been turned over. Each player counts the total red pips in their captured tiles with the loser having to pay the difference to the winner.

===Playing Heaven and Nine===
Playing Heaven and Nine (打天九) is a multi-trick game for 4 players. All tiles are distributed by the banker so each player gets eight. The banker leads the first trick with a single, double, triple, or quadruple trick and the others must play out with an equal number of tiles. Players that are unable to beat the trick discard their tiles face down (this is characteristic of some trumpless trick-taking games like Madiao and Ganjifa). The winner leads the next trick. The player who takes the last trick or multi-trick becomes the next banker. Players who have not won any of the first seven tricks automatically lose the last trick regardless of the strength of their final tile.
In double tricks, there are two additional suits, mixed and supreme:
*Mixed: Heaven and a Nine; Earth and an Eight; Mankind and a Seven; Harmony and a Five
*Supreme: Six and Final Three

As the supreme suit consists of a single pair, it is unbeatable if led but considered a discard if not led.
In triple and quadruple tricks these are the only valid combinations: Heavens and Nines; Earths and Eights; Mankinds and Sevens; Harmonies and Fives

Triple tricks have a rule that a triplet consisting of two civil and one military tiles can only be beaten by a triplet consisting of the same suit compositions. Likewise, a triplet consisting of two military and one civil tiles can only be beaten by the same.

There are complex rules to the game play and scoring. There is an accumulating multiplier to the winning and loss as the game proceeds. There are bonuses for winning the last trick with certain methods and for different types of slams. It can be adapted to be played with a standard 52-card deck.

The earliest surviving rules were written by Pan Zhiheng around 1610. In this version (鬥天九), triple and quadruple tricks were not allowed and Heavens can beat Nines and the Supreme pair. There were also versions for two or three players in which some of the tiles remain undistributed. His rules are more similar to the ones used in northern China during the early 20th century than the Cantonese rules that are dominant in the present. They are also very similar to another game simply called dominoes (骨牌) played in many parts of China.

Bagchen is a Tibetan variation played with a double set of dominoes. Daaluu (Даалуу) is a variation in Mongolia that also uses a double set and plays similarly to Khorol.
==History==
In his article &quot;Chinese Origin of Playing Cards&quot; published in 1895, Sir William Henry Wilkinson pointed out that the game of Tien Gow was invented long before Song dynasty, but was standardized in 1120: 
[Quote from page 66. Note this publication predated the modern pinyin transliteration system]
&lt;br&gt;
It is perfectly clear, indeed, that all that was done or asked for in 1120 was an imperial decision as to which of several forms or interpretations of the game now known as T&#x27;ien-kiu (&quot;Heavens and Nines&quot;) was to be considered orthodox. The game and the cards must have been in existence long before. The passage from the &quot;Cheng-tzâ-t&#x27;ung&quot; [《正字通》] runs thus (s.v. p&#x27;ai [牌]):
Also ya p&#x27;ai now the instruments of the game. A common legend states that in the second year of the Hsüan-ho [宣和二年], in the Sung dynasty [i.q. 1120 AD], a certain official memorialized the throne, praying that the ya p&#x27;ai (ivory cards [牙牌]) be fixed as a pack of 32, comprising 127 pips [sic, it should be 227, but Chinese printers are careless], in order to accord with the expanse of the stars and constellations. The combination &#x27;heaven&#x27; [6/6, 6/6] consisted of two pieces, containing 24 pips, figures of the 24 solar periods; &#x27;earth&#x27; [1/1, 1/1] also composed two pieces, but contained 4 pips, the 4 points of the compass - east, west, south, and north; &#x27;man&#x27; [4/4, 4/4] two pieces, containing 16 pips, the virtues of humanity, benevolence, propriety, and wisdom, four-fold; &#x27;harmony&#x27; [2/3, 1/3] two pieces of 8 pips, figuring the breath of harmony, which pervades the eight divisions of the year. The other combinations had each their names. There were four players having eight cards apiece for their hand, and the cards won or lost according as the number of the pips was less or in more the winner being rewarded with counters. In-the time of Kao-tsung [高宗 1127-1163] pattern packs were issued by imperial edict. They were known throughout the empire as Ku p&#x27;ai, &#x27;bone p&#x27;ai;&#x27; [骨牌] but it does not follow that this class of games, po-sai [博塞], Ko-wu [格五], and the rest originated in the reign of Hsüan-ho.

Ming author Xie Zhaozhe (1567–1624) also records the legend of dominoes having been presented to Emperor Huizong but in the year 1112. The Ming sources may be early by half a century as Li Qingzhao (1084 – c. 1155) made no mention of dominoes in her compendium of games. The oldest confirmed written mention of dominoes in China comes from the &quot;Former Events in Wulin&quot; (i.e. the capital Hangzhou) as recorded by Zhou Mi (1232–1298), who listed dominoes as items sold by peddlers during the reign of Emperor Xiaozong (r. 1162–1189).

==Relation to Pai Gow==
The partition game of Pai Gow borrows most of its tile ranking from the pairings in Playing Heaven and Nine. However, the suits have been merged into a single sequence:
*Supreme, Civil, Military, Nines and Heaven, Nines and Earth, Eights and Heaven, Mankind and Heaven, Eights and Earth, Mankind and Earth

Below these are unlisted pairs that use modular arithmetic like in Tau Gnau or baccarat.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* French Rules
* Tien Gow rules</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7801031" start="0" end="8" title="Tien Gow" label="Tien Gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801031" start="12" end="19" title="Tien Gow" label="Tin Kau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="46" end="54" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="90" end="94" title="dice" label="dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254574" start="110" end="126" title="Chinese dominoes" label="Chinese dominoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15973041" start="356" end="366" title="Wen and wu" label="Wen and wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030751" start="371" end="389" title="Hua–Yi distinction" label="Hua–Yi distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="423" end="435" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="466" end="473" title="Manchu people" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27905" start="583" end="588" title="Suit (cards)" label="suits"/>
<link wikidata="Q47883" start="621" end="633" title="playing card" label="playing card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191150" start="1863" end="1874" title="follow suit" label="follow suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342880" start="1957" end="1966" title="Robert Charles Bell" label="R.C. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2306" end="2338" title="Chinese playing cards#Domino cards" label="available in playing card format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191150" start="2464" end="2481" title="trick-taking game" label="trick-taking game"/>
<link wikidata="Q640673" start="2934" end="2937" title="War (card game)" label="War"/>
<link wikidata="Q727407" start="3590" end="3595" title="trump (card games)" label="trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211249" start="3624" end="3630" title="Madiao" label="Madiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788953" start="3635" end="3642" title="Ganjifa" label="Ganjifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419503" start="4872" end="4893" title="standard 52-card deck" label="standard 52-card deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q15945207" start="5599" end="5605" title="Khorol (game)" label="Khorol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47883" start="5640" end="5671" title="Chinese Origin of Playing Cards" label="Chinese Origin of Playing Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012216" start="5701" end="5724" title="William Henry Wilkinson" label="William Henry Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="5788" end="5800" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="5896" end="5902" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070791" start="6280" end="6300" title="Zhengzitong" label="Cheng-tzâ-t&amp;#x27;ung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7486" start="6452" end="6460" title="Emperor Huizong of Song" label="Hsüan-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q10942384" start="6524" end="6547" title="memorial to the throne" label="memorialized the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489" start="7547" end="7556" title="Emperor Gaozong of Song" label="Kao-tsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="7830" end="7834" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7486" start="7927" end="7942" title="Emperor Huizong of Song" label="Emperor Huizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q464470" start="8016" end="8027" title="Li Qingzhao" label="Li Qingzhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="8227" end="8235" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492" start="8339" end="8355" title="Emperor Xiaozong of Song" label="Emperor Xiaozong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278119" start="8419" end="8426" title="Pai Gow" label="Pai Gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="8744" end="8762" title="modular arithmetic" label="modular arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q739895" start="8783" end="8791" title="Baccarat (card game)" label="baccarat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30282" wikidata="Q155234" url="?curid=30282" title="Time signature">
<text>A time signature (also known as meter signature, metre signature, and measure signature) is an indication in music notation that specifies how many note values of a particular type are contained in each measure (bar). The time signature indicates the meter of a musical movement at the bar level.

In a music score the time signature appears as two stacked numerals, such as (spoken as &quot;four–four time&quot;), or a time symbol, such as (spoken as &quot;common time&quot;). It immediately follows the key signature (or if there is no key signature, the clef symbol). A mid-score time signature, usually immediately following a barline, indicates a change of meter.

Most time signatures are either simple (the note values are grouped in pairs, like , , and ), or compound (grouped in threes, like , , and ). Less common signatures indicate complex, mixed, additive, and irrational meters.

== Time signature notation ==
Most time signatures consist of two numerals, one stacked above the other:

* The &quot;lower&quot; numeral indicates the note value that the signature is counting. This number is always a power of 2 (unless the time signature is irrational), usually 2, 4 or 8, but less often 16 is also used, usually in Baroque music. 2 corresponds to the half note (minim), 4 to the quarter note (crotchet), 8 to the eighth note (quaver), 16 to the sixteenth note (semiquaver).
* The &quot;upper&quot; numeral indicates how many such note values constitute a bar.
For instance, means two quarter-notes (crotchets) per bar, while means four eighth-notes (quavers) per bar. The most common time signatures are , , and .

=== Symbolic signatures ===


By convention, two special symbols are sometimes used for and :
* The symbol is sometimes used for time, also called &quot;common time&quot; or &quot;imperfect time&quot;. 
* The symbol is sometimes used in place of and is called &quot;alla breve&quot; or, colloquially, &quot;cut time&quot; or &quot;cut common time&quot;. 
These symbols derive from mensural time signatures, described below.

== Frequently used time signatures ==

=== Simple versus compound ===
Simple meters are those whose upper number is 2, 3, or 4, sometimes described as duple meter, triple meter, and quadruple meter respectively. 

In compound meter, the note values specified by the bottom number are grouped into threes, and the upper number is a multiple of 3, such as 6, 9, or 12. The lower number is most commonly an 8 (an eighth-note or quaver): as in or .

Other upper numbers correspond to irregular meters.

=== Beat and subdivision ===

Musical passages commonly feature a recurring pulse, or beat, usually in the range of 60–140 beats per minute. Depending on the tempo of the music, this beat may correspond to the note value specified by the time signature, or to a grouping of such note values. Most commonly, in simple time signatures, the beat is the same as the note value of the signature, but in compound signatures, the beat is usually a dotted note value corresponding to three of the signature&#x27;s note values. Either way, the next lower note value shorter than the beat is called the subdivision.

On occasion a bar may seem like one singular beat. For example, a fast waltz, notated in time, may be described as being &quot;one in a bar&quot;. Conversely, at slow tempos, the beat might even be a smaller note value than the one enumerated by the time signature. 

Mathematically the time signatures of, e.g., and are interchangeable. In a sense &quot;all&quot; simple triple time signatures, such as , , , etc.—and all compound duple times, such as , and so on, are equivalent. A piece in can be easily rewritten in , simply by halving the length of the notes.

:&lt;score&gt;
 \new Staff «
 \new voice \relative c&#x27; {
 \clef percussion
 \time 3/4
 \tempo 4 = 100 
 \stemDown \repeat volta 2 { g4 d&#x27; d }
 \time 3/8
 \tempo 8 = 100 
 \stemDown \repeat volta 2 { g,8 d&#x27; d }
 \new voice \relative c&quot; {
 \override NoteHead.style = #&#x27;cross
 \stemUp \repeat volta 2 { a8[ a] a[ a] a[ a] }
 \stemUp \repeat volta 2 { a16 a a a a a }
 »
&lt;/score&gt;
Other time signature rewritings are possible: most commonly a simple time-signature with triplets translates into a compound meter.

:&lt;score&gt;
 \new Staff «
 \new voice \relative c&#x27; {
 \clef percussion
 \time 12/8
 \tempo 4. = 66 
 \stemDown \repeat volta 2 { g4. d&#x27; g, d&#x27; }
 \numericTimeSignature
 \time 4/4
 \tempo 4 = 66 
 \stemDown \repeat volta 2 { g,4 d&#x27; g, d&#x27; }
 \new voice \relative c&quot; {
 \override NoteHead.style = #&#x27;cross
 \stemUp \repeat volta 2 { a8 a a a a a a a a a a a }
 \stemUp \repeat volta 2 { \tuplet 3/2 { a8 a a } \tuplet 3/2 { a8 a a } \tuplet 3/2 { a8 a a } \tuplet 3/2 { a8 a a } }
 »
&lt;/score&gt;

The choice of time signature in these cases is largely a matter of tradition. Particular time signatures are traditionally associated with different music styles—it would seem strange to notate a conventional rock song in or , rather than .

=== Examples ===
In the examples below, bold denotes the primary stress of the measure, and &quot;italics&quot; denote a secondary stress. Syllables such as &quot;and&quot; are frequently used for pulsing in between numbers.

&quot;Simple&quot;: is a simple triple meter time signature that represents three quarter notes (crotchets), usually perceived as three beats. In this case the subdivision would be the eighth note (quaver). It is felt as
::: one and &quot;two&quot; and &quot;three&quot; and ...

&quot;Compound&quot;: Most often, is felt as two beats, each being a dotted quarter note (crotchet), and each containing subdivisions of three eighth notes (quavers). It is felt as
::: one two three &quot;four&quot; five six ... (or, if counting dotted-quarter beats, one and a &quot;two&quot; and a)
The table below shows the characteristics of the most frequently used time signatures.
=== Tempo giusto ===

While changing the bottom number and keeping the top number fixed only formally changes notation, without changing meaning – , , , and are all three beats to a meter, just noted with eighth notes, quarter notes, half notes, or whole notes – these conventionally imply different performance and different tempi. Conventionally, larger numbers in the bottom correspond to faster tempi and smaller numbers correspond to slower tempi. This convention is known as &quot;tempo giusto&quot;, and means that the tempo of each note remains in a narrower, &quot;normal&quot; range. For illustration, a quarter note might correspond to 60–120 bpm (quintuplet 75-150, triplet 90-180 and septuplet 105-210), a half note to 30–60 bpm (triplet 45-90), a whole note to 15–30 bpm, and an eighth note to 120–240 bpm; these are not strict, but show an example of &quot;normal&quot; ranges.

This convention dates to the Baroque era, when tempo changes were indicated by changing time signature during the piece, rather than by using a single time signature and changing tempo marking.

== Complex time signatures ==
Signatures that do not fit the usual simple or compound categories are called &quot;complex&quot;, &quot;asymmetric&quot;, &quot;irregular&quot;, &quot;unusual&quot;, or &quot;odd&quot;—though these are broad terms, and usually a more specific description is any meter which combines both simple and compound beats.

Irregular meters are common in some non-Western music, and in ancient Greek music such as the Delphic Hymns to Apollo, but the corresponding time signatures rarely appeared in formal written Western music until the 19th century. Early anomalous examples appeared in Spain between 1516 and 1520, plus a small section in Handel&#x27;s opera Orlando (1733).

The third movement of Frédéric Chopin&#x27;s Piano Sonata No. 1 (1828) is an early, but by no means the earliest, example of time in solo piano music. Anton Reicha&#x27;s Fugue No. 20 from his &quot;Thirty-six Fugues&quot;, published in 1803, is also for piano and is in . The waltz-like second movement of Tchaikovsky&#x27;s &quot;Pathétique&quot; Symphony (shown below), often described as a &quot;limping waltz&quot;, is a notable example of time in orchestral music.

: &lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
 \relative c {
 \set Score.tempoHideNote = ##t \tempo 4 = 144
 \set Staff.midiInstrument = #&quot;cello&quot;
 \clef bass
 \key d \major
 \time 5/4
 fis4\mf(^\markup { \bold { Allegro con grazia } }
 g) \tuplet 3/2 { a8(\&lt; g a } b4 cis)\!
 d( b) cis2.\&gt;
 a4(\mf b) \tuplet 3/2 { cis8(\&lt; b cis } d4 e)\!
 \clef tenor
 fis(\f d) e2. \break
 g4( fis) \tuplet 3/2 { e8( fis e } d4 cis)
 fis8-. [ r16 g( ] fis8) [ r16 eis( ] fis2.)
 fis4( e) \tuplet 3/2 { d8( e d } cis4) b\upbow(\&lt;^\markup { \italic gliss. }
 b&#x27;8)\ff\&gt; [a( g) fis-. ] e-. [ es-.( d-. cis-. b-. bes-.) ]
 a4\mf
&lt;/score&gt;

Examples from 20th-century classical music include:
* Gustav Holst&#x27;s &quot;Mars, the Bringer of War&quot; and &quot;Neptune, the Mystic&quot; from &quot;The Planets&quot; (both in )
* Paul Hindemith&#x27;s &quot;Fuga secunda&quot; in G from &quot;Ludus Tonalis&quot; ()
* the ending of Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;The Firebird&quot; ()
* the fugue from Heitor Villa-Lobos&#x27;s &quot;Bachianas Brasileiras No. 9&quot; ()
* the themes for the &quot;&quot; television series by Lalo Schifrin (in ) and for &quot;Room 222&quot; by Jerry Goldsmith (in )
In the Western popular music tradition, unusual time signatures occur as well, with progressive rock in particular making frequent use of them. The use of shifting meters in The Beatles&#x27; &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; and the use of quintuple meter in their &quot;Within You, Without You&quot; are well-known examples, as is Radiohead&#x27;s &quot;Paranoid Android&quot; (includes ).
Paul Desmond&#x27;s jazz composition &quot;Take Five&quot;, in time, was one of a number of irregular-meter compositions that The Dave Brubeck Quartet played. They played other compositions in (&quot;Eleven Four&quot;), (&quot;Unsquare Dance&quot;), and (&quot;Blue Rondo à la Turk&quot;), expressed as . &quot;Blue Rondo à la Turk&quot; is an example of a signature that, despite appearing merely compound triple, is actually more complex. Brubeck&#x27;s title refers to the characteristic &quot;aksak&quot; meter of the Turkish &quot;karşılama&quot; dance.

However, such time signatures are only unusual in most Western music. Traditional music of the Balkans uses such meters extensively. Bulgarian dances, for example, include forms with 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 22, 25 and other numbers of beats per measure. These rhythms are notated as &quot;additive rhythms&quot; based on simple units, usually 2, 3 and 4 beats, though the notation fails to describe the metric &quot;time bending&quot; taking place, or compound meters. See Additive meters below.

Some video samples are shown below.
==Mixed meters==
While time signatures usually express a regular pattern of beat stresses continuing through a piece (or at least a section), sometimes composers change time signatures often enough to result in music with an extremely irregular rhythm. The time signature may switch so much that a piece may not be best described as being in one meter, but rather as having a switching mixed meter. In this case, the time signatures are an aid to the performers and not &quot;necessarily&quot; an indication of meter. The Promenade from Modest Mussorgsky&#x27;s &quot;Pictures at an Exhibition&quot; (1874) is a good example. The opening measures are shown below:

:&lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
 { \new PianoStaff «
 \new Staff «
 \new voice \relative c&quot; {
 \set Score.tempoHideNote = ##t \tempo 4 = 112
 \clef treble \key bes \major 
 \time 5/4 
 g4--_\f^\markup { \bold {Allegro giusto, nel modo russico; senza allegrezza, ma poco sostenuto. } } f-- bes-- c8--( f d4--)
 \time 6/4
 c8--( f d4--) bes-- c-- g-- f--
 \time 5/4
 &lt;bes, d g&gt;4 &lt;a c f&gt; &lt;bes d bes&#x27;&gt; \stemDown &lt;c a&#x27;&gt; \stemNeutral &lt;f a d&gt;
 \time 6/4
 \stemDown &lt;c a&#x27;&gt; \stemNeutral &lt;f bes d&gt; &lt;d g bes&gt; &lt;e g c&gt; &lt;g, c g&#x27;&gt; &lt;a c f&gt;
 \new Voice \relative c&quot; {
 \time 5/4
 s1 s4
 \time 6/4
 s1.
 \time 5/4
 s2. \stemUp c8^( f d4)
 \time 6/4
 \stemUp c8^( f d4) s1
 »
 \new Staff «
 \clef bass \key bes \major 
 \relative c {
 \time 5/4
 R1*5/4
 \time 6/4
 R1*6/4
 \time 5/4
 &lt;g g&#x27;&gt;4 &lt;a f&#x27;&gt; &lt;g g&#x27;&gt; &lt;f f&#x27;&gt; &lt;d d&#x27;&gt;
 \time 6/4
 &lt;f f&#x27;&gt; &lt;bes bes&#x27;&gt; &lt;g g&#x27;&gt; &lt;c, c&#x27;&gt; &lt;e e&#x27;&gt; &lt;f f&#x27;&gt;
 »
&lt;/score&gt;

Igor Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;The Rite of Spring&quot; (1913) is famous for its &quot;savage&quot; rhythms. Five measures from &quot;Sacrificial Dance&quot; are shown below:

:&lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt; { \new PianoStaff « \new Staff \relative c&quot; { \set Staff.midiInstrument = #&quot;violin&quot; \clef treble \tempo 8 = 126 \override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #4 \time 3/16 r16 &lt;d c a fis d&gt;-! r16\fermata | \time 2/16 r &lt;d c a fis d&gt;-! \time 3/16 r &lt;d c a fis d&gt;8-! | r16 &lt;d c a fis d&gt;8-! | \time 2/8 &lt;d c a fis&gt;16-! &lt;e c bes g&gt;-&gt;-![ &lt;cis b aes f&gt;-! &lt;c a fis ees&gt;-!] } \new Staff \relative c { \set Staff.midiInstrument = #&quot;violin&quot; \clef bass \time 3/16 d,16-! &lt;bes&quot; ees,&gt;^\f-! r\fermata | \time 2/16 &lt;d, d,&gt;-! &lt;bes&quot; ees,&gt;-! | \time 3/16 d16-! &lt;ees cis&gt;8-! | r16 &lt;ees cis&gt;8-! | \time 2/8 d16^\sf-! &lt;ees cis&gt;-!-&gt;[ &lt;d c&gt;-! &lt;d c&gt;-!] } » } &lt;/score&gt;

In such cases, a convention that some composers follow (e.g., Olivier Messiaen, in his &quot;La Nativité du Seigneur&quot; and &quot;Quatuor pour la fin du temps&quot;) is to simply omit the time signature. Charles Ives&#x27;s &quot;Concord Sonata&quot; has measure bars for select passages, but the majority of the work is unbarred.

Some pieces have no time signature, as there is no discernible meter. This is sometimes known as free time. Sometimes one is provided (usually ) so that the performer finds the piece easier to read, and simply has &quot;free time&quot; written as a direction. Sometimes the word &quot;FREE&quot; is written downwards on the staff to indicate the piece is in free time. Erik Satie wrote many compositions that are ostensibly in free time but actually follow an unstated and unchanging simple time signature. Later composers used this device more effectively, writing music almost devoid of a discernibly regular pulse.

If two time signatures alternate repeatedly, sometimes the two signatures are placed together at the beginning of the piece or section, as shown below:

==Additive meters==
To indicate more complex patterns of stresses, such as additive rhythms, more complex time signatures can be used. Additive meters have a pattern of beats that subdivide into smaller, irregular groups. Such meters are sometimes called &quot;imperfect&quot;, in contrast to &quot;perfect meters&quot;, in which the bar is first divided into equal units.

For example, the time signature means that there are 8 quaver beats in the bar, divided as the first of a group of three eighth notes (quavers) that are stressed, then the first of a group of two, then first of a group of three again. The stress pattern is usually counted as

:: : one two three &quot;one&quot; two &quot;one&quot; two three ...

This kind of time signature is commonly used to notate folk and non-Western types of music. In classical music, Béla Bartók and Olivier Messiaen have used such time signatures in their works. The first movement of Maurice Ravel&#x27;s Piano Trio in A Minor is written in , in which the beats are likewise subdivided into to reflect Basque dance rhythms.

Romanian musicologist Constantin Brăiloiu had a special interest in compound time signatures, developed while studying the traditional music of certain regions in his country. While investigating the origins of such unusual meters, he learned that they were even more characteristic of the traditional music of neighboring peoples (e.g., the Bulgarians). He suggested that such timings can be regarded as compounds of simple two-beat and three-beat meters, where an accent falls on every first beat, even though, for example in Bulgarian music, beat lengths of 1, 2, 3, 4 are used in the metric description. In addition, when focused only on stressed beats, simple time signatures can count as beats in a slower, compound time. However, there are two different-length beats in this resulting compound time, a one half-again longer than the short beat (or conversely, the short beat is the value of the long). This type of meter is called &quot;aksak&quot; (the Turkish word for &quot;limping&quot;), &quot;impeded&quot;, &quot;jolting&quot;, or &quot;shaking&quot;, and is described as an &quot;irregular bichronic rhythm&quot;. A certain amount of confusion for Western musicians is inevitable, since a measure they would likely regard as , for example, is a three-beat measure in &quot;aksak&quot;, with one long and two short beats (with subdivisions of , , or ).

Folk music may make use of metric time bends, so that the proportions of the performed metric beat time lengths differ from the exact proportions indicated by the metric. Depending on playing style of the same meter, the time bend can vary from non-existent to considerable; in the latter case, some musicologists may want to assign a different meter. For example, the Bulgarian tune &quot;Eleno Mome&quot; is written in one of three forms: (1) , (2) , or (3) , but an actual performance (e.g., &quot;Eleno Mome&quot;) may be closer to . The Macedonian meter is even more complicated, with heavier time bends, and use of quadruples on the threes. The metric beat time proportions may vary with the speed that the tune is played. The Swedish Boda Polska (Polska from the parish Boda) has a typical elongated second beat.

In Western classical music, metric time bend is used in the performance of the Viennese waltz. Most Western music uses metric ratios of 2:1, 3:1, or 4:1 (two-, three- or four-beat time signatures)—in other words, integer ratios that make all beats equal in time length. So, relative to that, 3:2 and 4:3 ratios correspond to very distinctive metric rhythm profiles. Complex accentuation occurs in Western music, but as syncopation rather than as part of the metric accentuation.

Brăiloiu borrowed a term from Turkish medieval music theory: &quot;aksak&quot;. Such compound time signatures fall under the &quot;aksak rhythm&quot; category that he introduced along with a couple more that should describe the rhythm figures in traditional music. The term Brăiloiu revived had moderate success worldwide, but in Eastern Europe it is still frequently used. However, aksak rhythm figures occur not only in a few European countries, but on all continents, featuring various combinations of the two and three sequences. The longest are in Bulgaria. The shortest aksak rhythm figures follow the five-beat timing, comprising a two and a three (or three and two).

Some video samples are shown below.
A method to create meters of lengths of any length has been published in the Journal of Anaphoria Music Theory and Xenharmonikon 16 using both those based on the Horograms of Erv Wilson and Viggo Brun&#x27;s algorithm written by Kraig Grady.

== Irrational meters ==
Irrational time signatures (rarely, &quot;non-dyadic time signatures&quot;) are used for so-called &quot;irrational bar lengths&quot;, that have a denominator that is not a power of two (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, etc.). These are based on beats expressed in terms of fractions of full beats in the prevailing tempo—for example or . For example, where implies a bar construction of four quarter-parts of a whole note (i.e., four quarter notes), implies a bar construction of four third-parts of it. These signatures are of utility only when juxtaposed with other signatures with varying denominators; a piece written entirely in , say, could be more legibly written out in .

According to Brian Ferneyhough, metric modulation is &quot;a somewhat distant analogy&quot; to his own use of &quot;irrational time signatures&quot; as a sort of rhythmic dissonance. It is disputed whether the use of these signatures makes metric relationships clearer or more obscure to the musician; it is always possible to write a passage using non-irrational signatures by specifying a relationship between some note length in the previous bar and some other in the succeeding one. Sometimes, successive metric relationships between bars are so convoluted that the pure use of irrational signatures would quickly render the notation extremely hard to penetrate. Good examples, written entirely in conventional signatures with the aid of between-bar specified metric relationships, occur a number of times in John Adams&#x27; opera &quot;Nixon in China&quot; (1987), where the sole use of irrational signatures would quickly produce massive numerators and denominators.

Historically, this device has been prefigured wherever composers wrote tuplets. For example, a bar of 3 triplet quarter notes could be written as a bar of . Henry Cowell&#x27;s piano piece &quot;Fabric&quot; (1920) employs separate divisions of the bar (1 to 9) for the three contrapuntal parts, using a scheme of shaped noteheads to visually clarify the differences, but the pioneering of these signatures is largely due to Brian Ferneyhough, who says that he finds that &quot;such &#x27;irrational&#x27; measures serve as a useful buffer between local changes of event density and actual changes of base tempo&quot;. Thomas Adès has also used them extensively—for example in &quot;Traced Overhead&quot; (1996), the second movement of which contains, among more conventional meters, bars in such signatures as , and .

A gradual process of diffusion into less rarefied musical circles seems underway. For example, John Pickard&#x27;s &quot;Eden&quot;, commissioned for the 2005 finals of the National Brass Band Championships of Great Britain, contains bars of and .

Notationally, rather than using Cowell&#x27;s elaborate series of notehead shapes, the same convention has been invoked as when normal tuplets are written; for example, one beat in is written as a normal quarter note, four quarter notes complete the bar, but the whole bar lasts only of a reference whole note, and a beat of one (or of a normal quarter note). This is notated in exactly the same way that one would write if one were writing the first four quarter notes of five quintuplet quarter notes.

Some video samples are shown below.

These video samples show two time signatures combined to make a polymeter, since , say, in isolation, is identical to .

==Variants==
Some composers have used fractional beats: for example, the time signature appears in Carlos Chávez&#x27;s Piano Sonata No. 3 (1928) IV, m. 1. Both and appear in the fifth movement of Percy Grainger&#x27;s Lincolnshire Posy.
Music educator Carl Orff proposed replacing the lower number of the time signature with an actual note image, as shown at right. This system eliminates the need for compound time signatures, which are confusing to beginners. While this notation has not been adopted by music publishers generally (except in Orff&#x27;s own compositions), it is used extensively in music education textbooks. Similarly, American composers George Crumb and Joseph Schwantner, among others, have used this system in many of their works. Émile Jaques-Dalcroze proposed this in his 1920 collection, &quot;Le Rythme, la musique et l&#x27;éducation&quot;.

Another possibility is to extend the barline where a time change is to take place above the top instrument&#x27;s line in a score and to write the time signature there, and there only, saving the ink and effort that would have been spent writing it in each instrument&#x27;s staff. Henryk Górecki&#x27;s &quot;Beatus Vir&quot; is an example of this. Alternatively, music in a large score sometimes has time signatures written as very long, thin numbers covering the whole height of the score rather than replicating it on each staff; this is an aid to the conductor, who can see signature changes more easily.

==Early music usage==

===Mensural time signatures===

In the mensural notation of the 14th, 15th and 16th centuries there are no bar lines, and the four basic &quot;mensuration signs&quot; indicate the normal ratio of duration between different note values. Unlike modern notation, the subdivisions could be either 2:1 or 3:1. The relation between the &quot;breve&quot; and the &quot;semibreve&quot; was called tempus, and could be perfect (triple 3:1 indicated by circle) or imperfect (duple 2:1, with broken circle), while the relation between the &quot;semibreve&quot; and the &quot;minim&quot; was called prolatio and could be major (3:1 or compound, indicated by dot) or minor (2:1 or simple meter).

Modern transcriptions often reduce note values 4:1, such that
* corresponds to meter;
* corresponds to meter;
* corresponds to meter;
* corresponds to meter.

N.B.: In mensural notation actual note values depend not only on the prevailing mensuration, but on rules for imperfection and alteration, with ambiguous cases using a dot of separation, similar in appearance but not always in effect to the modern dot of augmentation.

===Proportions===

Besides showing the organization of beats with musical meter, the mensuration signs discussed above have a second function, which is showing tempo relationships between one section to another, which modern notation can only specify with tuplets or metric modulations. This is a fraught subject, because the usage has varied with both time and place: Charles Hamm was even able to establish a rough chronology of works based on three distinct usages of mensural signs over the career of Guillaume Dufay (1397(?) – 1474). By the end of the sixteenth century Thomas Morley was able to satirize the confusion in an imagined dialogue:
it was a world to hear them wrangle, every one defending his own for the best. &quot;What? You keep not time in your proportions.&quot; &quot;You sing them false. What proportion is this?&quot; &quot;Sesquipaltry.&quot; &quot;Nay, you sing you know not what; it would seem you came lately from a barber&#x27;s shop where you had &#x27;Gregory Walker&#x27; or a Curranta played in the new Proportions by them lately found out, called &#x27;Sesquiblinda&#x27; and &#x27;Sesquihearkenafter&#x27;.&quot;

In general though, a slash or the numeral 2 shows a doubling of tempo, and paired numbers (either side by side or one atop another) show ratios instead of beats per measure over note value: in early music contexts for example is unrelated to &#x27;third-notes&#x27;.

A few common signs are shown:
* &quot;tempus imperfectum diminutum&quot;, 1:2 proportion (twice as fast);
* &quot;tempus perfectum diminutum&quot;, 1:2 proportion (twice as fast);
* or &quot;proportio tripla&quot;, 1:3 proportion (three times as fast, similar to triplets).

In particular, when the sign was encountered, the tactus (beat) changed from the usual whole note (semibreve) to the double whole note (breve), a circumstance called &quot;alla breve&quot;. This term has been sustained to the present day, and though now it means the beat is a half note (minim), in contradiction to the literal meaning of the phrase, it still indicates that the &quot;tactus&quot; has changed from a short to a doubled value.

Certain composers delighted in creating mensuration canons, &quot;puzzle&quot; compositions that were intentionally difficult to decipher.

== Irregular bar ==

Irregular bars are a change in time signature normally for only one bar. Such a bar is most often a bar of ,  or  in a composition, or a bar of in a composition, or a bar of in a composition.

If a song is entirely in a change to will make the song feel like it has skipped a beat, the opposite is true for where it feels like the song adds a beat. If a song changes to is will make it feel like that bar is half as long as all the others

Some popular examples include &quot;Golden Brown&quot; by The Stranglers ( in a composition), &quot;I Love Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll&quot; originally by The Arrows ( in a composition), &quot;Hey Ya!&quot; by Outkast ( in a composition), and &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot; by Kate Bush (different kinds of irregular bars in a composition).

==See also==
*Schaffel, a kind of swing in rock and techno music
*Tala, meter in Indian music
*Colotomy, a coinage by Jap Kunst to describe the metric structure of gamelan music.

==References==
===Sources===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="2" end="16" title="Time signature" label="time signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="32" end="47" title="Time signature" label="meter signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="49" end="64" title="Time signature" label="metre signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="70" end="87" title="Time signature" label="measure signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="109" end="123" title="musical notation" label="music notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q312457" start="148" end="158" title="note value" label="note value"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="212" end="215" title="bar (music)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="251" end="256" title="Metre (music)" label="meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q845391" start="505" end="518" title="key signature" label="key signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="557" end="561" title="clef" label="clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="631" end="638" title="barline" label="barline"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="662" end="667" title="meter (music)" label="meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="702" end="708" title="Time signature" label="simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="767" end="775" title="Time signature" label="compound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="844" end="851" title="#Complex time signatures" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="853" end="858" title="#Mixed meters" label="mixed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="860" end="868" title="#Additive meters" label="additive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="874" end="891" title="#Irrational meters" label="irrational meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136880" start="1113" end="1123" title="Power of two" label="power of 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1154" end="1164" title="Time signature#Irrational meters" label="irrational"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="1469" end="1472" title="bar (music)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q339616" start="1498" end="1511" title="quarter-note" label="quarter-notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q339575" start="1550" end="1561" title="eighth-note" label="eighth-note"/>
<link wikidata="Q249261" start="1895" end="1905" title="alla breve" label="alla breve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2010" end="2034" title="Time signature#Mensural time signatures" label="mensural time signatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="2271" end="2285" title="Compound meter (music)" label="compound meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109325" start="2994" end="3005" title="dotted note" label="dotted note"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="5007" end="5011" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843523" start="5298" end="5310" title="triple meter" label="triple meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851221" start="6421" end="6433" title="tempo giusto" label="tempo giusto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="6857" end="6864" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022362" start="7464" end="7477" title="Delphic Hymns" label="Delphic Hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q946701" start="7709" end="7716" title="Orlando (opera)" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="7748" end="7763" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746036" start="7771" end="7789" title="Piano Sonata No. 1 (Chopin)" label="Piano Sonata No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q311387" start="7877" end="7889" title="Anton Reicha" label="Anton Reicha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635717" start="7925" end="7942" title="36 Fugues (Reicha)" label="Thirty-six Fugues"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="8003" end="8008" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q246589" start="8052" end="8083" title="Symphony No. 6 (Tchaikovsky)" label="&amp;quot;Pathétique&amp;quot; Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338153" start="8857" end="8885" title="20th-century classical music" label="20th-century classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q200867" start="8897" end="8909" title="Gustav Holst" label="Gustav Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q303508" start="9001" end="9012" title="The Planets" label="The Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="9032" end="9046" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420025" start="9095" end="9108" title="Ludus Tonalis" label="Ludus Tonalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="9134" end="9151" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Stravinsky&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q844790" start="9158" end="9170" title="The Firebird" label="The Firebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q203514" start="9197" end="9215" title="Heitor Villa-Lobos" label="Heitor Villa-Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9229" end="9256" title="Bachianas Brasileiras#Bachianas Brasileiras No. 9" label="Bachianas Brasileiras No. 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q247293" start="9321" end="9334" title="Lalo Schifrin" label="Lalo Schifrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248509" start="9355" end="9363" title="Room 222" label="Room 222"/>
<link wikidata="Q235077" start="9373" end="9388" title="Jerry Goldsmith" label="Jerry Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="9479" end="9495" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="9569" end="9580" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213718" start="9593" end="9618" title="Strawberry Fields Forever" label="Strawberry Fields Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q16664169" start="9640" end="9655" title="quintuple meter" label="quintuple meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q541835" start="9671" end="9694" title="Within You, Without You" label="Within You, Without You"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="9732" end="9741" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751357" start="9755" end="9771" title="Paranoid Android" label="Paranoid Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q332471" start="9791" end="9803" title="Paul Desmond" label="Paul Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="9811" end="9815" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q844299" start="9834" end="9843" title="Take Five" label="Take Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q108597" start="9917" end="9941" title="The Dave Brubeck Quartet" label="The Dave Brubeck Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290193" start="10018" end="10032" title="Unsquare Dance" label="Unsquare Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742757" start="10052" end="10072" title="Blue Rondo à la Turk" label="Blue Rondo à la Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829148" start="10288" end="10293" title="aksak" label="aksak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556333" start="10327" end="10336" title="karşılama" label="karşılama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211884" start="10433" end="10453" title="music of the Balkans" label="music of the Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015619" start="10484" end="10500" title="Bulgarian dances" label="Bulgarian dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316480" start="10637" end="10652" title="additive rhythm" label="additive rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="10751" end="10757" title="meter (music)" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="10800" end="10815" title="compound meter (music)" label="compound meters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10821" end="10836" title="#Additive meters" label="Additive meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="11418" end="11435" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q724981" start="11449" end="11474" title="Pictures at an Exhibition" label="Pictures at an Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="12645" end="12660" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q206015" start="12674" end="12692" title="The Rite of Spring" label="The Rite of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q151593" start="13703" end="13719" title="Olivier Messiaen" label="Olivier Messiaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q911776" start="13734" end="13757" title="La Nativité du Seigneur" label="La Nativité du Seigneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683795" start="13774" end="13802" title="Quatuor pour la fin du temps" label="Quatuor pour la fin du temps"/>
<link wikidata="Q309648" start="13848" end="13860" title="Charles Ives" label="Charles Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992072" start="13874" end="13888" title="Concord Sonata" label="Concord Sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500333" start="14073" end="14082" title="free time (music)" label="free time"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="14345" end="14355" title="Erik Satie" label="Erik Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316480" start="14823" end="14838" title="additive rhythm" label="additive rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="14917" end="14922" title="Beat (music)" label="beats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="15082" end="15085" title="Bar (music)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="15581" end="15592" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q151593" start="15597" end="15613" title="Olivier Messiaen" label="Olivier Messiaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="15683" end="15696" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539334" start="15704" end="15725" title="Piano Trio (Ravel)" label="Piano Trio in A Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328599" start="15801" end="15807" title="Basque music" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="15833" end="15845" title="musicologist" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q677098" start="15846" end="15865" title="Constantin Brăiloiu" label="Constantin Brăiloiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q852210" start="15947" end="15964" title="Traditional music of Romania" label="traditional music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003981" start="16166" end="16176" title="Bulgarian Folk Music" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015619" start="16352" end="16367" title="Bulgarian dances" label="Bulgarian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829148" start="16768" end="16773" title="aksak" label="aksak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015619" start="17582" end="17592" title="Bulgarian dances" label="Eleno Mome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766836" start="17933" end="17944" title="Polska (dance)" label="Boda Polska"/>
<link wikidata="Q878948" start="18092" end="18106" title="Viennese waltz" label="Viennese waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="18432" end="18443" title="syncopation" label="syncopation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074080" start="18523" end="18530" title="Music of Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396003" start="19380" end="19390" title="Erv Wilson" label="Erv Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435841" start="19434" end="19445" title="Kraig Grady" label="Kraig Grady"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="19619" end="19630" title="denominator" label="denominator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136880" start="19645" end="19657" title="power of two" label="power of two"/>
<link wikidata="Q462291" start="20154" end="20171" title="Brian Ferneyhough" label="Brian Ferneyhough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824327" start="20173" end="20190" title="metric modulation" label="metric modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q84114" start="20954" end="20964" title="John Adams (composer)" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146706" start="20983" end="20997" title="Nixon in China" label="Nixon in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092296" start="21187" end="21193" title="tuplet" label="tuplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q434610" start="21273" end="21285" title="Henry Cowell" label="Henry Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q112871326" start="21311" end="21317" title="Fabric (Cowell)" label="Fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="21392" end="21404" title="contrapuntal" label="contrapuntal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122143" start="21437" end="21445" title="notehead" label="notehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q462291" start="21541" end="21558" title="Brian Ferneyhough" label="Brian Ferneyhough"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="21722" end="21727" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q439572" start="21735" end="21746" title="Thomas Adès" label="Thomas Adès"/>
<link wikidata="Q24882784" start="21799" end="21814" title="Traced Overhead" label="Traced Overhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780102" start="22031" end="22043" title="John Pickard (composer)" label="John Pickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257952" start="22109" end="22159" title="National Brass Band Championships of Great Britain" label="National Brass Band Championships of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q339603" start="22484" end="22494" title="whole note" label="whole note"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="22791" end="22800" title="polymeter" label="polymeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q357326" start="22947" end="22960" title="Carlos Chávez" label="Carlos Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q318354" start="23045" end="23066" title="Percy Grainger" label="Percy Grainger&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551267" start="23067" end="23084" title="Lincolnshire Posy" label="Lincolnshire Posy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44086" start="23101" end="23110" title="Carl Orff" label="Carl Orff"/>
<link wikidata="Q356804" start="23507" end="23519" title="George Crumb" label="George Crumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q323596" start="23524" end="23541" title="Joseph Schwantner" label="Joseph Schwantner"/>
<link wikidata="Q286062" start="23603" end="23624" title="Émile Jaques-Dalcroze" label="Émile Jaques-Dalcroze"/>
<link wikidata="Q294568" start="24001" end="24015" title="Henryk Górecki" label="Henryk Górecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920919" start="24392" end="24409" title="mensural notation" label="mensural notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="24460" end="24463" title="bar (music)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16038819" start="24549" end="24557" title="duration (music)" label="duration"/>
<link wikidata="Q312457" start="24576" end="24586" title="note value" label="note value"/>
<link wikidata="Q249740" start="24689" end="24694" title="Breve (music)" label="breve"/>
<link wikidata="Q339603" start="24715" end="24724" title="semibreve" label="semibreve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24772" end="24778" title="meter (music)#Triple meter" label="triple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24818" end="24823" title="meter (music)#Duple meter" label="duple"/>
<link wikidata="Q393811" start="24917" end="24922" title="minim (music)" label="minim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24976" end="24984" title="meter (music)#Compound meter" label="compound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25021" end="25033" title="meter (music)#Simple meter" label="simple meter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25306" end="25333" title="Mensural notation#imperfection and alteration" label="imperfection and alteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109325" start="25444" end="25463" title="Dotted note" label="dot of augmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="25532" end="25545" title="musical meter" label="musical meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092296" start="25722" end="25728" title="tuplet" label="tuplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824327" start="25733" end="25750" title="metric modulation" label="metric modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078733" start="25835" end="25847" title="Charles Hamm" label="Charles Hamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q207717" start="25971" end="25986" title="Guillaume Dufay" label="Guillaume Dufay"/>
<link wikidata="Q438141" start="26041" end="26054" title="Thomas Morley" label="Thomas Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q664056" start="26476" end="26484" title="Courante" label="Curranta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550652" start="27209" end="27215" title="Pulse (music)" label="tactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q249261" start="27331" end="27341" title="alla breve" label="alla breve"/>
<link wikidata="Q393811" start="27436" end="27445" title="minim (music)" label="half note"/>
<link wikidata="Q53831" start="27669" end="27675" title="Puzzle canon" label="puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843523" start="27871" end="27871" title="Triple metre" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q16664169" start="27873" end="27873" title="Quintuple meter" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q5315936" start="27877" end="27877" title="Duple meter" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1534853" start="28240" end="28252" title="Golden Brown" label="Golden Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532854" start="28262" end="28276" title="The Stranglers" label="The Stranglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q719454" start="28304" end="28334" title="I Love Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll" label="I Love Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q702998" start="28355" end="28365" title="Arrows (British band)" label="The Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q281085" start="28393" end="28400" title="Hey Ya!" label="Hey Ya!"/>
<link wikidata="Q472595" start="28410" end="28417" title="Outkast" label="Outkast"/>
<link wikidata="Q55777670" start="28449" end="28466" title="Wuthering Heights (song)" label="Wuthering Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q636" start="28476" end="28485" title="Kate Bush" label="Kate Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738175" start="28555" end="28563" title="Schaffel" label="Schaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896571" start="28607" end="28611" title="Tala (music)" label="Tala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149174" start="28636" end="28644" title="Colotomy" label="Colotomy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30283" wikidata="Q379949" url="?curid=30283" title="Tristan Bernard">
<text>Tristan Bernard (7 September 1866 – 7 December 1947) was a French playwright, novelist, journalist and lawyer.

==Life==

He studied law, and after his military service, he started his career as the manager of an aluminium smelter. In the 1890s, he managed the &quot;Vélodrome de la Seine&quot; at Levallois-Perret and the Vélodrome Buffalo, events that were an integral part of Parisian life, being regularly attended by personalities such as Toulouse-Lautrec. He reputedly introduced the bell to signify the last lap of a race.

He identified as an anarchist.

Famous for his wit, Bernard was also a crossword creator.

==Works==

===Plays===
*&quot;Les Pieds nickelés&quot; (1895)
*&quot;&quot; (&quot;French Without a Master&quot;) (1899)
*&quot;Triplepatte&quot; (with André Godfernaux, 1905)
*&quot;The Brighton Twins&quot; (&quot;Les Jumeaux de Brighton&quot;) (1908)
*&quot;Le Danseur inconnu&quot; (1909)
*&quot;Le Costaud des épinettes&quot; (with Alfred Athis, 1910)
*&quot;The Little Cafe&quot; (&quot;Le petit café&quot;) (1911)
*&quot;Les Deux Canards&quot; (with Alfred Athis, 1913)
*&quot;Jeanne Doré&quot; (1913)
*&quot;Coeur de lilas&quot; (with , 1921)
*&quot;Le Cordon bleu&quot; (1923)
*&quot;Embrassez-moi&quot; (with Gustave Quinson and Yves Mirande, 1923)

===Narrative works===
*&quot;Vous m&#x27;en direz tant&quot; (1894) collaboration with Pierre Veber
*&quot;Contes de Pantruche et d&#x27;ailleurs&quot; (1897)
*&quot;Sous toutes réserves&quot; (1898)
*&quot;Mémoires d&#x27;un jeune homme rangé&quot; (1899)
*&quot;Un mari pacifique&quot; (1901)
*&quot;Amants et voleurs&quot; (1905)
*&quot;Mathilde et ses mitaines&quot; (1912)
*&quot;L&#x27;Affaire Larcier&quot; (1924)
*&quot;Le Voyage imprévu&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Aux abois&quot; (1933)
*&quot;Robin des bois&quot; (1935)

==Filmography==
*&quot;Jeanne Doré&quot;, directed by Louis Mercanton and René Hervil (1915, based on the play &quot;Jeanne Doré&quot;)
*&quot;The Love Cheat&quot;, directed by George Archainbaud (1919, based on the play &quot;Le Danseur inconnu&quot;)
*&quot;The Little Cafe&quot;, directed by Raymond Bernard (1919, based on the play &quot;The Little Cafe&quot;)
*&quot;Triplepatte&quot;, directed by Raymond Bernard (1922, based on the play &quot;Triplepatte&quot;)
*&quot;Le Costaud des épinettes&quot;, directed by Raymond Bernard (1923, based on the play &quot;Le Costaud des épinettes&quot;)
*&quot;Kiss Me&quot;, directed by Robert Péguy (1929, based on the play &quot;Embrassez-moi&quot;)
*&quot;The Unknown Dancer&quot;, directed by René Barberis (1929, based on the play &quot;Le Danseur inconnu&quot;)
*&quot;Playboy of Paris&quot;, directed by Ludwig Berger (1930, based on the play &quot;The Little Cafe&quot;)
**&quot;The Little Cafe&quot;, directed by Ludwig Berger (1931, based on the play &quot;The Little Cafe&quot;)
*&quot;Le Poignard malais&quot;, directed by Roger Goupillières (1931, based on a short story)
* &quot;English As It Is Spoken&quot;, directed by Robert Boudrioz (1931, based on the play &quot;&quot;)
*&quot;The Champion Cook&quot;, directed by Karl Anton (1932, based on the play &quot;Le Cordon bleu&quot;)
*&quot;&quot;, directed by Anatole Litvak (1932, based on the play &quot;Coeur de lilas&quot;)
*&quot;Kiss Me&quot;, directed by Léon Mathot (1932, based on the play &quot;Embrassez-moi&quot;)
*&quot;Les Deux Canards&quot;, directed by Erich Schmidt (1934, based on the play &quot;Les Deux Canards&quot;)
* &quot;The Slipper Episode&quot;, directed by Jean de Limur (1935, based on the novel &quot;Le Voyage imprévu&quot;)
**&quot;Runaway Ladies&quot;, directed by Jean de Limur (1938, based on the novel &quot;Le Voyage imprévu&quot;)
*&quot;&quot;, directed by Raymond Bernard (1935, based on the play &quot;Le Costaud des épinettes&quot;)
*&quot;The Brighton Twins&quot;, directed by Claude Heymann (1936, based on the play &quot;The Brighton Twins&quot;)
*&quot;&quot;, directed by Mario Bonnard (Italy, 1938, based on the play &quot;Jeanne Doré&quot;)
*&quot;The Last Metro&quot;, directed by Maurice de Canonge (1945, based on the novel &quot;Mathilde et ses mitaines&quot;)
*&quot;&quot;, directed by (2005, based on the novel &quot;Aux abois&quot;)

===Screenwriter===
*&quot;&quot; (dir. Jacques Feyder and Raymond Bernard, 1917)
*&quot;L&#x27;Homme inusable&quot; (dir. Raymond Bernard, 1923)
*&quot;Décadence et grandeur&quot; (dir. Raymond Bernard, 1923)
*&quot;The Fortune&quot; (dir. , 1931)
*&quot;&quot; (dir. André Berthomieu, 1938)
*&quot;Girls in Distress&quot; (dir. G. W. Pabst, 1939)

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q379949" start="0" end="15" title="Tristan Bernard" label="Tristan Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="261" end="294" title="Adolphe Clément#Later life" label="&amp;quot;Vélodrome de la Seine&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q166640" start="298" end="314" title="Levallois-Perret" label="Levallois-Perret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001911" start="323" end="340" title="Vélodrome Buffalo" label="Vélodrome Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82445" start="444" end="460" title="Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec" label="Toulouse-Lautrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q83207" start="602" end="611" title="crossword" label="crossword"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209423" start="805" end="823" title="The Brighton Twins (play)" label="The Brighton Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066334" start="985" end="1000" title="The Little Cafe (play)" label="The Little Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121302" start="1240" end="1255" title="Gustave Quinson" label="Gustave Quinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573865" start="1260" end="1272" title="Yves Mirande" label="Yves Mirande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023824" start="1860" end="1875" title="Louis Mercanton" label="Louis Mercanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426361" start="1880" end="1891" title="René Hervil" label="René Hervil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988112" start="1949" end="1963" title="The Love Cheat" label="The Love Cheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268373" start="1983" end="2001" title="George Archainbaud" label="George Archainbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949786" start="2066" end="2081" title="The Little Cafe (1919 film)" label="The Little Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412890" start="2101" end="2116" title="Raymond Bernard (filmmaker)" label="Raymond Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066334" start="2148" end="2163" title="The Little Cafe (play)" label="The Little Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412890" start="2209" end="2224" title="Raymond Bernard (filmmaker)" label="Raymond Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412890" start="2326" end="2341" title="Raymond Bernard (filmmaker)" label="Raymond Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209392" start="2412" end="2419" title="Kiss Me (1929 film)" label="Kiss Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436128" start="2439" end="2451" title="Robert Péguy" label="Robert Péguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896887" start="2511" end="2529" title="The Unknown Dancer" label="The Unknown Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425791" start="2549" end="2562" title="René Barberis" label="René Barberis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254204" start="2627" end="2643" title="Playboy of Paris" label="Playboy of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q40645" start="2663" end="2676" title="Ludwig Berger (director)" label="Ludwig Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066334" start="2708" end="2723" title="The Little Cafe (play)" label="The Little Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252581" start="2739" end="2754" title="The Little Cafe (1931 film)" label="The Little Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40645" start="2774" end="2787" title="Ludwig Berger (director)" label="Ludwig Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066334" start="2819" end="2834" title="The Little Cafe (play)" label="The Little Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439044" start="2887" end="2905" title="Roger Goupillières" label="Roger Goupillières"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074404" start="2945" end="2968" title="English As It Is Spoken" label="English As It Is Spoken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434625" start="2988" end="3003" title="Robert Boudrioz" label="Robert Boudrioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896112" start="3050" end="3067" title="The Champion Cook" label="The Champion Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q331352" start="3087" end="3097" title="Karl Anton" label="Karl Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q213581" start="3178" end="3192" title="Anatole Litvak" label="Anatole Litvak"/>
<link wikidata="Q23999784" start="3253" end="3260" title="Kiss Me (1932 film)" label="Kiss Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q958636" start="3280" end="3291" title="Léon Mathot" label="Léon Mathot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16107941" start="3464" end="3483" title="The Slipper Episode" label="The Slipper Episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055340" start="3503" end="3516" title="Jean de Limur" label="Jean de Limur"/>
<link wikidata="Q125149905" start="3582" end="3596" title="Runaway Ladies" label="Runaway Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055340" start="3616" end="3629" title="Jean de Limur" label="Jean de Limur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412890" start="3714" end="3729" title="Raymond Bernard (filmmaker)" label="Raymond Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233464" start="3800" end="3818" title="The Brighton Twins" label="The Brighton Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977544" start="3838" end="3852" title="Claude Heymann" label="Claude Heymann"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209423" start="3884" end="3902" title="The Brighton Twins (play)" label="The Brighton Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q925178" start="3937" end="3950" title="Mario Bonnard" label="Mario Bonnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18169882" start="4015" end="4029" title="The Last Metro (1945 film)" label="The Last Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301542" start="4049" end="4067" title="Maurice de Canonge" label="Maurice de Canonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q122187" start="4248" end="4262" title="Jacques Feyder" label="Jacques Feyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412890" start="4267" end="4282" title="Raymond Bernard (filmmaker)" label="Raymond Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412890" start="4331" end="4346" title="Raymond Bernard (filmmaker)" label="Raymond Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412890" start="4395" end="4410" title="Raymond Bernard (filmmaker)" label="Raymond Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209570" start="4425" end="4436" title="The Fortune (1931 film)" label="The Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847287" start="4477" end="4493" title="André Berthomieu" label="André Berthomieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178089" start="4508" end="4525" title="Girls in Distress" label="Girls in Distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q55421" start="4538" end="4549" title="G. W. Pabst" label="G. W. Pabst"/>
</links>
</doc>
