<doc id="7172" wikidata="Q974135" url="?curid=7172" title="Chemotherapy">
<text>Chemotherapy (often abbreviated chemo, sometimes CTX and CTx) is the type of cancer treatment that uses one or more anti-cancer drugs (chemotherapeutic agents or alkylating agents) in a standard regimen. Chemotherapy may be given with a curative intent (which almost always involves combinations of drugs), or it may aim only to prolong life or to reduce symptoms (palliative chemotherapy). Chemotherapy is one of the major categories of the medical discipline specifically devoted to pharmacotherapy for cancer, which is called &quot;medical oncology&quot;.

The term &quot;chemotherapy&quot; now means the non-specific use of intracellular poisons to inhibit mitosis (cell division) or to induce DNA damage (so that DNA repair can augment chemotherapy). This meaning excludes the more-selective agents that block extracellular signals (signal transduction). Therapies with specific molecular or genetic targets, which inhibit growth-promoting signals from classic endocrine hormones (primarily estrogens for breast cancer and androgens for prostate cancer), are now called &quot;hormonal therapies&quot;. Other inhibitions of growth-signals, such as those associated with receptor tyrosine kinases, are &quot;targeted therapy&quot;.

The use of drugs (whether chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, or targeted therapy) is &quot;systemic therapy&quot; for cancer: they are introduced into the blood stream (the system) and therefore can treat cancer anywhere in the body. Systemic therapy is often used with other, &quot;local therapy&quot; (treatments that work only where they are applied), such as radiation, surgery, and hyperthermia.

Traditional chemotherapeutic agents are cytotoxic by means of interfering with cell division (mitosis) but cancer cells vary widely in their susceptibility to these agents. To a large extent, chemotherapy can be thought of as a way to damage or stress cells, which may then lead to cell death if apoptosis is initiated. Many of the side effects of chemotherapy can be traced to damage to normal cells that divide rapidly and are thus sensitive to anti-mitotic drugs: cells in the bone marrow, digestive tract and hair follicles. This results in the most common side-effects of chemotherapy: myelosuppression (decreased production of blood cells, hence that also immunosuppression), mucositis (inflammation of the lining of the digestive tract), and alopecia (hair loss). Because of the effect on immune cells (especially lymphocytes), chemotherapy drugs often find use in a host of diseases that result from harmful overactivity of the immune system against self (so-called autoimmunity). These include rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis, vasculitis and many others.

== Treatment strategies ==
There are a number of strategies in the administration of chemotherapeutic drugs used today. Chemotherapy may be given with a curative intent or it may aim to prolong life or to palliate symptoms.
* Induction chemotherapy is the first line treatment of cancer with a chemotherapeutic drug. This type of chemotherapy is used for curative intent.
* Combined modality chemotherapy is the use of drugs with other cancer treatments, such as surgery, radiation therapy, or hyperthermia therapy.
* Consolidation chemotherapy is given after remission in order to prolong the overall disease-free time and improve overall survival. The drug that is administered is the same as the drug that achieved remission.
* Intensification chemotherapy is identical to consolidation chemotherapy but a different drug than the induction chemotherapy is used.
* Combination chemotherapy involves treating a person with a number of different drugs simultaneously. The drugs differ in their mechanism and side-effects. The biggest advantage is minimising the chances of resistance developing to any one agent. Also, the drugs can often be used at lower doses, reducing toxicity.
* Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is given prior to a local treatment such as surgery, and is designed to shrink the primary tumor. It is also given for cancers with a high risk of micrometastatic disease.
* Adjuvant chemotherapy is given after a local treatment (radiotherapy or surgery). It can be used when there is little evidence of cancer present, but there is risk of recurrence. It is also useful in killing any cancerous cells that have spread to other parts of the body. These micrometastases can be treated with adjuvant chemotherapy and can reduce relapse rates caused by these disseminated cells.
* Maintenance chemotherapy is a repeated low-dose treatment to prolong remission.
* Salvage chemotherapy or palliative chemotherapy is given without curative intent, but simply to decrease tumor load and increase life expectancy. For these regimens, in general, a better toxicity profile is expected.

All chemotherapy regimens require that the recipient be capable of undergoing the treatment. Performance status is often used as a measure to determine whether a person can receive chemotherapy, or whether dose reduction is required. Because only a fraction of the cells in a tumor die with each treatment (fractional kill), repeated doses must be administered to continue to reduce the size of the tumor. Current chemotherapy regimens apply drug treatment in cycles, with the frequency and duration of treatments limited by toxicity.

=== Effectiveness ===
The effectiveness of chemotherapy depends on the type of cancer and the stage. The overall effectiveness ranges from being curative for some cancers, such as some leukemias, to being ineffective, such as in some brain tumors, to being needless in others, like most non-melanoma skin cancers.

=== Dosage ===

Dosage of chemotherapy can be difficult: If the dose is too low, it will be ineffective against the tumor, whereas, at excessive doses, the toxicity (side-effects) will be intolerable to the person receiving it. The standard method of determining chemotherapy dosage is based on calculated body surface area (BSA). The BSA is usually calculated with a mathematical formula or a nomogram, using the recipient&#x27;s weight and height, rather than by direct measurement of body area. This formula was originally derived in a 1916 study and attempted to translate medicinal doses established with laboratory animals to equivalent doses for humans. The study only included nine human subjects. When chemotherapy was introduced in the 1950s, the BSA formula was adopted as the official standard for chemotherapy dosing for lack of a better option.

The validity of this method in calculating uniform doses has been questioned because the formula only takes into account the individual&#x27;s weight and height. Drug absorption and clearance are influenced by multiple factors, including age, sex, metabolism, disease state, organ function, drug-to-drug interactions, genetics, and obesity, which have major impacts on the actual concentration of the drug in the person&#x27;s bloodstream. As a result, there is high variability in the systemic chemotherapy drug concentration in people dosed by BSA, and this variability has been demonstrated to be more than ten-fold for many drugs. In other words, if two people receive the same dose of a given drug based on BSA, the concentration of that drug in the bloodstream of one person may be 10 times higher or lower compared to that of the other person. This variability is typical with many chemotherapy drugs dosed by BSA, and, as shown below, was demonstrated in a study of 14 common chemotherapy drugs.
The result of this pharmacokinetic variability among people is that many people do not receive the right dose to achieve optimal treatment effectiveness with minimized toxic side effects. Some people are overdosed while others are underdosed. For example, in a randomized clinical trial, investigators found 85% of metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) did not receive the optimal therapeutic dose when dosed by the BSA standard—68% were underdosed and 17% were overdosed.

There has been controversy over the use of BSA to calculate chemotherapy doses for people who are obese. Because of their higher BSA, clinicians often arbitrarily reduce the dose prescribed by the BSA formula for fear of overdosing. In many cases, this can result in sub-optimal treatment.

Several clinical studies have demonstrated that when chemotherapy dosing is individualized to achieve optimal systemic drug exposure, treatment outcomes are improved and toxic side effects are reduced. In the 5-FU clinical study cited above, people whose dose was adjusted to achieve a pre-determined target exposure realized an 84% improvement in treatment response rate and a six-month improvement in overall survival (OS) compared with those dosed by BSA.

In the same study, investigators compared the incidence of common 5-FU-associated grade 3/4 toxicities between the dose-adjusted people and people dosed per BSA. The incidence of debilitating grades of diarrhea was reduced from 18% in the BSA-dosed group to 4% in the dose-adjusted group and serious hematologic side effects were eliminated. Because of the reduced toxicity, dose-adjusted patients were able to be treated for longer periods of time. BSA-dosed people were treated for a total of 680 months while people in the dose-adjusted group were treated for a total of 791 months. Completing the course of treatment is an important factor in achieving better treatment outcomes.

Similar results were found in a study involving people with colorectal cancer who have been treated with the popular FOLFOX regimen. The incidence of serious diarrhea was reduced from 12% in the BSA-dosed group of patients to 1.7% in the dose-adjusted group, and the incidence of severe mucositis was reduced from 15% to 0.8%.

The FOLFOX study also demonstrated an improvement in treatment outcomes. Positive response increased from 46% in the BSA-dosed group to 70% in the dose-adjusted group. Median progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) both improved by six months in the dose adjusted group.

One approach that can help clinicians individualize chemotherapy dosing is to measure the drug levels in blood plasma over time and adjust dose according to a formula or algorithm to achieve optimal exposure. With an established target exposure for optimized treatment effectiveness with minimized toxicities, dosing can be personalized to achieve target exposure and optimal results for each person. Such an algorithm was used in the clinical trials cited above and resulted in significantly improved treatment outcomes.

Oncologists are already individualizing dosing of some cancer drugs based on exposure. Carboplatin and busulfan dosing rely upon results from blood tests to calculate the optimal dose for each person. Simple blood tests are also available for dose optimization of methotrexate, 5-FU, paclitaxel, and docetaxel.

The serum albumin level immediately prior to chemotherapy administration is an independent prognostic predictor of survival in various cancer types.

=== Types ===
==== Alkylating agents ====

Alkylating agents are the oldest group of chemotherapeutics in use today. Originally derived from mustard gas used in World War I, there are now many types of alkylating agents in use. They are so named because of their ability to alkylate many molecules, including proteins, RNA and DNA. This ability to bind covalently to DNA via their alkyl group is the primary cause for their anti-cancer effects. DNA is made of two strands and the molecules may either bind twice to one strand of DNA (intrastrand crosslink) or may bind once to both strands (interstrand crosslink). If the cell tries to replicate crosslinked DNA during cell division, or tries to repair it, the DNA strands can break. This leads to a form of programmed cell death called apoptosis. Alkylating agents will work at any point in the cell cycle and thus are known as cell cycle-independent drugs. For this reason, the effect on the cell is dose dependent; the fraction of cells that die is directly proportional to the dose of drug.

The subtypes of alkylating agents are the nitrogen mustards, nitrosoureas, tetrazines, aziridines, cisplatins and derivatives, and non-classical alkylating agents. Nitrogen mustards include mechlorethamine, cyclophosphamide, melphalan, chlorambucil, ifosfamide and busulfan. Nitrosoureas include N-Nitroso-N-methylurea (MNU), carmustine (BCNU), lomustine (CCNU) and semustine (MeCCNU), fotemustine and streptozotocin. Tetrazines include dacarbazine, mitozolomide and temozolomide. Aziridines include thiotepa, mytomycin and diaziquone (AZQ). Cisplatin and derivatives include cisplatin, carboplatin and oxaliplatin. They impair cell function by forming covalent bonds with the amino, carboxyl, sulfhydryl, and phosphate groups in biologically important molecules. Non-classical alkylating agents include procarbazine and hexamethylmelamine.

==== Antimetabolites ====
Anti-metabolites are a group of molecules that impede DNA and RNA synthesis. Many of them have a similar structure to the building blocks of DNA and RNA. The building blocks are nucleotides; a molecule comprising a nucleobase, a sugar and a phosphate group. The nucleobases are divided into purines (guanine and adenine) and pyrimidines (cytosine, thymine and uracil). Anti-metabolites resemble either nucleobases or nucleosides (a nucleotide without the phosphate group), but have altered chemical groups. These drugs exert their effect by either blocking the enzymes required for DNA synthesis or becoming incorporated into DNA or RNA. By inhibiting the enzymes involved in DNA synthesis, they prevent mitosis because the DNA cannot duplicate itself. Also, after misincorporation of the molecules into DNA, DNA damage can occur and programmed cell death (apoptosis) is induced. Unlike alkylating agents, anti-metabolites are cell cycle dependent. This means that they only work during a specific part of the cell cycle, in this case S-phase (the DNA synthesis phase). For this reason, at a certain dose, the effect plateaus and proportionally no more cell death occurs with increased doses. Subtypes of the anti-metabolites are the anti-folates, fluoropyrimidines, deoxynucleoside analogues and thiopurines.

The anti-folates include methotrexate and pemetrexed. Methotrexate inhibits dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), an enzyme that regenerates tetrahydrofolate from dihydrofolate. When the enzyme is inhibited by methotrexate, the cellular levels of folate coenzymes diminish. These are required for thymidylate and purine production, which are both essential for DNA synthesis and cell division. Pemetrexed is another anti-metabolite that affects purine and pyrimidine production, and therefore also inhibits DNA synthesis. It primarily inhibits the enzyme thymidylate synthase, but also has effects on DHFR, aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase and glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase. The fluoropyrimidines include fluorouracil and capecitabine. Fluorouracil is a nucleobase analogue that is metabolised in cells to form at least two active products; 5-fluourouridine monophosphate (FUMP) and 5-fluoro-2&#x27;-deoxyuridine 5&#x27;-phosphate (fdUMP). FUMP becomes incorporated into RNA and fdUMP inhibits the enzyme thymidylate synthase; both of which lead to cell death. Capecitabine is a prodrug of 5-fluorouracil that is broken down in cells to produce the active drug. The deoxynucleoside analogues include cytarabine, gemcitabine, decitabine, azacitidine, fludarabine, nelarabine, cladribine, clofarabine, and pentostatin. The thiopurines include thioguanine and mercaptopurine.

==== Anti-microtubule agents ====

Anti-microtubule agents are plant-derived chemicals that block cell division by preventing microtubule function. Microtubules are an important cellular structure composed of two proteins, α-tubulin and β-tubulin. They are hollow, rod-shaped structures that are required for cell division, among other cellular functions. Microtubules are dynamic structures, which means that they are permanently in a state of assembly and disassembly. &quot;Vinca&quot; alkaloids and taxanes are the two main groups of anti-microtubule agents, and although both of these groups of drugs cause microtubule dysfunction, their mechanisms of action are completely opposite: &quot;Vinca&quot; alkaloids prevent the assembly of microtubules, whereas taxanes prevent their disassembly. By doing so, they can induce mitotic catastrophe in the cancer cells. Following this, cell cycle arrest occurs, which induces programmed cell death (apoptosis). These drugs can also affect blood vessel growth, an essential process that tumours utilise in order to grow and metastasise.

&quot;Vinca&quot; alkaloids are derived from the Madagascar periwinkle, &quot;Catharanthus roseus&quot;, formerly known as &quot;Vinca rosea&quot;. They bind to specific sites on tubulin, inhibiting the assembly of tubulin into microtubules. The original &quot;vinca&quot; alkaloids are natural products that include vincristine and vinblastine. Following the success of these drugs, semi-synthetic &quot;vinca&quot; alkaloids were produced: vinorelbine (used in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer), vindesine, and vinflunine. These drugs are cell cycle-specific. They bind to the tubulin molecules in S-phase and prevent proper microtubule formation required for M-phase.

Taxanes are natural and semi-synthetic drugs. The first drug of their class, paclitaxel, was originally extracted from &quot;Taxus brevifolia&quot;, the Pacific yew. Now this drug and another in this class, docetaxel, are produced semi-synthetically from a chemical found in the bark of another yew tree, &quot;Taxus baccata&quot;.

Podophyllotoxin is an antineoplastic lignan obtained primarily from the American mayapple (&quot;Podophyllum peltatum&quot;) and Himalayan mayapple (&quot;Sinopodophyllum hexandrum&quot;). It has anti-microtubule activity, and its mechanism is similar to that of &quot;vinca&quot; alkaloids in that they bind to tubulin, inhibiting microtubule formation. Podophyllotoxin is used to produce two other drugs with different mechanisms of action: etoposide and teniposide.

==== Topoisomerase inhibitors ====
Topoisomerase inhibitors are drugs that affect the activity of two enzymes: topoisomerase I and topoisomerase II. When the DNA double-strand helix is unwound, during DNA replication or transcription, for example, the adjacent unopened DNA winds tighter (supercoils), like opening the middle of a twisted rope. The stress caused by this effect is in part aided by the topoisomerase enzymes. They produce single- or double-strand breaks into DNA, reducing the tension in the DNA strand. This allows the normal unwinding of DNA to occur during replication or transcription. Inhibition of topoisomerase I or II interferes with both of these processes.

Two topoisomerase I inhibitors, irinotecan and topotecan, are semi-synthetically derived from camptothecin, which is obtained from the Chinese ornamental tree &quot;Camptotheca acuminata&quot;. Drugs that target topoisomerase II can be divided into two groups. The topoisomerase II poisons cause increased levels enzymes bound to DNA. This prevents DNA replication and transcription, causes DNA strand breaks, and leads to programmed cell death (apoptosis). These agents include etoposide, doxorubicin, mitoxantrone and teniposide. The second group, catalytic inhibitors, are drugs that block the activity of topoisomerase II, and therefore prevent DNA synthesis and translation because the DNA cannot unwind properly. This group includes novobiocin, merbarone, and aclarubicin, which also have other significant mechanisms of action.

==== Cytotoxic antibiotics ====
The cytotoxic antibiotics are a varied group of drugs that have various mechanisms of action. The common theme that they share in their chemotherapy indication is that they interrupt cell division. The most important subgroup is the anthracyclines and the bleomycins; other prominent examples include mitomycin C and actinomycin.

Among the anthracyclines, doxorubicin and daunorubicin were the first, and were obtained from the bacterium &quot;Streptomyces peucetius&quot;. Derivatives of these compounds include epirubicin and idarubicin. Other clinically used drugs in the anthracycline group are pirarubicin, aclarubicin, and mitoxantrone. The mechanisms of anthracyclines include DNA intercalation (molecules insert between the two strands of DNA), generation of highly reactive free radicals that damage intercellular molecules and topoisomerase inhibition.

Actinomycin is a complex molecule that intercalates DNA and prevents RNA synthesis.

Bleomycin, a glycopeptide isolated from &quot;Streptomyces verticillus&quot;, also intercalates DNA, but produces free radicals that damage DNA. This occurs when bleomycin binds to a metal ion, becomes chemically reduced and reacts with oxygen.

Mitomycin is a cytotoxic antibiotic with the ability to alkylate DNA.

=== Delivery ===

Most chemotherapy is delivered intravenously, although a number of agents can be administered orally (e.g., melphalan, busulfan, capecitabine). According to a recent (2016) systematic review, oral therapies present additional challenges for patients and care teams to maintain and support adherence to treatment plans.

There are many intravenous methods of drug delivery, known as vascular access devices. These include the winged infusion device, peripheral venous catheter, midline catheter, peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC), central venous catheter and implantable port. The devices have different applications regarding duration of chemotherapy treatment, method of delivery and types of chemotherapeutic agent.

Depending on the person, the cancer, the stage of cancer, the type of chemotherapy, and the dosage, intravenous chemotherapy may be given on either an inpatient or an outpatient basis. For continuous, frequent or prolonged intravenous chemotherapy administration, various systems may be surgically inserted into the vasculature to maintain access. Commonly used systems are the Hickman line, the Port-a-Cath, and the PICC line. These have a lower infection risk, are much less prone to phlebitis or extravasation, and eliminate the need for repeated insertion of peripheral cannulae.

Isolated limb perfusion (often used in melanoma), or isolated infusion of chemotherapy into the liver or the lung have been used to treat some tumors. The main purpose of these approaches is to deliver a very high dose of chemotherapy to tumor sites without causing overwhelming systemic damage. These approaches can help control solitary or limited metastases, but they are by definition not systemic, and, therefore, do not treat distributed metastases or micrometastases.

Topical chemotherapies, such as 5-fluorouracil, are used to treat some cases of non-melanoma skin cancer.

If the cancer has central nervous system involvement, or with meningeal disease, intrathecal chemotherapy may be administered.

== Adverse effects ==
Chemotherapeutic techniques have a range of side effects that depend on the type of medications used. The most common medications affect mainly the fast-dividing cells of the body, such as blood cells and the cells lining the mouth, stomach, and intestines. Chemotherapy-related iatrogenic toxicities can occur acutely after administration, within hours or days, or chronically, from weeks to years.

=== Immunosuppression and myelosuppression ===
Virtually all chemotherapeutic regimens can cause depression of the immune system, often by paralysing the bone marrow and leading to a decrease of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets.
Anemia and thrombocytopenia may require blood transfusion. Neutropenia (a decrease of the neutrophil granulocyte count below 0.5 x 109/litre) can be improved with synthetic G-CSF (granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor, e.g., filgrastim, lenograstim, efbemalenograstim alfa).

In very severe myelosuppression, which occurs in some regimens, almost all the bone marrow stem cells (cells that produce white and red blood cells) are destroyed, meaning &quot;allogenic&quot; or &quot;autologous&quot; bone marrow cell transplants are necessary. (In autologous BMTs, cells are removed from the person before the treatment, multiplied and then re-injected afterward; in &quot;allogenic&quot; BMTs, the source is a donor.) However, some people still develop diseases because of this interference with bone marrow.

Although people receiving chemotherapy are encouraged to wash their hands, avoid sick people, and take other infection-reducing steps, about 85% of infections are due to naturally occurring microorganisms in the person&#x27;s own gastrointestinal tract (including oral cavity) and skin. This may manifest as systemic infections, such as sepsis, or as localized outbreaks, such as Herpes simplex, shingles, or other members of the Herpesviridea. The risk of illness and death can be reduced by taking common antibiotics such as quinolones or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole before any fever or sign of infection appears. Quinolones show effective prophylaxis mainly with hematological cancer. However, in general, for every five people who are immunosuppressed following chemotherapy who take an antibiotic, one fever can be prevented; for every 34 who take an antibiotic, one death can be prevented. Sometimes, chemotherapy treatments are postponed because the immune system is suppressed to a critically low level.

In Japan, the government has approved the use of some medicinal mushrooms like &quot;Trametes versicolor&quot;, to counteract depression of the immune system in people undergoing chemotherapy.

Trilaciclib is an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 approved for the prevention of myelosuppression caused by chemotherapy. The drug is given before chemotherapy to protect bone marrow function.

=== Neutropenic enterocolitis ===
Due to immune system suppression, neutropenic enterocolitis (typhlitis) is a &quot;life-threatening gastrointestinal complication of chemotherapy.&quot; Typhlitis is an intestinal infection which may manifest itself through symptoms including nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, a distended abdomen, fever, chills, or abdominal pain and tenderness.

Typhlitis is a medical emergency. It has a very poor prognosis and is often fatal unless promptly recognized and aggressively treated. Successful treatment hinges on early diagnosis provided by a high index of suspicion and the use of CT scanning, nonoperative treatment for uncomplicated cases, and sometimes elective right hemicolectomy to prevent recurrence.

=== Gastrointestinal distress ===
Nausea, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and constipation are common side-effects of chemotherapeutic medications that kill fast-dividing cells. Malnutrition and dehydration can result when the recipient does not eat or drink enough, or when the person vomits frequently, because of gastrointestinal damage. This can result in rapid weight loss, or occasionally in weight gain, if the person eats too much in an effort to allay nausea or heartburn. Weight gain can also be caused by some steroid medications. These side-effects can frequently be reduced or eliminated with antiemetic drugs. Low-certainty evidence also suggests that probiotics may have a preventative and treatment effect of diarrhoea related to chemotherapy alone and with radiotherapy. However, a high index of suspicion is appropriate, since diarrhoea and bloating are also symptoms of typhlitis, a very serious and potentially life-threatening medical emergency that requires immediate treatment.

=== Anemia ===
Anemia can be a combined outcome caused by myelosuppressive chemotherapy, and possible cancer-related causes such as bleeding, blood cell destruction (hemolysis), hereditary disease, kidney dysfunction, nutritional deficiencies or anemia of chronic disease. Treatments to mitigate anemia include hormones to boost blood production (erythropoietin), iron supplements, and blood transfusions. Myelosuppressive therapy can cause a tendency to bleed easily, leading to anemia. Medications that kill rapidly dividing cells or blood cells can reduce the number of platelets in the blood, which can result in bruises and bleeding. Extremely low platelet counts may be temporarily boosted through platelet transfusions and new drugs to increase platelet counts during chemotherapy are being developed. Sometimes, chemotherapy treatments are postponed to allow platelet counts to recover.

Fatigue may be a consequence of the cancer or its treatment, and can last for months to years after treatment. One physiological cause of fatigue is anemia, which can be caused by chemotherapy, surgery, radiotherapy, primary and metastatic disease or nutritional depletion. Aerobic exercise has been found to be beneficial in reducing fatigue in people with solid tumours.

=== Nausea and vomiting ===

Nausea and vomiting are two of the most feared cancer treatment-related side-effects for people with cancer and their families. In 1983, Coates et al. found that people receiving chemotherapy ranked nausea and vomiting as the first and second most severe side-effects, respectively. Up to 20% of people receiving highly emetogenic agents in this era postponed, or even refused potentially curative treatments. Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) are common with many treatments and some forms of cancer. Since the 1990s, several novel classes of antiemetics have been developed and commercialized, becoming a nearly universal standard in chemotherapy regimens, and helping to successfully manage these symptoms in many people. Effective mediation of these unpleasant and sometimes debilitating symptoms results in increased quality of life for the recipient and more efficient treatment cycles, as patients are less likely to avoid or refuse treatment.

=== Hair loss ===
Hair loss (alopecia) can be caused by chemotherapy that kills rapidly dividing cells; other medications may cause hair to thin. These are most often temporary effects: hair usually starts to regrow a few weeks after the last treatment, but sometimes with a change in color, texture, thickness or style. Sometimes hair has a tendency to curl after regrowth, resulting in &quot;chemo curls.&quot; Severe hair loss occurs most often with drugs such as doxorubicin, daunorubicin, paclitaxel, docetaxel, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide and etoposide. Permanent thinning or hair loss can result from some standard chemotherapy regimens.

Chemotherapy induced hair loss occurs by a non-androgenic mechanism, and can manifest as alopecia totalis, telogen effluvium, or less often alopecia areata. It is usually associated with systemic treatment due to the high mitotic rate of hair follicles, and more reversible than androgenic hair loss, although permanent cases can occur. Chemotherapy induces hair loss in women more often than men.

Scalp cooling offers a means of preventing both permanent and temporary hair loss; however, concerns about this method have been raised.

=== Secondary neoplasm ===
Development of secondary neoplasia after successful chemotherapy or radiotherapy treatment can occur. The most common secondary neoplasm is secondary acute myeloid leukemia, which develops primarily after treatment with alkylating agents or topoisomerase inhibitors. Survivors of childhood cancer are more than 13 times as likely to get a secondary neoplasm during the 30 years after treatment than the general population. Not all of this increase can be attributed to chemotherapy.

=== Infertility ===
Some types of chemotherapy are gonadotoxic and may cause infertility. Chemotherapies with high risk include procarbazine and other alkylating drugs such as cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, busulfan, melphalan, chlorambucil, and chlormethine. Drugs with medium risk include doxorubicin and platinum analogs such as cisplatin and carboplatin. On the other hand, therapies with low risk of gonadotoxicity include plant derivatives such as vincristine and vinblastine, antibiotics such as bleomycin and dactinomycin, and antimetabolites such as methotrexate, mercaptopurine, and 5-fluorouracil.

Female infertility by chemotherapy appears to be secondary to premature ovarian failure by loss of primordial follicles. This loss is not necessarily a direct effect of the chemotherapeutic agents, but could be due to an increased rate of growth initiation to replace damaged developing follicles.

People may choose between several methods of fertility preservation prior to chemotherapy, including cryopreservation of semen, ovarian tissue, oocytes, or embryos. As more than half of cancer patients are elderly, this adverse effect is only relevant for a minority of patients. A study in France between 1999 and 2011 came to the result that embryo freezing before administration of gonadotoxic agents to females caused a delay of treatment in 34% of cases, and a live birth in 27% of surviving cases who wanted to become pregnant, with the follow-up time varying between 1 and 13 years.

Potential protective or attenuating agents include GnRH analogs, where several studies have shown a protective effect &quot;in vivo&quot; in humans, but some studies show no such effect. Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) has shown similar effect, but its mechanism of inhibiting the sphingomyelin apoptotic pathway may also interfere with the apoptosis action of chemotherapy drugs.

In chemotherapy as a conditioning regimen in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, a study of people conditioned with cyclophosphamide alone for severe aplastic anemia came to the result that ovarian recovery occurred in all women younger than 26 years at time of transplantation, but only in five of 16 women older than 26 years.

=== Teratogenicity ===
Chemotherapy is teratogenic during pregnancy, especially during the first trimester, to the extent that abortion usually is recommended if pregnancy in this period is found during chemotherapy. Second- and third-trimester exposure does not usually increase the teratogenic risk and adverse effects on cognitive development, but it may increase the risk of various complications of pregnancy and fetal myelosuppression.

Female patients of reproductive potential should use effective contraception during chemotherapy and for a few months after the last dose (e.g. 6 month for doxorubicin).

In males previously having undergone chemotherapy or radiotherapy, there appears to be no increase in genetic defects or congenital malformations in their children conceived after therapy. The use of assisted reproductive technologies and micromanipulation techniques might increase this risk. In females previously having undergone chemotherapy, miscarriage and congenital malformations are not increased in subsequent conceptions. However, when in vitro fertilization and embryo cryopreservation is practised between or shortly after treatment, possible genetic risks to the growing oocytes exist, and hence it has been recommended that the babies be screened.

=== Peripheral neuropathy ===

Between 30 and 40 percent of people undergoing chemotherapy experience chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN), a progressive, enduring, and often irreversible condition, causing pain, tingling, numbness and sensitivity to cold, beginning in the hands and feet and sometimes progressing to the arms and legs. Chemotherapy drugs associated with CIPN include thalidomide, epothilones, &quot;vinca&quot; alkaloids, taxanes, proteasome inhibitors, and the platinum-based drugs. Whether CIPN arises, and to what degree, is determined by the choice of drug, duration of use, the total amount consumed and whether the person already has peripheral neuropathy. Though the symptoms are mainly sensory, in some cases motor nerves and the autonomic nervous system are affected. CIPN often follows the first chemotherapy dose and increases in severity as treatment continues, but this progression usually levels off at completion of treatment. The platinum-based drugs are the exception; with these drugs, sensation may continue to deteriorate for several months after the end of treatment. Some CIPN appears to be irreversible. Pain can often be managed with drug or other treatment but the numbness is usually resistant to treatment.

=== Cognitive impairment ===
Some people receiving chemotherapy report fatigue or non-specific neurocognitive problems, such as an inability to concentrate; this is sometimes called post-chemotherapy cognitive impairment, referred to as &quot;chemo brain&quot; in popular and social media.

=== Tumor lysis syndrome ===
In particularly large tumors and cancers with high white cell counts, such as lymphomas, teratomas, and some leukemias, some people develop tumor lysis syndrome. The rapid breakdown of cancer cells causes the release of chemicals from the inside of the cells. Following this, high levels of uric acid, potassium and phosphate are found in the blood. High levels of phosphate induce secondary hypoparathyroidism, resulting in low levels of calcium in the blood. This causes kidney damage and the high levels of potassium can cause cardiac arrhythmia. Although prophylaxis is available and is often initiated in people with large tumors, this is a dangerous side-effect that can lead to death if left untreated.

=== Organ damage ===
Cardiotoxicity (heart damage) is especially prominent with the use of anthracycline drugs (doxorubicin, epirubicin, idarubicin, and liposomal doxorubicin). The cause of this is most likely due to the production of free radicals in the cell and subsequent DNA damage. Other chemotherapeutic agents that cause cardiotoxicity, but at a lower incidence, are cyclophosphamide, docetaxel and clofarabine.

Hepatotoxicity (liver damage) can be caused by many cytotoxic drugs. The susceptibility of an individual to liver damage can be altered by other factors such as the cancer itself, viral hepatitis, immunosuppression and nutritional deficiency. The liver damage can consist of damage to liver cells, hepatic sinusoidal syndrome (obstruction of the veins in the liver), cholestasis (where bile does not flow from the liver to the intestine) and liver fibrosis.

Nephrotoxicity (kidney damage) can be caused by tumor lysis syndrome and also due direct effects of drug clearance by the kidneys. Different drugs will affect different parts of the kidney and the toxicity may be asymptomatic (only seen on blood or urine tests) or may cause acute kidney injury.

Ototoxicity (damage to the inner ear) is a common side effect of platinum based drugs that can produce symptoms such as dizziness and vertigo. Children treated with platinum analogues have been found to be at risk for developing hearing loss. 

=== Other side-effects ===
Less common side-effects include red skin (erythema), dry skin, damaged fingernails, a dry mouth (xerostomia), water retention, and sexual impotence. Some medications can trigger allergic or pseudoallergic reactions.

Specific chemotherapeutic agents are associated with organ-specific toxicities, including cardiovascular disease (e.g., doxorubicin), interstitial lung disease (e.g., bleomycin) and occasionally secondary neoplasm (e.g., MOPP therapy for Hodgkin&#x27;s disease).

Hand-foot syndrome is another side effect to cytotoxic chemotherapy.

Nutritional problems are also frequently seen in cancer patients at diagnosis and through chemotherapy treatment. Research suggests that in children and young people undergoing cancer treatment, parenteral nutrition may help with this leading to weight gain and increased calorie and protein intake, when compared to enteral nutrition.

== Limitations ==
Chemotherapy does not always work, and even when it is useful, it may not completely destroy the cancer. People frequently fail to understand its limitations. In one study of people who had been newly diagnosed with incurable, stage 4 cancer, more than two-thirds of people with lung cancer and more than four-fifths of people with colorectal cancer still believed that chemotherapy was likely to cure their cancer.

The blood–brain barrier poses an obstacle to delivery of chemotherapy to the brain. This is because the brain has an extensive system in place to protect it from harmful chemicals. Drug transporters can pump out drugs from the brain and brain&#x27;s blood vessel cells into the cerebrospinal fluid and blood circulation. These transporters pump out most chemotherapy drugs, which reduces their efficacy for treatment of brain tumors. Only small lipophilic alkylating agents such as lomustine or temozolomide are able to cross this blood–brain barrier.

Blood vessels in tumors are very different from those seen in normal tissues. As a tumor grows, tumor cells furthest away from the blood vessels become low in oxygen (hypoxic). To counteract this they then signal for new blood vessels to grow. The newly formed tumor vasculature is poorly formed and does not deliver an adequate blood supply to all areas of the tumor. This leads to issues with drug delivery because many drugs will be delivered to the tumor by the circulatory system.

== Resistance ==
Resistance is a major cause of treatment failure in chemotherapeutic drugs. There are a few possible causes of resistance in cancer, one of which is the presence of small pumps on the surface of cancer cells that actively move chemotherapy from inside the cell to the outside. Cancer cells produce high amounts of these pumps, known as p-glycoprotein, in order to protect themselves from chemotherapeutics. Research on p-glycoprotein and other such chemotherapy efflux pumps is currently ongoing. Medications to inhibit the function of p-glycoprotein are undergoing investigation, but due to toxicities and interactions with anti-cancer drugs their development has been difficult. Another mechanism of resistance is gene amplification, a process in which multiple copies of a gene are produced by cancer cells. This overcomes the effect of drugs that reduce the expression of genes involved in replication. With more copies of the gene, the drug can not prevent all expression of the gene and therefore the cell can restore its proliferative ability. Cancer cells can also cause defects in the cellular pathways of apoptosis (programmed cell death). As most chemotherapy drugs kill cancer cells in this manner, defective apoptosis allows survival of these cells, making them resistant. Many chemotherapy drugs also cause DNA damage, which can be repaired by enzymes in the cell that carry out DNA repair. Upregulation of these genes can overcome the DNA damage and prevent the induction of apoptosis. Mutations in genes that produce drug target proteins, such as tubulin, can occur which prevent the drugs from binding to the protein, leading to resistance to these types of drugs. Drugs used in chemotherapy can induce cell stress, which can kill a cancer cell; however, under certain conditions, cells stress can induce changes in gene expression that enables resistance to several types of drugs. In lung cancer, the transcription factor NFκB is thought to play a role in resistance to chemotherapy, via inflammatory pathways.

== Cytotoxics and targeted therapies ==
Targeted therapies are a relatively new class of cancer drugs that can overcome many of the issues seen with the use of cytotoxics. They are divided into two groups: small molecule and antibodies. The massive toxicity seen with the use of cytotoxics is due to the lack of cell specificity of the drugs. They will kill any rapidly dividing cell, tumor or normal. Targeted therapies are designed to affect cellular proteins or processes that are utilised by the cancer cells. This allows a high dose to cancer tissues with a relatively low dose to other tissues. Although the side effects are often less severe than that seen of cytotoxic chemotherapeutics, life-threatening effects can occur. Initially, the targeted therapeutics were supposed to be solely selective for one protein. Now it is clear that there is often a range of protein targets that the drug can bind. An example target for targeted therapy is the BCR-ABL1 protein produced from the Philadelphia chromosome, a genetic lesion found commonly in chronic myelogenous leukemia and in some patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. This fusion protein has enzyme activity that can be inhibited by imatinib, a small molecule drug.

== Mechanism of action ==

Cancer is the uncontrolled growth of cells coupled with malignant behaviour: invasion and metastasis (among other features). It is caused by the interaction between genetic susceptibility and environmental factors. These factors lead to accumulations of genetic mutations in oncogenes (genes that control the growth rate of cells) and tumor suppressor genes (genes that help to prevent cancer), which gives cancer cells their malignant characteristics, such as uncontrolled growth.

In the broad sense, most chemotherapeutic drugs work by impairing mitosis (cell division), effectively targeting fast-dividing cells. As these drugs cause damage to cells, they are termed &quot;cytotoxic&quot;. They prevent mitosis by various mechanisms including damaging DNA and inhibition of the cellular machinery involved in cell division. One theory as to why these drugs kill cancer cells is that they induce a programmed form of cell death known as apoptosis.

As chemotherapy affects cell division, tumors with high growth rates (such as acute myelogenous leukemia and the aggressive lymphomas, including Hodgkin&#x27;s disease) are more sensitive to chemotherapy, as a larger proportion of the targeted cells are undergoing cell division at any time. Malignancies with slower growth rates, such as indolent lymphomas, tend to respond to chemotherapy much more modestly. Heterogeneic tumours may also display varying sensitivities to chemotherapy agents, depending on the subclonal populations within the tumor.

Cells from the immune system also make crucial contributions to the antitumor effects of chemotherapy. For example, the chemotherapeutic drugs oxaliplatin and cyclophosphamide can cause tumor cells to die in a way that is detectable by the immune system (called immunogenic cell death), which mobilizes immune cells with antitumor functions. Chemotherapeutic drugs that cause cancer immunogenic tumor cell death can make unresponsive tumors sensitive to immune checkpoint therapy.

== Other uses ==
Some chemotherapy drugs are used in diseases other than cancer, such as in autoimmune disorders, and noncancerous plasma cell dyscrasia. In some cases they are often used at lower doses, which means that the side effects are minimized, while in other cases doses similar to ones used to treat cancer are used. Methotrexate is used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriasis, ankylosing spondylitis and multiple sclerosis. The anti-inflammatory response seen in RA is thought to be due to increases in adenosine, which causes immunosuppression; effects on immuno-regulatory cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme pathways; reduction in pro-inflammatory cytokines; and anti-proliferative properties. Although methotrexate is used to treat both multiple sclerosis and ankylosing spondylitis, its efficacy in these diseases is still uncertain. Cyclophosphamide is sometimes used to treat lupus nephritis, a common symptom of systemic lupus erythematosus. Dexamethasone along with either bortezomib or melphalan is commonly used as a treatment for AL amyloidosis. Recently, bortezomid in combination with cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone has also shown promise as a treatment for AL amyloidosis. Other drugs used to treat myeloma such as lenalidomide have shown promise in treating AL amyloidosis.

Chemotherapy drugs are also used in conditioning regimens prior to bone marrow transplant (hematopoietic stem cell transplant). Conditioning regimens are used to suppress the recipient&#x27;s immune system in order to allow a transplant to engraft. Cyclophosphamide is a common cytotoxic drug used in this manner and is often used in conjunction with total body irradiation. Chemotherapeutic drugs may be used at high doses to permanently remove the recipient&#x27;s bone marrow cells (myeloablative conditioning) or at lower doses that will prevent permanent bone marrow loss (non-myeloablative and reduced intensity conditioning). When used in non-cancer setting, the treatment is still called &quot;chemotherapy&quot;, and is often done in the same treatment centers used for people with cancer.

== Occupational exposure and safe handling ==

In the 1970s, antineoplastic (chemotherapy) drugs were identified as hazardous, and the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) has since then introduced the concept of hazardous drugs after publishing a recommendation in 1983 regarding handling hazardous drugs. The adaptation of federal regulations came when the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) first released its guidelines in 1986 and then updated them in 1996, 1999, and, most recently, 2006.

The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has been conducting an assessment in the workplace since then regarding these drugs. Occupational exposure to antineoplastic drugs has been linked to multiple health effects, including infertility and possible carcinogenic effects. A few cases have been reported by the NIOSH alert report, such as one in which a female pharmacist was diagnosed with papillary transitional cell carcinoma. Twelve years before the pharmacist was diagnosed with the condition, she had worked for 20 months in a hospital where she was responsible for preparing multiple antineoplastic drugs. The pharmacist did not have any other risk factor for cancer, and therefore, her cancer was attributed to the exposure to the antineoplastic drugs, although a cause-and-effect relationship has not been established in the literature. Another case happened when a malfunction in biosafety cabinetry is believed to have exposed nursing personnel to antineoplastic drugs. Investigations revealed evidence of genotoxic biomarkers two and nine months after that exposure.

=== Routes of exposure ===
Antineoplastic drugs are usually given through intravenous, intramuscular, intrathecal, or subcutaneous administration. In most cases, before the medication is administered to the patient, it needs to be prepared and handled by several workers. Any worker who is involved in handling, preparing, or administering the drugs, or with cleaning objects that have come into contact with antineoplastic drugs, is potentially exposed to hazardous drugs. Health care workers are exposed to drugs in different circumstances, such as when pharmacists and pharmacy technicians prepare and handle antineoplastic drugs and when nurses and physicians administer the drugs to patients. Additionally, those who are responsible for disposing antineoplastic drugs in health care facilities are also at risk of exposure.

Dermal exposure is thought to be the main route of exposure due to the fact that significant amounts of the antineoplastic agents have been found in the gloves worn by healthcare workers who prepare, handle, and administer the agents. Another noteworthy route of exposure is inhalation of the drugs&#x27; vapors. Multiple studies have investigated inhalation as a route of exposure, and although air sampling has not shown any dangerous levels, it is still a potential route of exposure. Ingestion by hand to mouth is a route of exposure that is less likely compared to others because of the enforced hygienic standard in the health institutions. However, it is still a potential route, especially in the workplace, outside of a health institute. One can also be exposed to these hazardous drugs through injection by needle sticks. Research conducted in this area has established that occupational exposure occurs by examining evidence in multiple urine samples from health care workers.

=== Hazards ===
Hazardous drugs expose health care workers to serious health risks. Many studies show that antineoplastic drugs could have many side effects on the reproductive system, such as fetal loss, congenital malformation, and infertility. Health care workers who are exposed to antineoplastic drugs on many occasions have adverse reproductive outcomes such as spontaneous abortions, stillbirths, and congenital malformations. Moreover, studies have shown that exposure to these drugs leads to menstrual cycle irregularities. Antineoplastic drugs may also increase the risk of learning disabilities among children of health care workers who are exposed to these hazardous substances.

Moreover, these drugs have carcinogenic effects. In the past five decades, multiple studies have shown the carcinogenic effects of exposure to antineoplastic drugs. Similarly, there have been research studies that linked alkylating agents with humans developing leukemias. Studies have reported elevated risk of breast cancer, nonmelanoma skin cancer, and cancer of the rectum among nurses who are exposed to these drugs. Other investigations revealed that there is a potential genotoxic effect from anti-neoplastic drugs to workers in health care settings.

=== Safe handling in health care settings ===
As of 2018, there were no occupational exposure limits set for antineoplastic drugs, i.e., OSHA or the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) have not set workplace safety guidelines.

==== Preparation ====
NIOSH recommends using a ventilated cabinet that is designed to decrease worker exposure. Additionally, it recommends training of all staff, the use of cabinets, implementing an initial evaluation of the technique of the safety program, and wearing protective gloves and gowns when opening drug packaging, handling vials, or labeling. When wearing personal protective equipment, one should inspect gloves for physical defects before use and always wear double gloves and protective gowns. Health care workers are also required to wash their hands with water and soap before and after working with antineoplastic drugs, change gloves every 30 minutes or whenever punctured, and discard them immediately in a chemotherapy waste container.

The gowns used should be disposable gowns made of polyethylene-coated polypropylene. When wearing gowns, individuals should make sure that the gowns are closed and have long sleeves. When preparation is done, the final product should be completely sealed in a plastic bag.

The health care worker should also wipe all waste containers inside the ventilated cabinet before removing them from the cabinet. Finally, workers should remove all protective wear and put them in a bag for their disposal inside the ventilated cabinet.

==== Administration ====
Drugs should only be administered using protective medical devices such as needle lists and closed systems and techniques such as priming of IV tubing by pharmacy personnel inside a ventilated cabinet. Workers should always wear personal protective equipment such as double gloves, goggles, and protective gowns when opening the outer bag and assembling the delivery system to deliver the drug to the patient, and when disposing of all material used in the administration of the drugs.

Hospital workers should never remove tubing from an IV bag that contains an antineoplastic drug, and when disconnecting the tubing in the system, they should make sure the tubing has been thoroughly flushed. After removing the IV bag, the workers should place it together with other disposable items directly in the yellow chemotherapy waste container with the lid closed. Protective equipment should be removed and put into a disposable chemotherapy waste container. After this has been done, one should double bag the chemotherapy waste before or after removing one&#x27;s inner gloves. Moreover, one must always wash one&#x27;s hands with soap and water before leaving the drug administration site.

==== Employee training ====
All employees whose jobs in health care facilities expose them to hazardous drugs must receive training. Training should include shipping and receiving personnel, housekeepers, pharmacists, assistants, and all individuals involved in the transportation and storage of antineoplastic drugs. These individuals should receive information and training to inform them of the hazards of the drugs present in their areas of work. They should be informed and trained on operations and procedures in their work areas where they can encounter hazards, different methods used to detect the presence of hazardous drugs and how the hazards are released, and the physical and health hazards of the drugs, including their reproductive and carcinogenic hazard potential. Additionally, they should be informed and trained on the measures they should take to avoid and protect themselves from these hazards. This information ought to be provided when health care workers come into contact with the drugs, that is, perform the initial assignment in a work area with hazardous drugs. Moreover, training should also be provided when new hazards emerge as well as when new drugs, procedures, or equipment are introduced.

==== Housekeeping and waste disposal ====
When performing cleaning and decontaminating the work area where antineoplastic drugs are used, one should make sure that there is sufficient ventilation to prevent the buildup of airborne drug concentrations. When cleaning the work surface, hospital workers should use deactivation and cleaning agents before and after each activity as well as at the end of their shifts. Cleaning should always be done using double protective gloves and disposable gowns. After employees finish up cleaning, they should dispose of the items used in the activity in a yellow chemotherapy waste container while still wearing protective gloves. After removing the gloves, they should thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water. Anything that comes into contact or has a trace of the antineoplastic drugs, such as needles, empty vials, syringes, gowns, and gloves, should be put in the chemotherapy waste container.

==== Spill control ====
A written policy needs to be in place in case of a spill of antineoplastic products. The policy should address the possibility of various sizes of spills as well as the procedure and personal protective equipment required for each size. A trained worker should handle a large spill and always dispose of all cleanup materials in the chemical waste container according to EPA regulations, not in a yellow chemotherapy waste container.

=== Occupational monitoring ===
A medical surveillance program must be established. In case of exposure, occupational health professionals need to ask for a detailed history and do a thorough physical exam. They should test the urine of the potentially exposed worker by doing a urine dipstick or microscopic examination, mainly looking for blood, as several antineoplastic drugs are known to cause bladder damage.

Urinary mutagenicity is a marker of exposure to antineoplastic drugs that was first used by Falck and colleagues in 1979 and uses bacterial mutagenicity assays. Apart from being nonspecific, the test can be influenced by extraneous factors such as dietary intake and smoking and is, therefore, used sparingly. However, the test played a significant role in changing the use of horizontal flow cabinets to vertical flow biological safety cabinets during the preparation of antineoplastic drugs because the former exposed health care workers to high levels of drugs. This changed the handling of drugs and effectively reduced workers&#x27; exposure to antineoplastic drugs.

Biomarkers of exposure to antineoplastic drugs commonly include urinary platinum, methotrexate, urinary cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide, and urinary metabolite of 5-fluorouracil. In addition to this, there are other drugs used to measure the drugs directly in the urine, although they are rarely used. A measurement of these drugs directly in one&#x27;s urine is a sign of high exposure levels and that an uptake of the drugs is happening either through inhalation or dermally.  

== Available agents ==

There is an extensive list of antineoplastic agents. Several classification schemes have been used to subdivide the medicines used for cancer into several different types.

== History ==

The first use of small-molecule drugs to treat cancer was in the early 20th century, although the specific chemicals first used were not originally intended for that purpose. Mustard gas was used as a chemical warfare agent during World War I and was discovered to be a potent suppressor of hematopoiesis (blood production). A similar family of compounds known as nitrogen mustards were studied further during World War II at the Yale School of Medicine. It was reasoned that an agent that damaged the rapidly growing white blood cells might have a similar effect on cancer. Therefore, in December 1942, several people with advanced lymphomas (cancers of the lymphatic system and lymph nodes) were given the drug by vein, rather than by breathing the irritating gas. Their improvement, although temporary, was remarkable. Concurrently, during a military operation in World War II, following a German air raid on the Italian harbour of Bari, several hundred people were accidentally exposed to mustard gas, which had been transported there by the Allied forces to prepare for possible retaliation in the event of German use of chemical warfare. The survivors were later found to have very low white blood cell counts. After WWII was over and the reports declassified, the experiences converged and led researchers to look for other substances that might have similar effects against cancer. The first chemotherapy drug to be developed from this line of research was mustine. Since then, many other drugs have been developed to treat cancer, and drug development has exploded into a multibillion-dollar industry, although the principles and limitations of chemotherapy discovered by the early researchers still apply.

=== The term &quot;chemotherapy&quot; ===
The word &quot;chemotherapy&quot; without a modifier usually refers to cancer treatment, but its historical meaning was broader. The term was coined in the early 1900s by Paul Ehrlich as meaning any use of chemicals to treat any disease (&quot;-&quot; + &quot;&quot;), such as the use of antibiotics (&quot;antibacterial chemotherapy&quot;). Ehrlich was not optimistic that effective chemotherapy drugs would be found for the treatment of cancer. The first modern chemotherapeutic agent was arsphenamine, an arsenic compound discovered in 1907 and used to treat syphilis. This was later followed by sulfonamides (sulfa drugs) and penicillin. In today&#x27;s usage, the sense &quot;any treatment of disease with drugs&quot; is often expressed with the word &quot;pharmacotherapy&quot;.

== Research ==

=== Targeted delivery vehicles ===
Specially targeted delivery vehicles aim to increase effective levels of chemotherapy for tumor cells while reducing effective levels for other cells. This should result in an increased tumor kill or reduced toxicity or both.

==== Antibody-drug conjugates ====
Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) comprise an antibody, drug and a linker between them. The antibody will be targeted at a preferentially expressed protein in the tumour cells (known as a tumor antigen) or on cells that the tumor can utilise, such as blood vessel endothelial cells. They bind to the tumor antigen and are internalised, where the linker releases the drug into the cell. These specially targeted delivery vehicles vary in their stability, selectivity, and choice of target, but, in essence, they all aim to increase the maximum effective dose that can be delivered to the tumor cells. Reduced systemic toxicity means that they can also be used in people who are sicker and that they can carry new chemotherapeutic agents that would have been far too toxic to deliver via traditional systemic approaches.

The first approved drug of this type was gemtuzumab ozogamicin (Mylotarg), released by Wyeth (now Pfizer). The drug was approved to treat acute myeloid leukemia. Two other drugs, trastuzumab emtansine and brentuximab vedotin, are both in late clinical trials, and the latter has been granted accelerated approval for the treatment of refractory Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma and systemic anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

==== Nanoparticles ====
Nanoparticles are 1–1000 nanometer (nm) sized particles that can promote tumor selectivity and aid in delivering low-solubility drugs. Nanoparticles can be targeted passively or actively. Passive targeting exploits the difference between tumor blood vessels and normal blood vessels. Blood vessels in tumors are &quot;leaky&quot; because they have gaps from 200 to 2000 nm, which allow nanoparticles to escape into the tumor. Active targeting uses biological molecules (antibodies, proteins, DNA and receptor ligands) to preferentially target the nanoparticles to the tumor cells. There are many types of nanoparticle delivery systems, such as silica, polymers, liposomes and magnetic particles. Nanoparticles made of magnetic material can also be used to concentrate agents at tumor sites using an externally applied magnetic field. They have emerged as a useful vehicle in magnetic drug delivery for poorly soluble agents such as paclitaxel.

=== Electrochemotherapy ===

Electrochemotherapy is the combined treatment in which injection of a chemotherapeutic drug is followed by application of high-voltage electric pulses locally to the tumor. The treatment enables the chemotherapeutic drugs, which otherwise cannot or hardly go through the membrane of cells (such as bleomycin and cisplatin), to enter the cancer cells. Hence, greater effectiveness of antitumor treatment is achieved.

Clinical electrochemotherapy has been successfully used for treatment of cutaneous and subcutaneous tumors irrespective of their histological origin. The method has been reported as safe, simple and highly effective in all reports on clinical use of electrochemotherapy. According to the ESOPE project (European Standard Operating Procedures of Electrochemotherapy), the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for electrochemotherapy were prepared, based on the experience of the leading European cancer centres on electrochemotherapy. Recently, new electrochemotherapy modalities have been developed for treatment of internal tumors using surgical procedures, endoscopic routes or percutaneous approaches to gain access to the treatment area.

=== Hyperthermia therapy ===
Hyperthermia therapy is heat treatment for cancer that can be a powerful tool when used in combination with chemotherapy (thermochemotherapy) or radiation for the control of a variety of cancers. The heat can be applied locally to the tumor site, which will dilate blood vessels to the tumor, allowing more chemotherapeutic medication to enter the tumor. Additionally, the tumor cell membrane will become more porous, further allowing more of the chemotherapeutic medicine to enter the tumor cell.

Hyperthermia has also been shown to help prevent or reverse &quot;chemo-resistance.&quot; Chemotherapy resistance sometimes develops over time as the tumors adapt and can overcome the toxicity of the chemo medication. &quot;Overcoming chemoresistance has been extensively studied within the past, especially using CDDP-resistant cells. In regard to the potential benefit that drug-resistant cells can be recruited for effective therapy by combining chemotherapy with hyperthermia, it was important to show that chemoresistance against several anticancer drugs (e.g. mitomycin C, anthracyclines, BCNU, melphalan) including CDDP could be reversed at least partially by the addition of heat.

== Other animals ==
Chemotherapy is used in veterinary medicine similar to how it is used in human medicine.

== See also ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Chemotherapy, American Cancer Society
* Hazardous Drug Exposures in Health Care, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
* NIOSH List of Antineoplastic and Other Hazardous Drugs in Healthcare Settings, 2016, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
* Wikiversity page for the International Ototoxicity Management Group: https://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/International_Ototoxicity_Management_Group_(IOMG)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="0" end="12" title="Chemotherapy" label="Chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="32" end="37" title="Chemotherapy" label="chemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="49" end="52" title="Chemotherapy" label="CTX"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="57" end="60" title="Chemotherapy" label="CTx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575340" start="77" end="93" title="cancer treatment" label="cancer treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140638" start="135" end="158" title="list of chemotherapeutic agents" label="chemotherapeutic agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q177604" start="162" end="178" title="alkylating agent" label="alkylating agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090632" start="195" end="202" title="chemotherapy regimen" label="regimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595418" start="237" end="245" title="cure" label="curative"/>
<link wikidata="Q29483" start="348" end="363" title="Palliative care" label="reduce symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q29483" start="365" end="375" title="Palliative care" label="palliative"/>
<link wikidata="Q701216" start="485" end="500" title="pharmacotherapy" label="pharmacotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="505" end="511" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="535" end="551" title="oncology#Specialties" label="medical oncology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="642" end="648" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="661" end="668" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205747" start="698" end="708" title="DNA damage (naturally occurring)" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="718" end="728" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="838" end="857" title="signal transduction" label="signal transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="966" end="984" title="Endocrine hormone" label="endocrine hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="996" end="1004" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="1028" end="1036" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903784" start="1081" end="1099" title="hormonal therapy (oncology)" label="hormonal therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q420511" start="1174" end="1198" title="receptor tyrosine kinase" label="receptor tyrosine kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q492646" start="1211" end="1227" title="targeted therapy" label="targeted therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="1596" end="1605" title="radiation therapy" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="1607" end="1614" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q564872" start="1620" end="1632" title="hyperthermia therapy" label="hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q246181" start="1675" end="1684" title="cytotoxicity" label="cytotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="1729" end="1736" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="1931" end="1940" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="2115" end="2126" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="2128" end="2143" title="digestive tract" label="digestive tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q866324" start="2148" end="2161" title="hair follicle" label="hair follicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q864868" start="2226" end="2242" title="myelosuppression" label="myelosuppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455316" start="2297" end="2314" title="immunosuppression" label="immunosuppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931269" start="2317" end="2326" title="mucositis" label="mucositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181391" start="2384" end="2392" title="alopecia" label="alopecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="2609" end="2621" title="autoimmunity" label="autoimmunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="2638" end="2658" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="2660" end="2688" title="systemic lupus erythematosus" label="systemic lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="2690" end="2708" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q644318" start="2710" end="2720" title="vasculitis" label="vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595418" start="2892" end="2900" title="cure" label="curative"/>
<link wikidata="Q29483" start="2944" end="2961" title="Palliative care" label="palliate symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3175" end="3192" title="Cancer#Treatments" label="cancer treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="3202" end="3209" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="3211" end="3228" title="radiation therapy" label="radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q564872" start="3233" end="3253" title="hyperthermia therapy" label="hyperthermia therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867482" start="3606" end="3630" title="Combination chemotherapy" label="Combination chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991934" start="3923" end="3934" title="Neoadjuvant" label="Neoadjuvant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481887" start="4122" end="4143" title="Adjuvant chemotherapy" label="Adjuvant chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779635" start="4401" end="4416" title="micrometastases" label="micrometastases"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090632" start="4830" end="4850" title="chemotherapy regimen" label="chemotherapy regimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734165" start="4919" end="4937" title="Performance status" label="Performance status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867931" start="5133" end="5148" title="fractional kill" label="fractional kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="5547" end="5556" title="leukemias" label="leukemias"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="5596" end="5608" title="brain tumors" label="brain tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="5649" end="5673" title="non-melanoma skin cancer" label="non-melanoma skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047938" start="5843" end="5855" title="adverse effect" label="side-effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796666" start="5983" end="6000" title="body surface area" label="body surface area"/>
<link wikidata="Q721129" start="6071" end="6079" title="nomogram" label="nomogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="8148" end="8153" title="obese" label="obese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="8271" end="8281" title="overdosing" label="overdosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q117636" start="9603" end="9609" title="FOLFOX" label="FOLFOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q415588" start="10714" end="10725" title="Carboplatin" label="Carboplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q348922" start="10730" end="10738" title="busulfan" label="busulfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q422232" start="10891" end="10903" title="methotrexate" label="methotrexate"/>
<link wikidata="Q423762" start="10911" end="10921" title="paclitaxel" label="paclitaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q420436" start="10927" end="10936" title="docetaxel" label="docetaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81166" start="11230" end="11241" title="mustard gas" label="mustard gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="11250" end="11261" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q177604" start="11363" end="11371" title="alkylation" label="alkylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="11398" end="11405" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="11408" end="11411" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="11416" end="11419" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="11442" end="11452" title="covalent bond" label="covalently"/>
<link wikidata="Q335268" start="11470" end="11481" title="alkyl group" label="alkyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="11758" end="11771" title="cell division" label="cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="11876" end="11885" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q414004" start="12177" end="12193" title="nitrogen mustard" label="nitrogen mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q418311" start="12196" end="12208" title="nitrosoureas" label="nitrosoureas"/>
<link wikidata="Q417549" start="12210" end="12219" title="tetrazine" label="tetrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q56670455" start="12222" end="12232" title="aziridines" label="aziridines"/>
<link wikidata="Q412415" start="12234" end="12243" title="cisplatin" label="cisplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418011" start="12325" end="12340" title="mechlorethamine" label="mechlorethamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q408524" start="12342" end="12358" title="cyclophosphamide" label="cyclophosphamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298283" start="12360" end="12369" title="melphalan" label="melphalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q415939" start="12371" end="12383" title="chlorambucil" label="chlorambucil"/>
<link wikidata="Q418560" start="12385" end="12395" title="ifosfamide" label="ifosfamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q348922" start="12400" end="12408" title="busulfan" label="busulfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023727" start="12431" end="12453" title="N-Nitroso-N-methylurea" label="N-Nitroso-N-methylurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q415869" start="12461" end="12471" title="carmustine" label="carmustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415378" start="12480" end="12489" title="lomustine" label="lomustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230937" start="12501" end="12510" title="semustine" label="semustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439555" start="12521" end="12532" title="fotemustine" label="fotemustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q257331" start="12537" end="12551" title="streptozotocin" label="streptozotocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q416975" start="12572" end="12583" title="dacarbazine" label="dacarbazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881926" start="12585" end="12597" title="mitozolomide" label="mitozolomide"/>
<link wikidata="Q425088" start="12602" end="12614" title="temozolomide" label="temozolomide"/>
<link wikidata="Q416507" start="12635" end="12643" title="thiotepa" label="thiotepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q417625" start="12645" end="12654" title="mytomycin" label="mytomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q412415" start="12711" end="12720" title="cisplatin" label="cisplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q415588" start="12722" end="12733" title="carboplatin" label="carboplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422327" start="12738" end="12749" title="oxaliplatin" label="oxaliplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="12788" end="12801" title="covalent bond" label="covalent bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="12812" end="12817" title="amino group" label="amino"/>
<link wikidata="Q134856" start="12819" end="12827" title="carboxyl group" label="carboxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="12829" end="12839" title="sulfhydryl group" label="sulfhydryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="12845" end="12860" title="phosphate group" label="phosphate group"/>
<link wikidata="Q418656" start="12939" end="12951" title="procarbazine" label="procarbazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50429865" start="13003" end="13018" title="Anti-metabolite" label="Anti-metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="13181" end="13191" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422960" start="13218" end="13228" title="nucleobase" label="nucleobase"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="13244" end="13259" title="phosphate group" label="phosphate group"/>
<link wikidata="Q188261" start="13294" end="13300" title="purine" label="purine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="13303" end="13310" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="13315" end="13322" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207722" start="13328" end="13338" title="pyrimidine" label="pyrimidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="13341" end="13349" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171973" start="13351" end="13358" title="thymine" label="thymine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182990" start="13363" end="13369" title="uracil" label="uracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="13493" end="13507" title="chemical group" label="chemical group"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="13812" end="13822" title="DNA damage" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="13860" end="13869" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289513" start="14038" end="14045" title="S-phase" label="S-phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q50573407" start="14237" end="14249" title="antifolate" label="anti-folates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991665" start="14300" end="14310" title="thiopurine" label="thiopurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422232" start="14339" end="14351" title="methotrexate" label="methotrexate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415220" start="14356" end="14366" title="pemetrexed" label="pemetrexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q417149" start="14390" end="14413" title="dihydrofolate reductase" label="dihydrofolate reductase"/>
<link wikidata="Q27098158" start="14449" end="14465" title="tetrahydrofolate" label="tetrahydrofolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192367" start="14471" end="14484" title="dihydrofolate" label="dihydrofolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q743705" start="14605" end="14616" title="thymidylate" label="thymidylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676802" start="14863" end="14883" title="thymidylate synthase" label="thymidylate synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q422358" start="14979" end="15023" title="glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase" label="glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q238512" start="15055" end="15067" title="fluorouracil" label="fluorouracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q420207" start="15072" end="15084" title="capecitabine" label="capecitabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q603741" start="15429" end="15436" title="prodrug" label="prodrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q180983" start="15550" end="15560" title="cytarabine" label="cytarabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q414143" start="15562" end="15573" title="gemcitabine" label="gemcitabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181878" start="15575" end="15585" title="decitabine" label="decitabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q416451" start="15587" end="15598" title="azacitidine" label="azacitidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q185916" start="15600" end="15611" title="fludarabine" label="fludarabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216264" start="15613" end="15623" title="nelarabine" label="nelarabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q414030" start="15625" end="15635" title="cladribine" label="cladribine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134875" start="15637" end="15648" title="clofarabine" label="clofarabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q425470" start="15654" end="15665" title="pentostatin" label="pentostatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q385347" start="15691" end="15702" title="thioguanine" label="thioguanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q418529" start="15707" end="15721" title="mercaptopurine" label="mercaptopurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881918" start="15759" end="15781" title="Anti-microtubule agent" label="Anti-microtubule agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="15787" end="15792" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q189933" start="15850" end="15861" title="microtubule" label="microtubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q422492" start="15947" end="15956" title="α-tubulin" label="α-tubulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422492" start="15961" end="15970" title="β-tubulin" label="β-tubulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559405" start="16195" end="16222" title="Vinca alkaloid" label="&amp;quot;Vinca&amp;quot; alkaloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q425227" start="16227" end="16233" title="taxane" label="taxane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881914" start="16551" end="16570" title="mitotic catastrophe" label="mitotic catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="16671" end="16680" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q539568" start="16711" end="16730" title="Angiogenesis" label="blood vessel growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q161093" start="16858" end="16879" title="Madagascar periwinkle" label="Madagascar periwinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q901227" start="17096" end="17111" title="natural product" label="natural product"/>
<link wikidata="Q408977" start="17126" end="17137" title="vincristine" label="vincristine"/>
<link wikidata="Q282629" start="17142" end="17153" title="vinblastine" label="vinblastine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420532" start="17251" end="17262" title="vinorelbine" label="vinorelbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658562" start="17289" end="17315" title="non-small-cell lung cancer" label="non-small-cell lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q416660" start="17318" end="17327" title="vindesine" label="vindesine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195393" start="17333" end="17343" title="vinflunine" label="vinflunine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188941" start="17361" end="17371" title="cell cycle" label="cell cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289513" start="17420" end="17427" title="S-phase" label="S-phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="17482" end="17489" title="M-phase" label="M-phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q423762" start="17569" end="17579" title="paclitaxel" label="paclitaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065540" start="17617" end="17633" title="Taxus brevifolia" label="Taxus brevifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q420436" start="17699" end="17708" title="docetaxel" label="docetaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179729" start="17803" end="17816" title="Taxus baccata" label="Taxus baccata"/>
<link wikidata="Q421193" start="17825" end="17840" title="Podophyllotoxin" label="Podophyllotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q424634" start="17862" end="17868" title="lignan" label="lignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q732308" start="17897" end="17914" title="Podophyllum" label="American mayapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077845" start="17954" end="17972" title="Sinopodophyllum" label="Himalayan mayapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q418817" start="18268" end="18277" title="etoposide" label="etoposide"/>
<link wikidata="Q417555" start="18282" end="18292" title="teniposide" label="teniposide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032062" start="18406" end="18421" title="topoisomerase I" label="topoisomerase I"/>
<link wikidata="Q411991" start="18426" end="18442" title="topoisomerase II" label="topoisomerase II"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="18515" end="18528" title="transcription (biology)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="18871" end="18882" title="DNA replication" label="replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q412197" start="19011" end="19021" title="irinotecan" label="irinotecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q419953" start="19026" end="19035" title="topotecan" label="topotecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q419964" start="19073" end="19085" title="camptothecin" label="camptothecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301049" start="19144" end="19165" title="Camptotheca acuminata" label="Camptotheca acuminata"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="19425" end="19434" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q418817" start="19458" end="19467" title="etoposide" label="etoposide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936" start="19469" end="19480" title="doxorubicin" label="doxorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q239426" start="19482" end="19494" title="mitoxantrone" label="mitoxantrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q417555" start="19499" end="19509" title="teniposide" label="teniposide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639291" start="19718" end="19728" title="novobiocin" label="novobiocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674302" start="19745" end="19756" title="aclarubicin" label="aclarubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="19861" end="19871" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="20030" end="20043" title="cell division" label="cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q417589" start="20080" end="20093" title="anthracycline" label="anthracycline"/>
<link wikidata="Q415571" start="20103" end="20112" title="bleomycin" label="bleomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19856779" start="20148" end="20159" title="mitomycin C" label="mitomycin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q186127" start="20164" end="20175" title="actinomycin" label="actinomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936" start="20204" end="20215" title="doxorubicin" label="doxorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q411659" start="20220" end="20232" title="daunorubicin" label="daunorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="20276" end="20285" title="bacterium" label="bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623394" start="20292" end="20314" title="Streptomyces peucetius" label="Streptomyces peucetius"/>
<link wikidata="Q425122" start="20361" end="20371" title="epirubicin" label="epirubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063862" start="20376" end="20386" title="idarubicin" label="idarubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q106045773" start="20447" end="20458" title="pirarubicin" label="pirarubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674302" start="20460" end="20471" title="aclarubicin" label="aclarubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q239426" start="20477" end="20489" title="mitoxantrone" label="mitoxantrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056749" start="20532" end="20549" title="DNA intercalation" label="DNA intercalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="20631" end="20644" title="free radicals" label="free radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="20781" end="20794" title="RNA synthesis" label="RNA synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425020" start="20810" end="20822" title="glycopeptide" label="glycopeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720484" start="20843" end="20867" title="Streptomyces verticillus" label="Streptomyces verticillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="20911" end="20923" title="free radical" label="free radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="20980" end="20989" title="metal ion" label="metal ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="20999" end="21017" title="reduction (chemistry)" label="chemically reduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="21034" end="21040" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q621636" start="21153" end="21162" title="Route of administration" label="delivered"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="21163" end="21176" title="intravenous therapy" label="intravenously"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298283" start="21240" end="21249" title="melphalan" label="melphalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q348922" start="21251" end="21259" title="busulfan" label="busulfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q420207" start="21261" end="21273" title="capecitabine" label="capecitabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771494" start="21557" end="21579" title="Winged infusion set" label="winged infusion device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061273" start="21581" end="21607" title="peripheral venous catheter" label="peripheral venous catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168716" start="21627" end="21665" title="peripherally inserted central catheter" label="peripherally inserted central catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q190404" start="21674" end="21697" title="central venous catheter" label="central venous catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q552258" start="21702" end="21718" title="implantable port" label="implantable port"/>
<link wikidata="Q181600" start="22014" end="22023" title="inpatient" label="inpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q181600" start="22030" end="22040" title="outpatient" label="outpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143998" start="22241" end="22253" title="Hickman line" label="Hickman line"/>
<link wikidata="Q552258" start="22259" end="22270" title="Port-a-Cath" label="Port-a-Cath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168716" start="22280" end="22289" title="PICC line" label="PICC line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423167" start="22349" end="22358" title="phlebitis" label="phlebitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076345" start="22362" end="22375" title="extravasation" label="extravasation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548946" start="22448" end="22471" title="Isolated limb perfusion" label="Isolated limb perfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="22487" end="22495" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779635" start="22906" end="22921" title="micrometastasis" label="micrometastases"/>
<link wikidata="Q238512" start="22956" end="22970" title="5-fluorouracil" label="5-fluorouracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="23004" end="23028" title="non-melanoma skin cancer" label="non-melanoma skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="23049" end="23071" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320251" start="23112" end="23123" title="intrathecal" label="intrathecal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467087" start="23329" end="23348" title="fast-dividing cells" label="fast-dividing cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q284220" start="23460" end="23481" title="Iatrogenesis" label="iatrogenic toxicities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="23697" end="23710" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="23736" end="23747" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q42395" start="23777" end="23793" title="white blood cell" label="white blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="23796" end="23810" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="23817" end="23825" title="platelet" label="platelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="23828" end="23834" title="Anemia" label="Anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q585285" start="23839" end="23855" title="thrombocytopenia" label="thrombocytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="23868" end="23885" title="blood transfusion" label="blood transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435822" start="23887" end="23898" title="Neutropenia" label="Neutropenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188417" start="23918" end="23940" title="neutrophil granulocyte" label="neutrophil granulocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="23963" end="23968" title="litre" label="litre"/>
<link wikidata="Q419327" start="24001" end="24006" title="G-CSF" label="G-CSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q223143" start="24008" end="24019" title="granulocyte" label="granulocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151081" start="24053" end="24063" title="filgrastim" label="filgrastim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523037" start="24065" end="24076" title="lenograstim" label="lenograstim"/>
<link wikidata="Q123499549" start="24078" end="24100" title="efbemalenograstim alfa" label="efbemalenograstim alfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q864868" start="24119" end="24135" title="myelosuppression" label="myelosuppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="24195" end="24204" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42395" start="24226" end="24231" title="white blood cells" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="24236" end="24250" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q379071" start="24307" end="24317" title="autologous" label="autologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128050" start="24324" end="24352" title="bone marrow transplant" label="bone marrow cell transplants"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="24865" end="24887" title="Human gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q27042858" start="24899" end="24910" title="oral cavity" label="oral cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="24972" end="24978" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473911" start="25015" end="25029" title="Herpes simplex" label="Herpes simplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q182155" start="25031" end="25039" title="shingles" label="shingles"/>
<link wikidata="Q149348" start="25065" end="25078" title="human herpes virus" label="Herpesviridea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13669486" start="25162" end="25171" title="Quinolone antibiotic" label="quinolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q898623" start="25176" end="25205" title="trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole" label="trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="25653" end="25658" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686195" start="25704" end="25723" title="medicinal mushrooms" label="medicinal mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q753833" start="25735" end="25754" title="Trametes versicolor" label="Trametes versicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q105592965" start="25844" end="25855" title="Trilaciclib" label="Trilaciclib"/>
<link wikidata="Q46292" start="25875" end="25898" title="cyclin-dependent kinase" label="cyclin-dependent kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q462339" start="26115" end="26140" title="neutropenic enterocolitis" label="neutropenic enterocolitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q462339" start="26234" end="26243" title="Typhlitis" label="Typhlitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="26324" end="26330" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="26332" end="26340" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="26342" end="26350" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536390" start="26354" end="26371" title="distended abdomen" label="distended abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="26373" end="26378" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260058" start="26380" end="26386" title="chills" label="chills"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="26391" end="26405" title="abdominal pain" label="abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q462339" start="26423" end="26432" title="Typhlitis" label="Typhlitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751242" start="26438" end="26455" title="medical emergency" label="medical emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q592442" start="26476" end="26485" title="prognosis" label="prognosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779148" start="26748" end="26761" title="hemicolectomy" label="hemicolectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="26820" end="26826" title="Nausea" label="Nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="26828" end="26836" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="26838" end="26846" title="Anorexia (symptom)" label="anorexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="26848" end="26856" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="26880" end="26892" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="26980" end="26992" title="Malnutrition" label="Malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="26997" end="27008" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q575136" start="27408" end="27418" title="antiemetic" label="antiemetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q462339" start="27691" end="27700" title="typhlitis" label="typhlitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751242" start="27750" end="27767" title="medical emergency" label="medical emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="27819" end="27825" title="Anemia" label="Anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="27936" end="27944" title="bleeding" label="bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q211709" start="27946" end="27956" title="blood cell" label="blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="27970" end="27979" title="hemolysis" label="hemolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549029" start="28050" end="28075" title="anemia of chronic disease" label="anemia of chronic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q218706" start="28151" end="28165" title="erythropoietin" label="erythropoietin"/>
<link wikidata="Q769796" start="28168" end="28183" title="iron supplement" label="iron supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="28190" end="28207" title="blood transfusion" label="blood transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="28377" end="28385" title="platelet" label="platelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q468787" start="28421" end="28428" title="Hematoma" label="bruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="28433" end="28441" title="Hemorrhage" label="bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925170" start="28508" end="28528" title="platelet transfusion" label="platelet transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031385" start="28700" end="28707" title="Cancer-related fatigue" label="Fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="28894" end="28901" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="28903" end="28915" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152037" start="28974" end="28990" title="Aerobic exercise" label="Aerobic exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="29058" end="29070" title="solid tumour" label="solid tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="29103" end="29109" title="Nausea" label="Nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="29114" end="29122" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q575136" start="29661" end="29672" title="antiemetics" label="antiemetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181391" start="30087" end="30096" title="Hair loss" label="Hair loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936" start="30536" end="30547" title="doxorubicin" label="doxorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q411659" start="30549" end="30561" title="daunorubicin" label="daunorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q423762" start="30563" end="30573" title="paclitaxel" label="paclitaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q420436" start="30575" end="30584" title="docetaxel" label="docetaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q408524" start="30586" end="30602" title="cyclophosphamide" label="cyclophosphamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q418560" start="30604" end="30614" title="ifosfamide" label="ifosfamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q418817" start="30619" end="30628" title="etoposide" label="etoposide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734614" start="30805" end="30821" title="alopecia totalis" label="alopecia totalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26967" start="30823" end="30840" title="telogen effluvium" label="telogen effluvium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075435" start="30856" end="30871" title="alopecia areata" label="alopecia areata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156461" start="31115" end="31128" title="Hypothermia cap" label="Scalp cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="31398" end="31416" title="secondary neoplasm" label="secondary neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097977" start="31560" end="31576" title="childhood cancer" label="childhood cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="31619" end="31637" title="secondary neoplasm" label="secondary neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="31841" end="31852" title="infertility" label="infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="32246" end="32256" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q648065" start="32373" end="32391" title="Female infertility" label="Female infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q647630" start="32435" end="32460" title="premature ovarian failure" label="premature ovarian failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142940" start="32472" end="32492" title="primordial follicles" label="primordial follicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445580" start="32717" end="32739" title="fertility preservation" label="fertility preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144664" start="32773" end="32789" title="cryopreservation" label="cryopreservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314721" start="33314" end="33325" title="GnRH analog" label="GnRH analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="33387" end="33394" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q418267" start="33450" end="33473" title="Sphingosine-1-phosphate" label="Sphingosine-1-phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33542" end="33573" title="Sphingomyelin#Apoptosis" label="sphingomyelin apoptotic pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="33602" end="33611" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128050" start="33664" end="33684" title="conditioning regimen" label="conditioning regimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q631521" start="34017" end="34028" title="teratogenic" label="teratogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="34036" end="34045" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="34069" end="34084" title="first trimester" label="first trimester"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="34105" end="34113" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916477" start="34365" end="34391" title="complications of pregnancy" label="complications of pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="34484" end="34497" title="contraception" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936" start="34577" end="34588" title="doxorubicin" label="doxorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25862" start="34792" end="34826" title="assisted reproductive technologies" label="assisted reproductive technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933900" start="34831" end="34858" title="micromanipulation technique" label="micromanipulation technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="35039" end="35061" title="in vitro fertilization" label="in vitro fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052108" start="35066" end="35089" title="embryo cryopreservation" label="embryo cryopreservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153857" start="35358" end="35400" title="chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy" label="chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203174" start="35654" end="35665" title="thalidomide" label="thalidomide"/>
<link wikidata="Q408201" start="35667" end="35677" title="epothilone" label="epothilone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251235" start="35718" end="35738" title="proteasome inhibitor" label="proteasome inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="35927" end="35948" title="peripheral neuropathy" label="peripheral neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422765" start="36004" end="36015" title="motor nerve" label="motor nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="36025" end="36049" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069589" start="36704" end="36742" title="post-chemotherapy cognitive impairment" label="post-chemotherapy cognitive impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q886518" start="36893" end="36909" title="white cell count" label="white cell count"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="36920" end="36928" title="lymphoma" label="lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q200741" start="36931" end="36939" title="teratoma" label="teratoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="36951" end="36959" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q998803" start="36982" end="37002" title="tumor lysis syndrome" label="tumor lysis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q49970" start="37133" end="37142" title="hyperuricemia" label="uric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q605259" start="37144" end="37153" title="hyperkalemia" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641062" start="37158" end="37167" title="hyperphosphatemia" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="37372" end="37390" title="Cardiac dysrhythmia" label="cardiac arrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118956" start="37574" end="37588" title="Cardiotoxicity" label="Cardiotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q417589" start="37644" end="37657" title="anthracycline" label="anthracycline"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936" start="37665" end="37676" title="doxorubicin" label="doxorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q425122" start="37678" end="37688" title="epirubicin" label="epirubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063862" start="37690" end="37700" title="idarubicin" label="idarubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936" start="37706" end="37727" title="liposomal doxorubicin" label="liposomal doxorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="37788" end="37800" title="free radical" label="free radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="37829" end="37839" title="DNA damage" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q408524" start="37928" end="37944" title="cyclophosphamide" label="cyclophosphamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q420436" start="37946" end="37955" title="docetaxel" label="docetaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134875" start="37960" end="37971" title="clofarabine" label="clofarabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349821" start="37974" end="37988" title="Hepatotoxicity" label="Hepatotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983841" start="38154" end="38169" title="viral hepatitis" label="viral hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455316" start="38171" end="38188" title="immunosuppression" label="immunosuppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="38193" end="38215" title="nutritional deficiency" label="nutritional deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731687" start="38272" end="38299" title="Hepatic veno-occlusive disease" label="hepatic sinusoidal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075923" start="38341" end="38352" title="cholestasis" label="cholestasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="38416" end="38430" title="liver fibrosis" label="liver fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468324" start="38433" end="38447" title="Nephrotoxicity" label="Nephrotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q998803" start="38481" end="38501" title="tumor lysis syndrome" label="tumor lysis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="38646" end="38658" title="asymptomatic" label="asymptomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q424337" start="38708" end="38727" title="acute kidney injury" label="acute kidney injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351381" start="38730" end="38741" title="Ototoxicity" label="Ototoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="38864" end="38871" title="Vertigo (medical)" label="vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166142" start="39045" end="39053" title="erythema" label="erythema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162276" start="39100" end="39110" title="xerostomia" label="xerostomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="39113" end="39128" title="Water retention (medicine)" label="water retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="39134" end="39150" title="sexual impotence" label="sexual impotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="39181" end="39189" title="allergic" label="allergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115709" start="39193" end="39207" title="pseudoallergic" label="pseudoallergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="39310" end="39332" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936" start="39340" end="39351" title="doxorubicin" label="doxorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153419" start="39354" end="39379" title="interstitial lung disease" label="interstitial lung disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q415571" start="39387" end="39396" title="bleomycin" label="bleomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="39415" end="39433" title="secondary neoplasm" label="secondary neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q13860556" start="39441" end="39445" title="MOPP (medicine)" label="MOPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q593277" start="39484" end="39502" title="Chemotherapy-induced acral erythema" label="Hand-foot syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="39749" end="39769" title="parenteral nutrition" label="parenteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752284" start="40136" end="40150" title="Stage-4 cancer" label="stage 4 cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="40330" end="40349" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="40403" end="40408" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="40604" end="40623" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q898401" start="40771" end="40781" title="lipophilic" label="lipophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q177604" start="40782" end="40799" title="alkylating agents" label="alkylating agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q415378" start="40808" end="40817" title="lomustine" label="lomustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q425088" start="40821" end="40833" title="temozolomide" label="temozolomide"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="40879" end="40891" title="Blood vessel" label="Blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852677" start="41046" end="41053" title="Tumor hypoxia" label="hypoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="41345" end="41363" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147416" start="41383" end="41393" title="Drug resistance" label="Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q412902" start="41719" end="41733" title="p-glycoprotein" label="p-glycoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q746284" start="42099" end="42117" title="gene duplication" label="gene amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="42498" end="42507" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="42741" end="42747" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="42776" end="42786" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q422492" start="42946" end="42953" title="tubulin" label="tubulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="43286" end="43297" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q411114" start="43324" end="43328" title="NF-κB" label="NFκB"/>
<link wikidata="Q492646" start="43454" end="43472" title="Targeted therapy" label="Targeted therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047938" start="44028" end="44040" title="adverse effects" label="side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129111" start="44405" end="44428" title="Philadelphia chromosome" label="Philadelphia chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q729735" start="44465" end="44493" title="chronic myelogenous leukemia" label="chronic myelogenous leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180664" start="44520" end="44548" title="acute lymphoblastic leukemia" label="acute lymphoblastic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q425158" start="44555" end="44569" title="fusion protein" label="fusion protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q177094" start="44615" end="44623" title="imatinib" label="imatinib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988322" start="44627" end="44641" title="small molecule" label="small molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="44676" end="44682" title="Cancer" label="Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="44713" end="44718" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="44732" end="44741" title="malignant" label="malignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="44766" end="44776" title="metastasis" label="metastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="44841" end="44845" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="44930" end="44946" title="genetic mutation" label="genetic mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="44951" end="44959" title="oncogene" label="oncogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q422445" start="45011" end="45032" title="tumor suppressor gene" label="tumor suppressor gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="45225" end="45232" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="45234" end="45247" title="cell division" label="cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467087" start="45272" end="45291" title="fast-dividing cells" label="fast-dividing cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="45616" end="45625" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249605" start="45684" end="45696" title="proliferative index" label="growth rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q264118" start="45706" end="45732" title="acute myelogenous leukemia" label="acute myelogenous leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="45752" end="45760" title="lymphoma" label="lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="45773" end="45795" title="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="45893" end="45906" title="cell division" label="cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917291" start="46039" end="46059" title="Tumour heterogeneity" label="Heterogeneic tumours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="46196" end="46209" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q422327" start="46324" end="46335" title="oxaliplatin" label="oxaliplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q408524" start="46340" end="46356" title="cyclophosphamide" label="cyclophosphamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144704" start="46443" end="46465" title="immunogenic cell death" label="immunogenic cell death"/>
<link wikidata="Q21686041" start="46635" end="46652" title="immune checkpoint" label="immune checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706485" start="46794" end="46815" title="plasma cell dyscrasia" label="plasma cell dyscrasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q422232" start="46990" end="47002" title="Methotrexate" label="Methotrexate"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="47031" end="47051" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179945" start="47058" end="47067" title="psoriasis" label="psoriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q52849" start="47069" end="47091" title="ankylosing spondylitis" label="ankylosing spondylitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="47096" end="47114" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190012" start="47195" end="47204" title="adenosine" label="adenosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455316" start="47219" end="47236" title="immunosuppression" label="immunosuppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q410251" start="47267" end="47281" title="cyclooxygenase" label="cyclooxygenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="47331" end="47339" title="cytokine" label="cytokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q408524" start="47519" end="47535" title="Cyclophosphamide" label="Cyclophosphamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621830" start="47563" end="47578" title="lupus nephritis" label="lupus nephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="47600" end="47628" title="systemic lupus erythematosus" label="systemic lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q422252" start="47630" end="47643" title="Dexamethasone" label="Dexamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q419319" start="47662" end="47672" title="bortezomib" label="bortezomib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298283" start="47676" end="47685" title="melphalan" label="melphalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652470" start="47722" end="47736" title="AL amyloidosis" label="AL amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q408524" start="47779" end="47795" title="cyclophosphamide" label="cyclophosphamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="47898" end="47905" title="myeloma" label="myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q425681" start="47914" end="47926" title="lenalidomide" label="lenalidomide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128050" start="48011" end="48031" title="conditioning regimen" label="conditioning regimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128050" start="48066" end="48100" title="hematopoietic stem cell transplant" label="hematopoietic stem cell transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986672" start="48326" end="48348" title="total body irradiation" label="total body irradiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745081" start="48910" end="48955" title="American Society of Health-System Pharmacists" label="American Society of Health-System Pharmacists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687718" start="49004" end="49019" title="hazardous drugs" label="hazardous drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="49155" end="49200" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="49314" end="49367" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="50489" end="50500" title="Intravenous therapy" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="50502" end="50515" title="Intramuscular injection" label="intramuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320251" start="50517" end="50528" title="Intrathecal administration" label="intrathecal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035485" start="50533" end="50545" title="Subcutaneous injection" label="subcutaneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565962" start="52062" end="52075" title="Needlestick injury" label="needle sticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="52953" end="52963" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009245" start="53404" end="53413" title="Genotoxicity" label="genotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072363" start="53557" end="53584" title="occupational exposure limit" label="occupational exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614049" start="53634" end="53691" title="American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists" label="American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884545" start="53790" end="53808" title="Engineering controls" label="ventilated cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333024" start="54113" end="54142" title="personal protective equipment" label="personal protective equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035062" start="58912" end="58932" title="Workplace health surveillance" label="medical surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637044" start="59157" end="59171" title="urine dipstick" label="urine dipstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="60039" end="60047" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q422232" start="60049" end="60061" title="methotrexate" label="methotrexate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408524" start="60071" end="60087" title="cyclophosphamide" label="cyclophosphamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q418560" start="60092" end="60102" title="ifosfamide" label="ifosfamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q238512" start="60130" end="60144" title="5-Fluorouracil" label="5-fluorouracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q25108566" start="60494" end="60523" title="list of antineoplastic agents" label="list of antineoplastic agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988322" start="60677" end="60696" title="small-molecule drug" label="small-molecule drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q81166" start="60835" end="60846" title="Mustard gas" label="Mustard gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="60861" end="60877" title="chemical warfare" label="chemical warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="60891" end="60902" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q919283" start="60951" end="60964" title="hematopoiesis" label="hematopoiesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q414004" start="61024" end="61041" title="nitrogen mustards" label="nitrogen mustards"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="61070" end="61082" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961140" start="61090" end="61113" title="Yale School of Medicine" label="Yale School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="61293" end="61302" title="lymphomas" label="lymphomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q714253" start="61560" end="61568" title="Air raid on Bari" label="air raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="61595" end="61599" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="61706" end="61719" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q418011" start="62125" end="62132" title="mustine" label="mustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q57089" start="62590" end="62602" title="Paul Ehrlich" label="Paul Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="62707" end="62717" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q410762" start="62910" end="62922" title="arsphenamine" label="arsphenamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="62981" end="62989" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q411398" start="63018" end="63030" title="Sulfonamide (medicine)" label="sulfonamides"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="63049" end="63059" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047050" start="63077" end="63082" title="usage" label="usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570700" start="63088" end="63093" title="word sense" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q701216" start="63181" end="63196" title="pharmacotherapy" label="pharmacotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069596" start="63518" end="63541" title="Antibody-drug conjugate" label="Antibody-drug conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="63562" end="63570" title="antibody" label="antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459684" start="63704" end="63717" title="tumor antigen" label="tumor antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q111140" start="63780" end="63797" title="endothelial cells" label="endothelial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q412685" start="64377" end="64398" title="gemtuzumab ozogamicin" label="gemtuzumab ozogamicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q901932" start="64423" end="64428" title="Wyeth" label="Wyeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="64434" end="64440" title="Pfizer" label="Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q264118" start="64474" end="64496" title="acute myeloid leukemia" label="acute myeloid leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997863" start="64515" end="64536" title="trastuzumab emtansine" label="trastuzumab emtansine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422324" start="64541" end="64560" title="brentuximab vedotin" label="brentuximab vedotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123417" start="64670" end="64680" title="refractory" label="refractory"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="64681" end="64704" title="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q486090" start="64718" end="64748" title="anaplastic large cell lymphoma" label="anaplastic large cell lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="64775" end="64788" title="Nanoparticles" label="Nanoparticles"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="64800" end="64809" title="nanometer" label="nanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="64892" end="64902" title="solubility" label="solubility"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="65245" end="65255" title="Antibody" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="65257" end="65264" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="65267" end="65270" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q899107" start="65275" end="65290" title="receptor ligand" label="receptor ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156473" start="65419" end="65425" title="mesoporous silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="65427" end="65434" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q410454" start="65437" end="65445" title="liposome" label="liposome"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314442" start="65650" end="65672" title="magnetic drug delivery" label="magnetic drug delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q423762" start="65707" end="65717" title="paclitaxel" label="paclitaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q564872" start="66937" end="66957" title="Hyperthermia therapy" label="Hyperthermia therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q463665" start="68305" end="68328" title="American Cancer Society" label="American Cancer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="68372" end="68425" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="68428" end="68566" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="NIOSH List of Antineoplastic and Other Hazardous Drugs in Healthcare Settings, 2016, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7174" wikidata="Q133908" url="?curid=7174" title="Chinese historiography">
<text>Chinese historiography is the study of the techniques and sources used by historians to develop the recorded history of China.

==Overview of Chinese history==

The recording of events in Chinese history dates back to the Shang dynasty ( 1600–1046 BC). Many written examples survive of ceremonial inscriptions, divinations and records of family names, which were carved or painted onto tortoise shell or bones. The uniformly religious context of Shang written records makes avoidance of preservation bias important when interpreting Shang history. The first conscious attempt to record history in China may have been the inscription on the Zhou dynasty bronze Shi Qiang &quot;pan&quot;. This and thousands of other Chinese bronze inscriptions form our primary sources for the period in which they were interred in elite burials.

The oldest surviving history texts of China were compiled in the &quot;Book of Documents (Shujing)&quot;. The &quot;Spring and Autumn Annals (Chunqiu)&quot;, the official chronicle of the State of Lu, cover the period from 722 to 481 BC and are among the earliest surviving Chinese historical texts to be arranged as annals. The compilations of both of these works are traditionally ascribed to Confucius. The &quot;Zuo zhuan&quot;, attributed to Zuo Qiuming in the 5th century BC, is the earliest Chinese work of narrative history and covers the period from 722 to 468 BC. The anonymous &quot;Zhan Guo Ce&quot; was a renowned ancient Chinese historical work composed of sporadic materials on the Warring States period between the 3rd and 1st centuries BC.

The first systematic Chinese historical text, the &quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot; (&quot;Shiji&quot;), was written by Sima Qian (145 or 135–86BC) based on work by his father, Sima Tan, during the Han dynasty. It covers the period from the time of the Yellow Emperor until the author&#x27;s own lifetime. Two instances of systematic book-burning and a palace fire in the preceding centuries narrowed the sources available for this work. Because of this highly praised and frequently copied work, Sima Qian is often regarded as the father of Chinese historiography. The &quot;Twenty-Four Histories&quot;, the official histories of the dynasties considered legitimate by imperial Chinese historians, all copied Sima Qian&#x27;s format. Typically, rulers initiating a new dynasty would employ scholars to compile a final history from the records of the previous one, using a broad variety of sources.

Around the turn of the millennium, father–son imperial librarians Liu Xiang and Liu Xin edited and catalogued a large number of early texts, including each individual text listed by name above. Much transmitted literature surviving today is known to be ultimately the version they edited down from a larger volume of material available at the time. In 190, the imperial capital was again destroyed by arson, causing the loss of significant amounts of historical material.

The &quot;Shitong&quot; was the first Chinese work about historiography. It was compiled by Liu Zhiji between 708 and 710 AD. The book describes the general pattern of the official dynastic histories with regard to the structure, method, arrangement, sequence, caption, and commentary, dating back to the Warring States period.

The &quot;Zizhi Tongjian&quot; was a pioneering reference work of Chinese historiography. Emperor Yingzong of Song ordered Sima Guang and other scholars to begin compiling this universal history of China in 1065, and they presented it to his successor Shenzong in 1084. It contains 294 volumes and about three million characters, and it narrates the history of China from 403 BC to the beginning of the Song dynasty in 959. This style broke the nearly thousand-year tradition of Sima Qian, which employed annals for imperial reigns but biographies or treatises for other topics. The more consistent style of the &quot;Zizhi Tongjian&quot; was not followed by later official histories. In the mid 13th century, Ouyang Xiu was heavily influenced by the work of Xue Juzheng. This led to the creation of the &quot;New History of the Five Dynasties&quot;, which covered five dynasties in over 70 chapters.

Toward the end of the Qing dynasty in the early 20th century, scholars looked to Japan and the West for models. In the late 1890s, although deeply learned in the traditional forms, Liang Qichao began to publish extensive and influential studies and polemics that converted young readers to a new type of historiography that Liang regarded as more scientific. Liu Yizheng published several specialized history works including &quot;History of Chinese Culture&quot;. This next generation became professional historians, training and teaching in universities. They included Chang Chi-yun, Gu Jiegang, Fu Sinian, and Tsiang Tingfu, who were PhDs from Columbia University; and Chen Yinke, who conducted his investigations into medieval Chinese history in both Europe and the United States. Other historians, such as Qian Mu, who was trained largely through independent study, were more conservative but remained innovative in their response to world trends. In the 1920s, wide-ranging scholars, such as Guo Moruo, adapted Marxism in order to portray China as a nation among nations, rather than having an exotic and isolated history. The ensuing years saw historians such as Wu Han master both Western theories, including Marxism, and Chinese learning.

==Key organizing concepts==

===Dynastic cycle===
Like the three ages of the Greek poet Hesiod, the oldest Chinese historiography viewed mankind as living in a fallen age of depravity, cut off from the virtues of the past, as Confucius and his disciples revered the sage kings Emperor Yao and Emperor Shun.

Unlike Hesiod&#x27;s system, however, the Duke of Zhou&#x27;s idea of the Mandate of Heaven as a rationale for dethroning the supposedly divine Zi clan led subsequent historians to see man&#x27;s fall as a cyclical pattern. In this view, a new dynasty is founded by a morally upright founder, but his successors cannot help but become increasingly corrupt and dissolute. This immorality removes the dynasty&#x27;s divine favor and is manifested by natural disasters (particularly floods), rebellions, and foreign invasions. Eventually, the dynasty becomes weak enough to be replaced by a new one, whose founder is able to rectify many of society&#x27;s problems and begin the cycle anew. Over time, many people felt a full correction was not possible, and that the golden age of Yao and Shun could not be attained.

This teleological theory implies that there can be only one rightful sovereign under heaven at a time. Thus, despite the fact that Chinese history has had many lengthy and contentious periods of disunity, a great effort was made by official historians to establish a legitimate precursor whose fall allowed a new dynasty to acquire its mandate. Similarly, regardless of the particular merits of individual emperors, founders would be portrayed in more laudatory terms, and the last ruler of a dynasty would always be castigated as depraved and unworthy – even when that was not the case. Such a narrative was employed after the fall of the empire by those compiling the history of the Qing, and by those who justified the attempted restorations of the imperial system by Yuan Shikai and Zhang Xun.

===Multi-ethnic history===
Traditional Chinese historiography includes states ruled by other peoples (Mongols, Manchus, Tibetans etc.) in the dynastic history of China proper, ignoring their own historical traditions and considering them parts of China. Two historiographic traditions: of unity in East Asia as a historical norm for this region, and of dynasties successively reigning on the Son of Heaven&#x27;s throne allowed Chinese elites describing historical process in China in simplified categories providing the basis for the concept of modern &quot;unitary China&quot; within the borders of the former Qing Empire, which was also ruled by Chinese emperors. However, deeper analysis reveals that, in fact, there was not a succession of dynasties ruled the same unitary China, but there were different states in certain regions of East Asia, some of which have been termed by later historiographers as the Empire ruled by the Son of the Heaven.

As early as the 1930s, the American scholar Owen Lattimore argued that China was the product of the interaction of farming and pastoral societies, rather than simply the expansion of the Han people. Lattimore did not accept the more extreme Sino-Babylonian theories that the essential elements of early Chinese technology and religion had come from Western Asia, but he was among the scholars to argue against the assumption they had all been indigenous.

Both the Republic of China and the People&#x27;s Republic of China hold the view that Chinese history should include all the ethnic groups of the lands held by the Qing dynasty during its territorial peak, with these ethnicities forming part of the &quot;Zhonghua minzu&quot; (Chinese nation). This view is in contrast with Han chauvinism promoted by the Qing-era Tongmenghui. This expanded view encompasses internal and external tributary lands, as well as conquest dynasties in the history of a China seen as a coherent multi-ethnic nation since time immemorial, incorporating and accepting the contributions and cultures of non-Han ethnicities.

The acceptance of this view by ethnic minorities sometimes depends on their views on present-day issues. The 14th Dalai Lama, long insistent on Tibet&#x27;s history being separate from that of China, conceded in 2005 that Tibet &quot;is a part of&quot; China&#x27;s &quot;5,000-year history&quot; as part of a new proposal for Tibetan autonomy. Korean nationalists have virulently reacted against China&#x27;s application to UNESCO for recognition of the Goguryeo tombs in Chinese territory. The absolute independence of Goguryeo is a central aspect of Korean identity, because, according to Korean legend, Goguryeo was independent of China and Japan, compared to subordinate states such as the Joseon dynasty and the Korean Empire. The legacy of Genghis Khan has been contested between China, Mongolia, and Russia, all three states having significant numbers of ethnic Mongols within their borders and holding territory that was conquered by the Khan.

The Jin dynasty tradition of a new dynasty composing the official history for its preceding dynasty/dynasties has been seen to foster an ethnically inclusive interpretation of Chinese history. The compilation of official histories usually involved monumental intellectual labor. The Yuan and Qing dynasties, ruled by the Mongols and Manchus, faithfully carried out this practice, composing the official Chinese-language histories of the Han-ruled Song and Ming dynasties, respectively.

Recent Western scholars have reacted against the ethnically inclusive narrative in traditional and Chinese Communist Party (CCP)-sponsored history, by writing revisionist histories of China such as the New Qing History that feature, according to James A. Millward, &quot;a degree of &#x27;partisanship&#x27; for the indigenous underdogs of frontier history&quot;. Scholarly interest in writing about Chinese minorities from non-Chinese perspectives is growing. So too is the rejection of a unified cultural narrative in early China. Historians engaging with archaeological progress find increasingly demonstrated a rich amalgam of diverse cultures in regions the received literature positions as homogeneous.

===Marxism===

Most Chinese history that is published in the People&#x27;s Republic of China is based on a Marxist interpretation of history. These theories were first applied in the 1920s by Chinese scholars such as Guo Moruo, and became orthodoxy in academic study after 1949. The Marxist view of history is that history is governed by universal laws and that according to these laws, a society moves through a series of stages, with the transition between stages being driven by class struggle. These stages are:
* Slave society
* Feudal society
* Capitalist society
* Socialist society
* The world communist society

The official historical view within the People&#x27;s Republic of China associates each of these stages with a particular era in Chinese history.
* Slave society – Xia to Zhou
* Feudal society (decentralized) – Qin to Sui
* Feudal society (bureaucratic) – Tang to the First Opium War
* Feudal society (semi-colonial) – First Opium War to end of Qing dynasty
* Semi-feudal and Semi-capitalist society – Republican era
* Socialist society – PRC 1949 to present

Because of the strength of the CCP and the importance of the Marxist interpretation of history in legitimizing its rule, it was for many years difficult for historians within the PRC to actively argue in favor of non-Marxist and anti-Marxist interpretations of history. However, this political restriction is less confining than it may first appear in that the Marxist historical framework is surprisingly flexible, and it is a rather simple matter to modify an alternative historical theory to use language that at least does not challenge the Marxist interpretation of history.

Partly because of the interest of Mao Zedong, historians in the 1950s took a special interest in the role of peasant rebellions in Chinese history and compiled documentary histories to examine them.

There are several problems associated with imposing Marx&#x27;s European-based framework on Chinese history. First, slavery existed throughout China&#x27;s history but never as the primary form of labor. While the Zhou and earlier dynasties may be labeled as feudal, later dynasties were much more centralized than how Marx analyzed their European counterparts as being. To account for the discrepancy, Chinese Marxists invented the term &quot;bureaucratic feudalism&quot;. The placement of the Tang as the beginning of the bureaucratic phase rests largely on the replacement of patronage networks with the imperial examination. Some world-systems analysts, such as Janet Abu-Lughod, claim that analysis of Kondratiev waves shows that capitalism first arose in Song dynasty China, although widespread trade was subsequently disrupted and then curtailed.

The Japanese scholar Tanigawa Michio, writing in the 1970s and 1980s, set out to revise the generally Marxist views of China prevalent in post-war Japan. Tanigawa writes that historians in Japan fell into two schools. One held that China followed the set European pattern which Marxists thought to be universal; that is, from ancient slavery to medieval feudalism to modern capitalism; while another group argued that &quot;Chinese society was extraordinarily saturated with stagnancy, as compared to the West&quot; and assumed that China existed in a &quot;qualitatively different historical world from Western society&quot;. That is, there is an argument between those who see &quot;unilinear, monistic world history&quot; and those who conceive of a &quot;two-tracked or multi-tracked world history&quot;. Tanigawa reviewed the applications of these theories in Japanese writings about Chinese history and then tested them by analyzing the Six Dynasties 220–589 CE period, which Marxist historians saw as feudal. His conclusion was that China did not have feudalism in the sense that Marxists use, that Chinese military governments did not lead to a European-style military aristocracy. The period established social and political patterns which shaped China&#x27;s history from that point on.

There was a gradual relaxation of Marxist interpretation after the death of Mao Zedong in 1976, which was accelerated after the Tian&#x27;anmen Square protest and other revolutions in 1989, which damaged Marxism&#x27;s ideological legitimacy in the eyes of Chinese academics.

===Modernization===
This view of Chinese history sees Chinese society as a traditional society needing to become modern, usually with the implicit assumption of Western society as the model. Such a view was common amongst European and American historians during the 19th and early 20th centuries, but is now criticized for being a Eurocentric viewpoint, since such a view permits an implicit justification for breaking the society from its static past and bringing it into the modern world under European direction.

By the mid-20th century, it was increasingly clear to historians that the notion of &quot;changeless China&quot; was untenable. A new concept, popularized by John Fairbank, was the notion of &quot;change within tradition&quot;, which argued that China did change in the pre-modern period but that this change existed within certain cultural traditions. This notion has also been subject to the criticism that to say &quot;China has not changed fundamentally&quot; is tautological, since it requires that one look for things that have not changed and then arbitrarily define those as fundamental.

Nonetheless, studies seeing China&#x27;s interaction with Europe as the driving force behind its recent history are still common. Such studies may consider the First Opium War as the starting point for China&#x27;s modern period. Examples include the works of H.B. Morse, who wrote chronicles of China&#x27;s international relations such as &quot;Trade and Relations of the Chinese Empire&quot;. The Chinese convention is to use the word &quot;jindai&quot; (&quot;modern&quot;) to refer to a timeframe for modernity which begins with the Opium wars and continues through the May Fourth period.

In the 1950s, several of Fairbank&#x27;s students argued that Confucianism was incompatible with modernity. Joseph Levenson and Mary C. Wright, and Albert Feuerwerker argued in effect that traditional Chinese values were a barrier to modernity and would have to be abandoned before China could make progress. Wright concluded, &quot;The failure of the T&#x27;ung-chih [&quot;Tongzhi&quot;] Restoration demonstrated with a rare clarity that even in the most favorable circumstances there is no way in which an effective modern state can be grafted onto a Confucian society. Yet in the decades that followed, the political ideas that had been tested and, for all their grandeur, found wanting, were never given a decent burial.&quot;

In a different view of modernization, the Japanese historian Naito Torajiro argued that China reached modernity during its mid-Imperial period, centuries before Europe. He believed that the reform of the civil service into a meritocratic system and the disappearance of the ancient Chinese nobility from the bureaucracy constituted a modern society. The problem associated with this approach is the subjective meaning of modernity. The Chinese nobility had been in decline since the Qin dynasty, and while the exams were largely meritocratic, performance required time and resources that meant examinees were still typically from the gentry. Moreover, expertise in the Confucian classics did not guarantee competent bureaucrats when it came to managing public works or preparing a budget. Confucian hostility to commerce placed merchants at the bottom of the four occupations, itself an archaism maintained by devotion to classic texts. The social goal continued to be to invest in land and enter the gentry, ideas more like those of the physiocrats than those of Adam Smith.

===Hydraulic despotism===

With ideas derived from Marx and Max Weber, Karl August Wittfogel argued that bureaucracy arose to manage irrigation systems. Despotism was needed to force the people into building canals, dikes, and waterways to increase agriculture. Yu the Great, one of China&#x27;s legendary founders, is known for his control of the floods of the Yellow River. The hydraulic empire produces wealth from its stability; while dynasties may change, the structure remains intact until destroyed by modern powers. In Europe abundant rainfall meant less dependence on irrigation. In the Orient natural conditions were such that the bulk of the land could not be cultivated without large-scale irrigation works. As only a centralized administration could organize the building and maintenance of large-scale systems of irrigation, the need for such systems made bureaucratic despotism inevitable in Oriental lands.

When Wittfogel published his &quot;Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power&quot;, critics pointed out that water management was given the high status China accorded to officials concerned with taxes, rituals, or fighting off bandits. The theory also has a strong orientalist bent, regarding all Asian states as generally the same while finding reasons for European polities not fitting the pattern.

While Wittfogel&#x27;s theories were not popular among Marxist historians in China, the economist Chi Ch&#x27;ao-ting used them in his influential 1936 book, &quot;Key Economic Areas in Chinese History, as Revealed in the Development of Public Works for Water-Control&quot;. The book identified key areas of grain production which, when controlled by a strong political power, permitted that power to dominate the rest of the country and enforce periods of stability.

===Convergence===
Convergence theory, including Hu Shih and Ray Huang&#x27;s involution theory, holds that the past 150 years have been a period in which Chinese and Western civilization have been in the process of converging into a world civilization. Such a view is heavily influenced by modernization theory but, in China&#x27;s case, it is also strongly influenced by indigenous sources such as the notion of &quot;Shijie Datong&quot; or &quot;Great Unity&quot;. It has tended to be less popular among more recent historians, as postmodern Western historians discount overarching narratives, and nationalist Chinese historians feel similar about narratives failing to account for some special or unique characteristics of Chinese culture.

===Anti-imperialism===

Closely related are colonial and anti-imperialist narratives. These often merge or are part of Marxist critiques from within China or the former Soviet Union, or are postmodern critiques such as Edward Said&#x27;s &quot;Orientalism&quot;, which fault traditional scholarship for trying to fit West, South, and East Asia&#x27;s histories into European categories unsuited to them. With regard to China particularly, T.F. Tsiang and John Fairbank used newly opened archives in the 1930s to write modern history from a Chinese point of view. Fairbank and Teng Ssu-yu then edited the influential volume &quot;China&#x27;s Response to the West&quot; (1953). This approach was attacked for ascribing the change in China to outside forces. In the 1980s, Paul Cohen, a student of Fairbank&#x27;s, issued a call for a more &quot;China-Centered history of China&quot;.

===Republican===
The schools of thought on the 1911 Revolution have evolved from the early years of the Republic. The Marxist view saw the events of 1911 as a bourgeois revolution. In the 1920s, the Nationalist Party issued a theory of three political stages based on Sun Yatsen&#x27;s writings:
* Military unification – 1923 to 1928 (Northern Expedition)
* Political tutelage – 1928 to 1947
* Constitutional democracy – 1947 onward

The most obvious criticism is the near-identical nature of &quot;political tutelage&quot; and of a &quot;constitutional democracy&quot; consisting only of the one-party rule until the 1990s. Against this, Chen Shui-bian proposed his own four-stage theory.

===Postmodernism===
Postmodern interpretations of Chinese history tend to reject narrative history and instead focus on a small subset of Chinese history, particularly the daily lives of ordinary people in particular locations or settings.

===Long-term political economy===
Zooming out from the dynastic cycle but maintaining focus on power dynamics, the following general periodization, based on the most powerful groups and the ways that power is used, has been proposed for Chinese history:
* The aristocratic settlement state (to 550 BCE)
* Centralization of power with military revolution ( 550 BCE – 25 CE)
* Landowning families competing for central power and integrating the South ( 25 – 755)
* Imperial examination scholar-officials and commercialization ( 755 – 1550)
* Commercial interests with global convergence (since 1550)

==Recent trends==
From the beginning of CCP rule in 1949 until the 1980s, Chinese historical scholarship focused largely on the officially sanctioned Marxist theory of class struggle. From the time of Deng Xiaoping (1978–1992) on, there has been a drift towards a Marxist-inspired Chinese nationalist perspective, and consideration of China&#x27;s contemporary international status has become of paramount importance in historical studies. The current focus tends to be on specifics of civilization in ancient China, and the general paradigm of how China has responded to the dual challenges of interactions with the outside world and modernization in the post-1700 era. Long abandoned as a research focus among most Western scholars due to postmodernism&#x27;s influence, this remains the primary interest for most historians inside China.

The late 20th century and early 21st century have seen numerous studies of Chinese history that challenge traditional paradigms. The field is rapidly evolving, with much new scholarship, often based on the realization that there is much about Chinese history that is unknown or controversial. For example, an active topic concerns whether the typical Chinese peasant in 1900 was seeing his life improve. In addition to the realization that there are major gaps in our knowledge of Chinese history is the equal realization that there are tremendous quantities of primary source material that have not yet been analyzed. Scholars are using previously overlooked documentary evidence, such as masses of government and family archives, and economic records such as census tax rolls, price records, and land surveys. In addition, artifacts such as vernacular novels, how-to manuals, and children&#x27;s books are analyzed for clues about day-to-day life.

Recent Western scholarship of China has been heavily influenced by postmodernism, and has questioned modernist narratives of China&#x27;s backwardness and lack of development. The desire to challenge the preconception that 19th-century China was weak, for instance, has led to a scholarly interest in Qing expansion into Central Asia. Postmodern scholarship largely rejects grand narratives altogether, preferring to publish empirical studies on the socioeconomics, and political or cultural dynamics, of smaller communities within China.

As of at least 2023, there has been a surge of historical writing about key leaders of the Nationalist period. A significant amount of new writing includes texts written for a general (as opposed to only academic) audience. There has been an increasingly nuanced portrayal of Chiang Kai-shek, particularly in more favorably evaluating his leadership during the Second Sino-Japanese War and highlighting his position as one of the Big Four allied leaders. Recently released archival sources on the Nationalist era, including the Chiang Kai-shek diaries at Stanford University&#x27;s Hoover Institution, have contributed to a surge in academic publishing on the period.

===Nationalism===
In China, historical scholarship remains largely nationalist and modernist or even traditionalist. The legacies of the modernist school (such as Lo Hsiang-lin) and the traditionalist school (such as Qian Mu (Chien Mu)) remain strong in Chinese circles. The more modernist works focus on imperial systems in China and employ the scientific method to analyze epochs of Chinese dynasties from geographical, genealogical, and cultural artifacts. For example, using Carbon-14 dating and geographical records to correlate climates with cycles of calm and calamity in Chinese history. The traditionalist school of scholarship resorts to official imperial records and colloquial historical works, and analyzes the rise and fall of dynasties using Confucian philosophy, albeit modified by an institutional administration perspective.

After 1911, writers, historians and scholars in China and abroad generally deprecated the late imperial system and its failures. However, in the 21st century, a highly favorable revisionism has emerged in the popular culture, in both the media and social media. 
Florian Schneider argues that nationalism in China in the early twenty-first century is largely a product of the digital revolution and that a large fraction of the population participates as readers and commentators who relate ideas to their friends over the internet.

==See also==

* History of Chinese archaeology
* Timeline of Chinese history
* Dynasties of China
* Monarchy of China
* Five thousand years of Chinese civilization
* Official communications in imperial China
* Chinese industrialization
* Population history of China
* Sinology
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources and further reading===
* Beasley, W. G. and Edwin G. Pulleyblank, eds. &quot;Historians of China and Japan&quot;. (Oxford UP, 1962). Essays on the historiographical traditions in pre-modern times.
* 
* 
* 
* Arif Dirlik. &quot;Revolution and History: The Origins of Marxist Historiography in China, 1919–1937&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978. .
* Duara, Prasenjit. &quot;Rescuing History from the Nation: Questioning Narratives of Modern China&quot;. (U of Chicago Press, 1995).
* Evans, Paul M. &quot;John Fairbank and the American Understanding of Modern China&quot; (1988)
* Feuerwerker, Albert. &quot;History in Communist China&quot;. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1968. Essays on the post-1949 treatment of particular aspects of Chinese history.
* Fogel, Joshua A. &quot;Politics and Sinology: The Case of Naito Konan (1866–1934)&quot;. Harvard University Press, Harvard East Asian Monographs, 1984. . Naito Konan developed the influential thesis that China developed an early modern society from the 8th to the 12th century.
* 
* Li, Huaiyin. &quot;Reinventing Modern China: Imagination and Authenticity in Chinese Historical Writing&quot; (U of Hawaii Press, 2012),
* Rowe, William. &quot;Approaches to Modern Chinese Social History,&quot; in Olivier Zunz, ed., &quot;Reliving the Past: The Worlds of Social History&quot; (University of North Carolina Press 1985), pp. 236–296.
* Rozman, Gilbert. &quot;Soviet Studies of Premodern China: Assessments of Recent Scholarship&quot;. (Center For Chinese Studies, University of Michigan, 1984). .
* Shambaugh, David L. &quot;American Studies of Contemporary China&quot; (M.E. Sharpe, 1993)
* Schneider, Florian. &quot;Mediated Massacre: Digital Nationalism and History Discourse on China&#x27;s Web.&quot; &quot;Journal of Asian Studies&quot; 77.2 (2018): 429–452. online
* Schneider, Laurence A. &quot;Ku Chieh-Kang and China&#x27;s New History: Nationalism and the Quest for Alternative Traditions&quot;. (U of California Press, 1971). . The first generation of Chinese historians to use Western concepts to write the history of China.
* Tanaka, Stefan. &quot;Japan&#x27;s Orient: Rendering Pasts into History&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993. .
* See especially Pt One, &quot;Chinese Society And Feudalism: An Investigation Of The Past Literature,&quot; a review of Japanese historiography.
* Wilkinson, Endymion. &quot;Chinese History: A New Manual.&quot; (Harvard University Asia Center, Harvard-Yenching Institute Monograph Series New Edition, 2012). .
* 
* Zurndorfer, Harriet. &quot;A Guide to the &#x27;New&#x27; Chinese History: Recent Publications Concerning Chinese Social and Economic Development before 1800,&quot; &quot;International Review of Social History&quot; 33: 148–201.

===Primary sources===
* Fairbank, John K. &quot;Chinabound: A Fifty Year Memoir&quot; (1982)

==External links==

*Chinese Academy of Social Sciences</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133908" start="0" end="22" title="Chinese historiography" label="Chinese historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="109" end="125" title="Chinese history" label="history of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="222" end="235" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q283127" start="386" end="409" title="Oracle bones" label="tortoise shell or bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q596086" start="487" end="504" title="preservation bias" label="preservation bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="640" end="652" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495914" start="660" end="685" title="Shi Qiang pan" label="Shi Qiang &amp;quot;pan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q917520" start="715" end="742" title="Chinese bronze inscriptions" label="Chinese bronze inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q875313" start="901" end="918" title="Book of Documents" label="Book of Documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q747720" start="946" end="970" title="Spring and Autumn Annals" label="Spring and Autumn Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q736936" start="1018" end="1029" title="State of Lu" label="State of Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193866" start="1147" end="1152" title="annal" label="annal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="1225" end="1234" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q230230" start="1246" end="1255" title="Zuo zhuan" label="Zuo zhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230192" start="1277" end="1288" title="Zuo Qiuming" label="Zuo Qiuming"/>
<link wikidata="Q197396" start="1424" end="1435" title="Zhan Guo Ce" label="Zhan Guo Ce"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="1527" end="1548" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="1644" end="1674" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Records of the Grand Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="1717" end="1726" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401828" start="1774" end="1782" title="Sima Tan" label="Sima Tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1795" end="1806" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="1850" end="1864" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="2147" end="2161" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q175077" start="2173" end="2194" title="Twenty-Four Histories" label="Twenty-Four Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q465282" start="2563" end="2572" title="Liu Xiang (scholar)" label="Liu Xiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q453449" start="2577" end="2584" title="Liu Xin (scholar)" label="Liu Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q856025" start="2980" end="2987" title="Shitong" label="Shitong"/>
<link wikidata="Q708347" start="3062" end="3071" title="Liu Zhiji" label="Liu Zhiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="3275" end="3296" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q207062" start="3309" end="3323" title="Zizhi Tongjian" label="Zizhi Tongjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7479" start="3389" end="3413" title="Emperor Yingzong of Song" label="Emperor Yingzong of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q33566" start="3422" end="3432" title="Sima Guang" label="Sima Guang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7483" start="3551" end="3559" title="Emperor Shenzong of Song" label="Shenzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="3702" end="3714" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q334323" start="4009" end="4019" title="Ouyang Xiu" label="Ouyang Xiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275708" start="4058" end="4069" title="Xue Juzheng" label="Xue Juzheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q919488" start="4109" end="4142" title="New History of the Five Dynasties" label="New History of the Five Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4223" end="4235" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q379836" start="4382" end="4394" title="Liang Qichao" label="Liang Qichao"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="4450" end="4457" title="polemic" label="polemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11110049" start="4560" end="4571" title="Liu Yizheng" label="Liu Yizheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071594" start="4772" end="4785" title="Chang Chi-yun" label="Chang Chi-yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q709067" start="4787" end="4797" title="Gu Jiegang" label="Gu Jiegang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506857" start="4799" end="4808" title="Fu Sinian" label="Fu Sinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q697747" start="4814" end="4827" title="Tsiang Tingfu" label="Tsiang Tingfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="4848" end="4867" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q714824" start="4873" end="4883" title="Chen Yinke" label="Chen Yinke"/>
<link wikidata="Q707313" start="5012" end="5019" title="Qian Mu" label="Qian Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q357821" start="5199" end="5208" title="Guo Moruo" label="Guo Moruo"/>
<link wikidata="Q705864" start="5371" end="5377" title="Wu Han (historian)" label="Wu Han"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5509" end="5519" title="Three-age system#The Metallic Ages of Hesiod" label="three ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="5538" end="5544" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="5676" end="5685" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088191" start="5716" end="5725" title="sage king" label="sage king"/>
<link wikidata="Q819556" start="5727" end="5738" title="Emperor Yao" label="Emperor Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q313342" start="5743" end="5755" title="Emperor Shun" label="Emperor Shun"/>
<link wikidata="Q468747" start="5800" end="5812" title="Duke of Zhou" label="Duke of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="5832" end="5849" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q10105188" start="5902" end="5904" title="Zi (surname)" label="Zi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319145" start="5964" end="5980" title="dynastic cycle" label="cyclical pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="6238" end="6244" title="Yellow River" label="floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204213" start="6380" end="6387" title="rectification of names" label="rectify"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="6523" end="6533" title="golden age" label="golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q192121" start="6579" end="6591" title="teleology" label="teleological"/>
<link wikidata="Q955223" start="6653" end="6665" title="all under heaven" label="under heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008604" start="7244" end="7263" title="History of the Qing dynasty" label="history of the Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="7345" end="7356" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q699600" start="7361" end="7370" title="Zhang Xun (Qing loyalist)" label="Zhang Xun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344502" start="8371" end="8385" title="Owen Lattimore" label="Owen Lattimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="8514" end="8524" title="Han Chinese" label="Han people"/>
<link wikidata="Q42309911" start="8568" end="8583" title="Sino-Babylonianism" label="Sino-Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q93913" start="8630" end="8648" title="Science and technology in China" label="Chinese technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482612" start="8653" end="8661" title="Religion in China" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="8676" end="8688" title="Western Asia" label="Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="8792" end="8809" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8818" end="8849" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141544" start="8908" end="8921" title="Ethnic groups in Chinese history" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367193" start="8971" end="8987" title="High Qing era" label="territorial peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780812" start="9038" end="9052" title="Zhonghua minzu" label="Zhonghua minzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q108486101" start="9107" end="9121" title="Han chauvinism" label="Han chauvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q950326" start="9147" end="9158" title="Tongmenghui" label="Tongmenghui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089515" start="9241" end="9259" title="Conquest dynasty" label="conquest dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="9541" end="9556" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="14th Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q126736785" start="9704" end="9722" title="Five thousand years of Chinese civilization" label="5,000-year history"/>
<link wikidata="Q716341" start="9777" end="9796" title="Korean nationalism" label="Korean nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="9857" end="9863" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q277525" start="9887" end="9901" title="Goguryeo tombs" label="Goguryeo tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28370" start="9953" end="9961" title="Goguryeo" label="Goguryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="10127" end="10141" title="Joseon" label="Joseon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233" start="10150" end="10163" title="Korean Empire" label="Korean Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="10179" end="10191" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="10302" end="10308" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="10390" end="10401" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="10669" end="10673" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="10707" end="10714" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="10719" end="10726" title="Manchu people" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="10833" end="10837" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="10842" end="10846" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="10972" end="10995" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q874803" start="11032" end="11053" title="Historical revisionism" label="revisionist histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q15897151" start="11075" end="11091" title="New Qing History" label="New Qing History"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657013" start="11690" end="11723" title="Marxist historiography" label="Marxist interpretation of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q357821" start="11800" end="11809" title="Guo Moruo" label="Guo Moruo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="12101" end="12114" title="Slavery" label="Slave society"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="12117" end="12131" title="Feudalism" label="Feudal society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="12134" end="12152" title="Capitalist society" label="Capitalist society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="12155" end="12172" title="Socialism" label="Socialist society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154552" start="12185" end="12202" title="communist society" label="communist society"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="12368" end="12371" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="12375" end="12379" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="12415" end="12418" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="12422" end="12425" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="12460" end="12464" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="12472" end="12487" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="12549" end="12561" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151968" start="12606" end="12620" title="History of the Republic of China" label="Republican era"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="12643" end="12646" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="13279" end="13289" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636134" start="13354" end="13372" title="list of rebellions in China" label="peasant rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="13704" end="13710" title="feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151136" start="14024" end="14042" title="nine-rank system" label="patronage networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="14052" end="14072" title="imperial examination" label="imperial examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061896" start="14079" end="14101" title="World systems theory" label="world-systems analysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153129" start="14111" end="14127" title="Janet Abu-Lughod" label="Janet Abu-Lughod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088183" start="14152" end="14168" title="Kondratiev waves" label="Kondratiev waves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14321" end="14336" title="Tanigawa Michio" label="Tanigawa Michio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046461" start="14438" end="14452" title="Post-occupation Japan" label="post-war Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="14724" end="14739" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese society"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="14904" end="14919" title="Western world" label="Western society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197281" start="15243" end="15256" title="Six Dynasties" label="Six Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11127665" start="15665" end="15684" title="Death and state funeral of Mao Zedong" label="death of Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="15726" end="15756" title="Tiananmen Square protest of 1989" label="Tian&amp;#x27;anmen Square protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="15761" end="15778" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="other revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q376717" start="16206" end="16217" title="Eurocentrism" label="Eurocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394780" start="16550" end="16563" title="John King Fairbank" label="John Fairbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q209555" start="16859" end="16871" title="Tautology (logic)" label="tautological"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="17149" end="17164" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5907260" start="17249" end="17259" title="Hosea Ballou Morse" label="H.B. Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="17564" end="17574" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="17646" end="17658" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="17681" end="17690" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256371" start="17692" end="17707" title="Joseph Levenson" label="Joseph Levenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779153" start="17712" end="17726" title="Mary C. Wright" label="Mary C. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q11957240" start="17732" end="17750" title="Albert Feuerwerker" label="Albert Feuerwerker"/>
<link wikidata="Q475513" start="17936" end="17985" title="Tongzhi Restoration" label="T&amp;#x27;ung-chih [&amp;quot;Tongzhi&amp;quot;] Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138959" start="18378" end="18392" title="Naito Torajiro" label="Naito Torajiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="18440" end="18459" title="Mid-Imperial China" label="mid-Imperial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q708299" start="18521" end="18534" title="scholar-bureaucrat" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512388" start="18599" end="18615" title="Chinese nobility" label="Chinese nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959900" start="18951" end="18957" title="Chinese gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="18986" end="19004" title="Confucian classics" label="Confucian classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328489" start="19176" end="19192" title="four occupations" label="four occupations"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="19355" end="19366" title="physiocrats" label="physiocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="19381" end="19391" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="19454" end="19463" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q61082" start="19465" end="19486" title="Karl August Wittfogel" label="Karl August Wittfogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="19499" end="19510" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="19527" end="19545" title="Irrigation" label="irrigation systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="19602" end="19607" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="19610" end="19615" title="Dyke (embankment)" label="dikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="19621" end="19629" title="waterway" label="waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="19643" end="19654" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q627784" start="19656" end="19668" title="Yu the Great" label="Yu the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="19756" end="19768" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366407" start="19774" end="19790" title="hydraulic empire" label="hydraulic empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="20264" end="20286" title="bureaucratic despotism" label="bureaucratic despotism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20353" end="20407" title="Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power" label="Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="20596" end="20607" title="oriental studies" label="orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19851905" start="20831" end="20850" title="Ji Chaoding" label="Chi Ch&amp;#x27;ao-ting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20897" end="21000" title="Ji Chaoding#Key Economic Areas in Chinese History" label="Key Economic Areas in Chinese History, as Revealed in the Development of Public Works for Water-Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q47667" start="21250" end="21257" title="Hu Shih" label="Hu Shih"/>
<link wikidata="Q707088" start="21262" end="21271" title="Ray Huang" label="Ray Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="22003" end="22019" title="Anti-imperialism" label="anti-imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q201538" start="22165" end="22176" title="Edward Said" label="Edward Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574967" start="22190" end="22201" title="Orientalism (book)" label="Orientalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q697747" start="22385" end="22396" title="Jiang Tingfu" label="T.F. Tsiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394780" start="22401" end="22414" title="John King Fairbank" label="John Fairbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862237" start="22522" end="22533" title="Deng Siyu" label="Teng Ssu-yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597922" start="22575" end="22608" title="China&amp;#x27;s Response to the West" label="China&amp;#x27;s Response to the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428546" start="22717" end="22727" title="Paul Cohen (historian)" label="Paul Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="22877" end="22892" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="1911 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q751967" start="22989" end="23009" title="bourgeois revolution" label="bourgeois revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="23029" end="23046" title="Kuomintang" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="23098" end="23108" title="Sun Yatsen" label="Sun Yatsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="23165" end="23184" title="Northern Expedition (1926–1927)" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q213099" start="23224" end="23248" title="Constitution of the Republic of China" label="Constitutional democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22368" start="23469" end="23483" title="Chen Shui-bian" label="Chen Shui-bian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925409" start="23501" end="23518" title="Four-Stage Theory of the Republic of China" label="four-stage theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="24529" end="24543" title="Class conflict" label="class struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="24562" end="24575" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="24642" end="24661" title="Chinese nationalism" label="Chinese nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827190" start="25554" end="25569" title="Chinese peasantry" label="Chinese peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="26221" end="26234" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="26255" end="26264" title="modernist" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="26475" end="26487" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="26785" end="26803" title="Nationalist government" label="Nationalist period"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="26970" end="26985" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="27055" end="27079" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945433" start="27124" end="27132" title="Big Four (World War II)" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="27249" end="27268" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898813" start="27276" end="27294" title="Hoover Institution Library and Archives" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="27430" end="27441" title="Chinese nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663126" start="27526" end="27539" title="Lo Hsiang-lin" label="Lo Hsiang-lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q707313" start="27580" end="27598" title="Chien Mu" label="Qian Mu (Chien Mu)"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="27842" end="27858" title="Carbon-14 dating" label="Carbon-14 dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="28416" end="28431" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="28445" end="28450" title="Mass media" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="28455" end="28467" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874725" start="28757" end="28787" title="History of Chinese archaeology" label="History of Chinese archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521584" start="28790" end="28817" title="Timeline of Chinese history" label="Timeline of Chinese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857432" start="28820" end="28838" title="Dynasties of China" label="Dynasties of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q85786107" start="28841" end="28858" title="Monarchy of China" label="Monarchy of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q126736785" start="28861" end="28904" title="Five thousand years of Chinese civilization" label="Five thousand years of Chinese civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934376" start="28907" end="28948" title="Official communications in imperial China" label="Official communications in imperial China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100815" start="28951" end="28976" title="Chinese industrialization" label="Chinese industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872845" start="28979" end="29006" title="Population history of China" label="Population history of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q269915" start="29009" end="29017" title="Sinology" label="Sinology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181262" start="29085" end="29099" title="William G. Beasley" label="Beasley, W. G."/>
<link wikidata="Q4790538" start="29268" end="29279" title="Arif Dirlik" label="Arif Dirlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q11957240" start="29659" end="29679" title="Albert Feuerwerker" label="Feuerwerker, Albert."/>
<link wikidata="Q3138959" start="29983" end="29994" title="Naito Konan" label="Naito Konan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569068" start="30326" end="30338" title="Olivier Zunz" label="Olivier Zunz"/>
<link wikidata="Q63144815" start="30463" end="30478" title="Gilbert Rozman" label="Rozman, Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31471" end="31500" title="Chinese History: A New Manual" label="Chinese History: A New Manual"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7175" wikidata="Q17427" url="?curid=7175" title="Chinese Communist Party">
<text>The Chinese Communist Party (CCP), officially the Communist Party of China (CPC), is the founding and sole ruling party of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC). Under the leadership of Mao Zedong, the CCP emerged victorious in the Chinese Civil War against the Kuomintang. In 1949, Mao proclaimed the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. Since then, the CCP has governed China and has had sole control over the People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA). Successive leaders of the CCP have added their own theories to the party&#x27;s constitution, which outlines the party&#x27;s ideology, collectively referred to as socialism with Chinese characteristics. , the CCP has more than 99 million members, making it the second largest political party by membership in the world after India&#x27;s Bharatiya Janata Party.

In 1921, Chen Duxiu and Li Dazhao led the founding of the CCP with the help of the Far Eastern Bureau of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and Far Eastern Bureau of the Communist International. For the first six years, the CCP aligned itself with the Kuomintang (KMT) as the organized left wing of the larger nationalist movement. However, when the right wing of the KMT, led by Chiang Kai-shek, turned on the CCP and massacred tens of thousands of the party&#x27;s members, the two parties split and began a prolonged civil war. During the next ten years of guerrilla warfare, Mao Zedong rose to become the most influential figure in the CCP, and the party established a strong base among the rural peasantry with its land reform policies. Support for the CCP continued to grow throughout the Second Sino-Japanese War, and after the Japanese surrender in 1945, the CCP emerged triumphant in the communist revolution against the Nationalist government. After the KMT&#x27;s retreat to Taiwan, the CCP established the People&#x27;s Republic of China on 1 October 1949.

Mao Zedong continued to be the most influential member of the CCP until his death in 1976, although he periodically withdrew from public leadership as his health deteriorated. Under Mao, the party completed its land reform program, launched a series of five-year plans, and eventually split with the Soviet Union. Although Mao attempted to purge the party of capitalist and reactionary elements during the Cultural Revolution, after his death, these policies were only briefly continued by the Gang of Four before a less radical faction seized control. During the 1980s, Deng Xiaoping directed the CCP away from Maoist orthodoxy and towards a policy of economic liberalization. The official explanation for these reforms was that China was still in the primary stage of socialism, a developmental stage similar to the capitalist mode of production. Since the collapse of the Eastern Bloc and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the CCP has focused on maintaining its relations with the ruling parties of the remaining socialist states. The CCP has also established relations with several non-communist parties, including dominant nationalist parties of many developing countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, as well as social democratic parties in Europe.

The Chinese Communist Party is organized based on democratic centralism, a principle that entails open policy discussion on the condition of unity among party members in upholding the agreed-upon decision. The highest body of the CCP is the National Congress, convened every fifth year. When the National Congress is not in session, the Central Committee is the highest body, but since that body usually only meets once a year, most duties and responsibilities are vested in the Politburo and its Standing Committee. Members of the latter are seen as the top leadership of the party and the state. Today the party&#x27;s leader holds the offices of general secretary (responsible for civilian party duties), Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC) (responsible for military affairs), and State President (a largely ceremonial position). Because of these posts, the party leader is seen as the country&#x27;s paramount leader. The current leader is Xi Jinping, who was elected at the 1st Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee held on 15 November 2012 and has been reelected twice, on 25 October 2017 by the 19th Central Committee and on 10 October 2022 by the 20th Central Committee.

==History==
===Founding and early history===
The October Revolution and Marxist theory inspired the founding of the CCP. Chen Duxiu and Li Dazhao were among the first to publicly support Leninism and world revolution. Both regarded the October Revolution in Russia as groundbreaking, believing it to herald a new era for oppressed countries everywhere.

Some historical analysis views the May Fourth Movement as the beginning of the revolutionary struggle that led to the founding of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. Following the movement, trends towards social transformation increased. Writing in 1939, Mao Zedong stated that the Movement had shown that the bourgeois revolution against imperialism and China had developed to a new stage, but that the proletariat would lead the revolution&#x27;s completion. The May Fourth Movement led to the establishment of radical intellectuals who went on to mobilize peasants and workers into the CCP and gain the organizational strength that would solidify the success of the Chinese Communist Revolution. Chen and Li were among the most influential promoters of Marxism in China during the May Fourth period. The CCP itself embraces the May Fourth Movement and views itself as part of the movement&#x27;s legacy.

Study circles were, according to Cai Hesen, &quot;the rudiments [of our party]&quot;. Several study circles were established during the New Culture Movement, but by 1920 many grew sceptical about their ability to bring about reforms. China&#x27;s intellectual movements were fragmented in the early 1920s. The May Fourth Movement and the New Culture Movement had identified issues of broad concern to Chinese progressives, including anti-imperialism, support for nationalism, support for democracy, promotion of feminism, and rejection of traditional values. Proposed solutions among Chinese progressives differed significantly, however.

The CCP was founded on 1 July 1921 with the help of the Far Eastern Bureau of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and Far Eastern Secretariat of the Communist International, according to the party&#x27;s official account of its history. However, party documents suggest that the party&#x27;s actual founding date was 23 July 1921, the first day of the 1st National Congress of the CCP. The founding National Congress of the CCP was held 23–31 July 1921. With only 50 members in the beginning of 1921, among them Chen Duxiu, Li Dazhao and Mao Zedong, the CCP organization and authorities grew tremendously. While it was originally held in a house in the Shanghai French Concession, French police interrupted the meeting on 30 July and the congress was moved to a tourist boat on South Lake in Jiaxing, Zhejiang province. A dozen delegates attended the congress, with neither Li nor Chen being able to attend, the latter sending a personal representative in his stead. The resolutions of the congress called for the establishment of a communist party as a branch of the Communist International (Comintern) and elected Chen as its leader. Chen then served as the first general secretary of the CCP and was referred to as &quot;China&#x27;s Lenin&quot;.

The Soviets hoped to foster pro-Soviet forces in East Asia to fight against anti-communist countries, particularly Japan. They attempted to contact the warlord Wu Peifu but failed. The Soviets then contacted the Kuomintang (KMT), which was leading the Guangzhou government parallel to the Beiyang government. On 6 October 1923, the Comintern sent Mikhail Borodin to Guangzhou, and the Soviets established friendly relations with the KMT. The Central Committee of the CCP, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, and the Comintern all hoped that the CCP would eventually control the KMT and called their opponents &quot;rightists&quot;. KMT leader Sun Yat-sen eased the conflict between the communists and their opponents. CCP membership grew tremendously after the 4th congress in 1925, from 900 to 2,428. The CCP still treats Sun Yat-sen as one of the founders of their movement and claim descent from him as he is viewed as a proto-communist and the economic element of Sun&#x27;s ideology was socialism. Sun stated, &quot;Our Principle of Livelihood is a form of communism&quot;.

The communists dominated the left wing of the KMT and struggled for power with the party&#x27;s right-wing factions. When Sun Yat-sen died in March 1925, he was succeeded by a rightist, Chiang Kai-shek, who initiated moves to marginalize the position of the communists. Chiang, Sun&#x27;s former assistant, was not actively anti-communist at that time, even though he hated the theory of class struggle and the CCP&#x27;s seizure of power. The communists proposed removing Chiang&#x27;s power. When Chiang gradually gained the support of Western countries, the conflict between him and the communists became more and more intense. Chiang asked the Kuomintang to join the Comintern to rule out the secret expansion of communists within the KMT, while Chen Duxiu hoped that the communists would completely withdraw from the KMT.

In April 1927, both Chiang and the CCP were preparing for conflict. Fresh from the success of the Northern Expedition to overthrow the warlords, Chiang Kai-shek turned on the communists, who by now numbered in the tens of thousands across China. Ignoring the orders of the Wuhan-based KMT government, he marched on Shanghai, a city controlled by communist militias. Although the communists welcomed Chiang&#x27;s arrival, he turned on them, massacring 5,000 with the aid of the Green Gang. Chiang&#x27;s army then marched on Wuhan but was prevented from taking the city by CCP General Ye Ting and his troops. Chiang&#x27;s allies also attacked communists; for example, in Beijing, Li Dazhao and 19 other leading communists were executed by Zhang Zuolin. Angered by these events, the peasant movement supported by the CCP became more violent. Ye Dehui, a famous scholar, was killed by communists in Changsha, and in revenge, KMT general He Jian and his troops gunned down hundreds of peasant militiamen. That May, tens of thousands of communists and their sympathizers were killed by KMT troops, with the CCP losing approximately of its members.

===Chinese Civil War and Second Sino-Japanese War===

The CCP continued supporting the Wuhan KMT government, but on 15 July 1927 the Wuhan government expelled all communists from the KMT. The CCP reacted by founding the Workers&#x27; and Peasants&#x27; Red Army of China, better known as the &quot;Red Army&quot;, to battle the KMT. A battalion led by General Zhu De was ordered to take the city of Nanchang on 1 August 1927 in what became known as the Nanchang uprising.

Initially successful, Zhu and his troops were forced to retreat after five days, marching south to Shantou, and from there being driven into the wilderness of Fujian. Mao Zedong was appointed commander-in-chief of the Red Army, and led four regiments against Changsha in the Autumn Harvest Uprising, hoping to spark peasant uprisings across Hunan. His plan was to attack the KMT-held city from three directions on 9 September, but the Fourth Regiment deserted to the KMT cause, attacking the Third Regiment. Mao&#x27;s army made it to Changsha but could not take it; by 15 September, he accepted defeat, with 1,000 survivors marching east to the Jinggang Mountains of Jiangxi.

The near destruction of the CCP&#x27;s urban organizational apparatus led to institutional changes within the party. The party adopted democratic centralism, a way to organize revolutionary parties, and established a politburo to function as the standing committee of the central committee. The result was increased centralization of power within the party. At every level of the party this was duplicated, with standing committees now in effective control. After being expelled from the party, Chen Duxiu went on to lead China&#x27;s Trotskyist movement. Li Lisan was able to assume &quot;de facto&quot; control of the party organization by 1929–1930.

The 1929 Gutian Congress was important in establishing the principle of party control over the military, which continues to be a core principle of the party&#x27;s ideology.

Li&#x27;s leadership was a failure, leaving the CCP on the brink of destruction. The Comintern became involved, and by late 1930, his powers had been taken away. By 1935, Mao had become a member of Politburo Standing Committee of the CCP and the party&#x27;s informal military leader, with Zhou Enlai and Zhang Wentian, the formal head of the party, serving as his informal deputies. The conflict with the KMT led to the reorganization of the Red Army, with power now centralized in the leadership through the creation of CCP political departments charged with supervising the army.

The Xi&#x27;an Incident of December 1936 paused the conflict between the CCP and the KMT. Under pressure from Marshal Zhang Xueliang and the CCP, Chiang Kai-shek finally agreed to a Second United Front focused on repelling the Japanese invaders. While the front formally existed until 1945, all collaboration between the two parties had effectively ended by 1940. Despite their formal alliance, the CCP used the opportunity to expand and carve out independent bases of operations to prepare for the coming war with the KMT. In 1939, the KMT began to restrict CCP expansion within China. This led to frequent clashes between CCP and KMT forces which subsided rapidly on the realization on both sides that civil war amidst a foreign invasion was not an option. By 1943, the CCP was again actively expanding its territory at the expense of the KMT.

Mao Zedong became the Chairman of the CCP in 1945. After the Japanese surrender in 1945, the war between the CCP and the KMT began again in earnest. The 1945–1949 period had four stages; the first was from August 1945 (when the Japanese surrendered) to June 1946 (when the peace talks between the CCP and the KMT ended). By 1945, the KMT had three times more soldiers under its command than the CCP and initially appeared to be prevailing. With the cooperation of the US and Japan, the KMT was able to retake major parts of the country. However, KMT rule over the reconquered territories proved unpopular because of its endemic political corruption.

Notwithstanding its numerical superiority, the KMT failed to reconquer the rural territories which made up the CCP&#x27;s stronghold. Around the same time, the CCP launched an invasion of Manchuria, where they were assisted by the Soviet Union. The second stage, lasting from July 1946 to June 1947, saw the KMT extend its control over major cities such as Yan&#x27;an, the CCP headquarters, for much of the war. The KMT&#x27;s successes were hollow; the CCP had tactically withdrawn from the cities, and instead undermined KMT rule there by instigating protests among students and intellectuals. The KMT responded to these demonstrations with heavy-handed repression. In the meantime, the KMT was struggling with factional infighting and Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s autocratic control over the party, which weakened its ability to respond to attacks.

The third stage, lasting from July 1947 to August 1948, saw a limited counteroffensive by the CCP. The objective was clearing &quot;Central China, strengthening North China, and recovering Northeast China.&quot; This operation, coupled with military desertions from the KMT, resulted in the KMT losing 2 million of its 3 million troops by the spring of 1948, and saw a significant decline in support for KMT rule. The CCP was consequently able to cut off KMT garrisons in Manchuria and retake several territories.

The last stage, lasting from September 1948 to December 1949, saw the communists go on the offensive and the collapse of KMT rule in mainland China as a whole. Mao&#x27;s proclamation of the founding of the People&#x27;s Republic of China on 1 October 1949 marked the end of the second phase of the Chinese Civil War (or the Chinese Communist Revolution, as it is called by the CCP).

===Proclamation of the PRC and the 1950s===
Mao proclaimed the founding of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) before a massive crowd at Tiananmen Square on 1 October 1949. The CCP headed the Central People&#x27;s Government. From this time through the 1980s, top leaders of the CCP (such as Mao Zedong, Lin Biao, Zhou Enlai and Deng Xiaoping) were largely the same military leaders prior to the PRC&#x27;s founding. As a result, informal personal ties between political and military leaders dominated civil-military relations.

Stalin proposed a one-party constitution when Liu Shaoqi visited the Soviet Union in 1952. The constitution of the PRC in 1954 subsequently abolished the previous coalition government and established the CCP&#x27;s one-party system. In 1957, the CCP launched the Anti-Rightist Campaign against political dissidents and prominent figures from minor parties, which resulted in the political persecution of at least 550,000 people. The campaign significantly damaged the limited pluralistic nature in the socialist republic and solidified the country&#x27;s status as a &quot;de facto&quot; one-party state.

The Anti-Rightist Campaign led to the catastrophic results of the Second Five Year Plan from 1958 to 1962, known as the Great Leap Forward. In an effort to transform the country from an agrarian economy into an industrialized one, the CCP collectivized farmland, formed people&#x27;s communes, and diverted labour to factories. General mismanagement and exaggerations of harvests by CCP officials led to the Great Chinese Famine, which resulted in an estimated 15 to 45 million deaths, making it the largest famine in recorded history.

===Sino-Soviet split and Cultural Revolution===
During the 1960s and 1970s, the CCP experienced a significant ideological separation from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union which was going through a period of &quot;de-Stalinization&quot; under Nikita Khrushchev. By that time, Mao had begun saying that the &quot;continued revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat&quot; stipulated that class enemies continued to exist even though the socialist revolution seemed to be complete, leading to the Cultural Revolution in which millions were persecuted and killed. During the Cultural Revolution, party leaders such as Liu Shaoqi, Deng Xiaoping, Peng Dehuai, and He Long were purged or exiled, and the Gang of Four, led by Mao&#x27;s wife Jiang Qing, emerged to fill in the power vacuum left behind.

===Reforms under Deng Xiaoping===
Following Mao&#x27;s death in 1976, a power struggle between CCP chairman Hua Guofeng and vice-chairman Deng Xiaoping erupted. Deng won the struggle, and became China&#x27;s paramount leader in 1978. Deng, alongside Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, spearheaded the &quot;reform and opening-up&quot; policies, and introduced the ideological concept of socialism with Chinese characteristics, opening China to the world&#x27;s markets. In reversing some of Mao&#x27;s &quot;leftist&quot; policies, Deng argued that a socialist state could use the market economy without itself being capitalist. While asserting the political power of the CCP, the change in policy generated significant economic growth. This was justified on the basis that &quot;Practice is the Sole Criterion for the Truth&quot;, a principle reinforced through a 1978 article that aimed to combat dogmatism and criticized the &quot;Two Whatevers&quot; policy. The new ideology, however, was contested on both sides of the spectrum, by Maoists to the left of the CCP&#x27;s leadership, as well as by those supporting political liberalization. In 1981, the Party adopted a historical resolution, which assessed the historical legacy of the Mao Zedong era and the future priorities of the CCP. With other social factors, the conflicts culminated in the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre. The protests having been crushed and the reformist party general secretary Zhao Ziyang under house arrest, Deng&#x27;s economic policies resumed and by the early 1990s the concept of a socialist market economy had been introduced. In 1997, Deng&#x27;s beliefs (officially called &quot;Deng Xiaoping Theory&quot;) were embedded into the CCP&#x27;s constitution.

===Further reforms under Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao===
CCP general secretary Jiang Zemin succeeded Deng as paramount leader in the 1990s and continued most of his policies. In the 1990s, the CCP transformed from a veteran revolutionary leadership that was both leading militarily and politically, to a political elite increasingly renewed according to institutionalized norms in the civil bureaucracy. Leadership was largely selected based on rules and norms on promotion and retirement, educational background, and managerial and technical expertise. There is a largely separate group of professionalized military officers, serving under top CCP leadership largely through formal relationships within institutional channels.

The CCP ratified Jiang&#x27;s Three Represents concept for the 2003 revision of the party&#x27;s constitution, as a &quot;guiding ideology&quot; to encourage the party to represent &quot;advanced productive forces, the progressive course of China&#x27;s culture, and the fundamental interests of the people.&quot; The theory legitimized the entry of private business owners and bourgeois elements into the party. Hu Jintao, Jiang Zemin&#x27;s successor as general secretary, took office in 2002. Unlike Mao, Deng and Jiang Zemin, Hu laid emphasis on collective leadership and opposed one-man dominance of the political system. The insistence on focusing on economic growth led to a wide range of serious social problems. To address these, Hu introduced two main ideological concepts: the &quot;Scientific Outlook on Development&quot; and &quot;Harmonious Society&quot;. Hu resigned from his post as CCP general secretary and Chairman of the CMC at the 18th National Congress held in 2012, and was succeeded in both posts by Xi Jinping.

===Leadership of Xi Jinping===
Since taking power, Xi has initiated a wide-reaching anti-corruption campaign, while centralizing powers in the office of CCP general secretary at the expense of the collective leadership of prior decades. Commentators have described the campaign as a defining part of Xi&#x27;s leadership as well as &quot;the principal reason why he has been able to consolidate his power so quickly and effectively.&quot; Xi&#x27;s leadership has also overseen an increase in the Party&#x27;s role in China. Xi has added his ideology, named after himself, into the CCP constitution in 2017. Xi&#x27;s term as general secretary was renewed in 2022.

Since 2014, the CCP has led efforts in Xinjiang that involve the detention of more than 1 million Uyghurs and other ethnic minorities in internment camps, as well as other repressive measures. This has been described as a genocide by some academics and some governments. On the other hand, a greater number of countries signed a letter penned to the Human Rights Council supporting the policies as an effort to combat terrorism in the region.

Celebrations of the 100th anniversary of the CCP&#x27;s founding, one of the Two Centenaries, took place on 1 July 2021. In the sixth plenary session of the 19th Central Committee in November 2021, CCP adopted a resolution on the Party&#x27;s history, which for the first time credited Xi as being the &quot;main innovator&quot; of Xi Jinping Thought while also declaring Xi&#x27;s leadership as being &quot;the key to the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation&quot;. In comparison with the other historical resolutions, Xi&#x27;s one did not herald a major change in how the CCP evaluated its history.

On 6 July 2021, Xi chaired the Communist Party of China and World Political Parties Summit, which involved representatives from 500 political parties across 160 countries. Xi urged the participants to oppose &quot;technology blockades,&quot; and &quot;developmental decoupling&quot; in order to work towards &quot;building a community with a shared future for mankind.&quot;

==Ideology==
===Formal ideology===

The core ideology of the party has evolved with each distinct generation of Chinese leadership. As both the CCP and the People&#x27;s Liberation Army promote their members according to seniority, it is possible to discern distinct generations of Chinese leadership. In official discourse, each group of leadership is identified with a distinct extension of the ideology of the party. Historians have studied various periods in the development of the government of the People&#x27;s Republic of China by reference to these &quot;generations&quot;.

Marxism–Leninism was the first official ideology of the CCP. According to the CCP, &quot;Marxism–Leninism reveals the universal laws governing the development of history of human society.&quot; To the CCP, Marxism–Leninism provides a &quot;vision of the contradictions in capitalist society and of the inevitability of a future socialist and communist societies&quot;. According to the &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot;, Mao Zedong Thought &quot;is Marxism–Leninism applied and developed in China&quot;. Mao Zedong Thought was conceived not only by Mao Zedong, but by leading party officials, according to Xinhua News Agency.

Deng Xiaoping Theory was added to the party constitution at the 14th National Congress in 1992. The concepts of &quot;socialism with Chinese characteristics&quot; and &quot;the primary stage of socialism&quot; were credited to the theory. Deng Xiaoping Theory can be defined as a belief that state socialism and state planning is not by definition communist, and that market mechanisms are class neutral. In addition, the party needs to react to the changing situation dynamically; to know if a certain policy is obsolete or not, the party had to &quot;seek truth from facts&quot; and follow the slogan &quot;practice is the sole criterion for the truth&quot;. At the 14th National Congress, Jiang reiterated Deng&#x27;s mantra that it was unnecessary to ask if something was socialist or capitalist, since the important factor was whether it worked.

The &quot;Three Represents&quot;, Jiang Zemin&#x27;s contribution to the party&#x27;s ideology, was adopted by the party at the 16th National Congress. The Three Represents defines the role of the CCP, and stresses that the Party must always represent the requirements for developing China&#x27;s advanced productive forces, the orientation of China&#x27;s advanced culture and the fundamental interests of the overwhelming majority of the Chinese people.&quot; Certain segments within the CCP criticized the Three Represents as being un-Marxist and a betrayal of basic Marxist values. Supporters viewed it as a further development of socialism with Chinese characteristics. Jiang disagreed, and had concluded that attaining the communist mode of production, as formulated by earlier communists, was more complex than had been realized, and that it was useless to try to force a change in the mode of production, as it had to develop naturally, by following the &quot;economic laws of history.&quot; The theory is most notable for allowing capitalists, officially referred to as the &quot;new social strata&quot;, to join the party on the grounds that they engaged in &quot;honest labor and work&quot; and through their labour contributed &quot;to build[ing] socialism with Chinese characteristics.&quot;

In 2003, the 3rd Plenary Session of the 16th Central Committee conceived and formulated the ideology of the Scientific Outlook on Development (SOD). It is considered to be Hu Jintao&#x27;s contribution to the official ideological discourse. The SOD incorporates scientific socialism, sustainable development, social welfare, a humanistic society, increased democracy, and, ultimately, the creation of a Socialist Harmonious Society. According to official statements by the CCP, the concept integrates &quot;Marxism with the reality of contemporary China and with the underlying features of our times, and it fully embodies the Marxist worldview on and methodology for development.&quot;

Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, commonly known as Xi Jinping Thought, was added to the party constitution in the 19th National Congress in 2017. The theory&#x27;s main elements are summarized in the ten affirmations, the fourteen commitments, and the thirteen areas of achievements.

The party combines elements of both socialist patriotism and Chinese nationalism.

===Economics===
Deng did not believe that the fundamental difference between the capitalist mode of production and the socialist mode of production was central planning versus free markets. He said, &quot;A planned economy is not the definition of socialism, because there is planning under capitalism; the market economy happens under socialism, too. Planning and market forces are both ways of controlling economic activity&quot;. Jiang Zemin supported Deng&#x27;s thinking, and stated in a party gathering that it did not matter if a certain mechanism was capitalist or socialist, because the only thing that mattered was whether it worked. It was at this gathering that Jiang Zemin introduced the term socialist market economy, which replaced Chen Yun&#x27;s &quot;planned socialist market economy&quot;. In his report to the 14th National Congress Jiang Zemin told the delegates that the socialist state would &quot;let market forces play a basic role in resource allocation.&quot; At the 15th National Congress, the party line was changed to &quot;make market forces further play their role in resource allocation&quot;; this line continued until the 3rd Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee, when it was amended to &quot;let market forces play a &quot;decisive&quot; role in resource allocation.&quot; Despite this, the 3rd Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee upheld the creed &quot;Maintain the dominance of the public sector and strengthen the economic vitality of the state-owned economy.&quot;

The CCP views the world as organized into two opposing camps; socialist and capitalist. They insist that socialism, on the basis of historical materialism, will eventually triumph over capitalism. In recent years, when the party has been asked to explain the capitalist globalization occurring, the party has returned to the writings of Karl Marx. Despite admitting that globalization developed through the capitalist system, the party&#x27;s leaders and theorists argue that globalization is not intrinsically capitalist. The reason being that if globalization was purely capitalist, it would exclude an alternative socialist form of modernity. Globalization, as with the market economy, therefore does not have one specific class character (neither socialist nor capitalist) according to the party. The insistence that globalization is not fixed in nature comes from Deng&#x27;s insistence that China can pursue socialist modernization by incorporating elements of capitalism. Because of this there is considerable optimism within the CCP that despite the current capitalist dominance of globalization, globalization can be turned into a vehicle supporting socialism.

===Analysis and criticism===
While foreign analysts generally agree that the CCP has rejected orthodox Marxism–Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought (or at least basic thoughts within orthodox thinking), the CCP itself disagrees. Critics of the CCP argue that Jiang Zemin ended the party&#x27;s formal commitment to Marxism–Leninism with the introduction of the ideological theory, the Three Represents. However, party theorist Leng Rong disagrees, claiming that &quot;President Jiang rid the Party of the ideological obstacles to different kinds of ownership... He did not give up Marxism or socialism. He strengthened the Party by providing a modern understanding of Marxism and socialism—which is why we talk about a &#x27;socialist market economy&#x27; with Chinese characteristics.&quot; The attainment of true &quot;communism&quot; is still described as the CCP&#x27;s and China&#x27;s &quot;ultimate goal&quot;. While the CCP claims that China is in the primary stage of socialism, party theorists argue that the current development stage &quot;looks a lot like capitalism&quot;. Alternatively, certain party theorists argue that &quot;capitalism is the early or first stage of communism.&quot; Some have dismissed the concept of a primary stage of socialism as intellectual cynicism. For example, Robert Lawrence Kuhn, a former foreign adviser to the Chinese government, stated: &quot;When I first heard this rationale, I thought it more comic than clever—a wry caricature of hack propagandists leaked by intellectual cynics. But the 100-year horizon comes from serious political theorists.&quot;

American political scientist and sinologist David Shambaugh argues that before the &quot;Practice Is the Sole Criterion for the Truth&quot; campaign, the relationship between ideology and decision making was a deductive one, meaning that policy-making was derived from ideological knowledge. However, under Deng&#x27;s leadership this relationship was turned upside down, with decision making justifying ideology. Chinese policy-makers have described the Soviet Union&#x27;s state ideology as &quot;rigid, unimaginative, ossified, and disconnected from reality&quot;, believing that this was one of the reasons for the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Therefore, Shambaugh argues, Chinese policy-makers believe that their party ideology must be dynamic to safeguard the party&#x27;s rule.

British sinologist Kerry Brown argues that the CCP does not have an ideology, and that the party organization is pragmatic and interested only in what works. The party itself argues against this assertion. Hu Jintao stated in 2012 that the Western world is &quot;threatening to divide us&quot; and that &quot;the international culture of the West is strong while we are weak ... Ideological and cultural fields are our main targets&quot;. As such, the CCP puts a great deal of effort into the party schools and into crafting its ideological message.

==Governance==

===Collective leadership===

Collective leadership, the idea that decisions will be taken through consensus, has been the ideal in the CCP. The concept has its origins back to Lenin and the Russian Bolshevik Party. At the level of the central party leadership this means that, for instance, all members of the Politburo Standing Committee are of equal standing (each member having only one vote). A member of the Politburo Standing Committee often represents a sector; during Mao&#x27;s reign, he controlled the People&#x27;s Liberation Army, Kang Sheng, the security apparatus, and Zhou Enlai, the State Council and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This counts as informal power. Despite this, in a paradoxical relation, members of a body are ranked hierarchically (despite the fact that members are in theory equal to one another). Informally, the collective leadership is headed by a &quot;leadership core&quot;; that is, the paramount leader, the person who holds the offices of CCP general secretary, CMC chairman and PRC president. Before Jiang Zemin&#x27;s tenure as paramount leader, the party core and collective leadership were indistinguishable. In practice, the core was not responsible to the collective leadership. However, by the time of Jiang, the party had begun propagating a responsibility system, referring to it in official pronouncements as the &quot;core of the collective leadership&quot;. Academics have noted a decline in collective leadership under Xi Jinping.

===Democratic centralism===

The CCP&#x27;s organizational principle is democratic centralism, a principle that entails open discussion of policy on the condition of unity among party members in upholding the agreed-upon decision. It is based on two principles: democracy (synonymous in official discourse with &quot;socialist democracy&quot; and &quot;inner-party democracy&quot;) and centralism. This has been the guiding organizational principle of the party since the 5th National Congress, held in 1927. In the words of the party constitution, &quot;The Party is an integral body organized under its program and constitution and on the basis of democratic centralism&quot;. Mao once quipped that democratic centralism was &quot;at once democratic and centralized, with the two seeming opposites of democracy and centralization united in a definite form.&quot; Mao claimed that the superiority of democratic centralism lay in its internal contradictions, between democracy and centralism, and freedom and discipline. Currently, the CCP is claiming that &quot;democracy is the lifeline of the Party, the lifeline of socialism&quot;. But for democracy to be implemented, and functioning properly, there needs to be centralization. Democracy in any form, the CCP claims, needs centralism, since without centralism there will be no order.

===&quot;Shuanggui&quot;===
&quot;Shuanggui&quot; is an intra-party disciplinary process conducted by the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (CCDI), which conducts &quot;shuanggui&quot; on members accused of &quot;disciplinary violations&quot;, a charge which generally refers to political corruption. The process, which literally translates to &quot;double regulation&quot;, aims to extract confessions from members accused of violating party rules. According to the Dui Hua Foundation, tactics such as cigarette burns, beatings and simulated drowning are among those used to extract confessions. Other reported techniques include the use of induced hallucinations, with one subject of this method reporting that &quot;In the end I was so exhausted, I agreed to all the accusations against me even though they were false.&quot;

===United front===
The CCP employs a political strategy that it terms &quot;united front work&quot; that involves groups and key individuals that are influenced or controlled by the CCP and used to advance its interests. United front work is managed primarily but not exclusively by the United Front Work Department (UFWD). The united front has historically been a popular front that has included eight legally-permitted political parties alongside other people&#x27;s organizations which have nominal representation in the National People&#x27;s Congress and the Chinese People&#x27;s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC). However, the CPPCC is a body without real power. While consultation does take place, it is supervised and directed by the CCP. Under Xi Jinping, the united front and its targets of influence have expanded in size and scope.

==Organization==
===Central organization===
The National Congress is the party&#x27;s highest body, and, since the 9th National Congress in 1969, has been convened every five years (prior to the 9th Congress they were convened on an irregular basis). According to the party&#x27;s constitution, a congress may not be postponed except &quot;under extraordinary circumstances.&quot; The party constitution gives the National Congress six responsibilities:
# Electing the Central Committee;
# Electing the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (CCDI);
# Examining the report of the outgoing Central Committee;
# Examining the report of the outgoing CCDI;
# Discussing and enacting party policies; and,
# Revising the party&#x27;s constitution.

In practice, the delegates rarely discuss issues at length at the National Congresses. Most substantive discussion takes place before the congress, in the preparation period, among a group of top party leaders. In between National Congresses, the Central Committee is the highest decision-making institution. The CCDI is responsible for supervising party&#x27;s internal anti-corruption and ethics system. In between congresses the CCDI is under the authority of the Central Committee.

The Central Committee, as the party&#x27;s highest decision-making institution between national congresses, elects several bodies to carry out its work. The first plenary session of a newly elected central committee elects the general secretary of the Central Committee, the party&#x27;s leader; the Central Military Commission (CMC); the Politburo; the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC). The first plenum also endorses the composition of the Secretariat and the leadership of the CCDI. According to the party constitution, the general secretary must be a member of the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC), and is responsible for convening meetings of the PSC and the Politburo, while also presiding over the work of the Secretariat. The Politburo &quot;exercises the functions and powers of the Central Committee when a plenum is not in session&quot;. The PSC is the party&#x27;s highest decision-making institution when the Politburo, the Central Committee and the National Congress are not in session. It convenes at least once a week. It was established at the 8th National Congress, in 1958, to take over the policy-making role formerly assumed by the Secretariat. The Secretariat is the top implementation body of the Central Committee, and can make decisions within the policy framework established by the Politburo; it is also responsible for supervising the work of organizations that report directly into the Central Committee, for example departments, commissions, publications, and so on. The CMC is the highest decision-making institution on military affairs within the party, and controls the operations of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army. The general secretary has, since Jiang Zemin, also served as Chairman of the CMC. Unlike the collective leadership ideal of other party organs, the CMC chairman acts as commander-in-chief with full authority to appoint or dismiss top military officers at will.

A first plenum of the Central Committee also elects heads of departments, bureaus, central leading groups and other institutions to pursue its work during a term (a &quot;term&quot; being the period elapsing between national congresses, usually five years). The General Office is the party&#x27;s &quot;nerve centre&quot;, in charge of day-to-day administrative work, including communications, protocol, and setting agendas for meetings. The CCP currently has six main central departments: the Organization Department, responsible for overseeing provincial appointments and vetting cadres for future appointments, the Publicity Department (formerly &quot;Propaganda Department&quot;), which oversees the media and formulates the party line to the media, the United Front Work Department, which oversees the country&#x27;s eight minor parties, people&#x27;s organizations, and influence groups inside and outside of the country, the International Department, functioning as the party&#x27;s &quot;foreign affairs ministry&quot; with other parties, the Social Work Department, which handles work related to civic groups, chambers of commerce and industry groups and mixed-ownership and non-public enterprises, and the Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission, which oversees the country&#x27;s legal enforcement authorities. The CC also has direct control over the Central Policy Research Office, which is responsible for researching issues of significant interest to the party leadership, the Central Party School, which provides political training and ideological indoctrination in communist thought for high-ranking and rising cadres, the Institute of Party History and Literature, which sets priorities for scholarly research in state-run universities and the Central Party School and studies and translates the classical works of Marxism. The party&#x27;s newspaper, the &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot;, is under the direct control of the Central Committee and is published with the objectives &quot;to tell good stories about China and the (Party)&quot; and to promote its party leader. The theoretical magazines &quot;Qiushi&quot; and &quot;Study Times&quot; are published by the Central Party School. The China Media Group, which oversees China Central Television (CCTV), China National Radio (CNR) and China Radio International (CRI), is under the direct control of the Publicity Department. The various offices of the &quot;Central Leading Groups&quot;, such as the Hong Kong and Macau Work Office, the Taiwan Affairs Office, and the Central Finance Office, also report to the central committee during a plenary session. Additionally, CCP has sole control over the People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA) through its Central Military Commission.

===Lower-level organizations===
After seizing political power, the CCP extended the dual party-state command system to all government institutions, social organizations, and economic entities. The State Council and the Supreme Court each has a party group, established since November 1949. Party committees permeate in every state administrative organ as well as the People&#x27;s Consultation Conferences and mass organizations at all levels. According to scholar Rush Doshi, &quot;[t]he Party sits above the state, runs parallel to the state, and is enmeshed in every level of the state.&quot; Modelled after the Soviet Nomenklatura system, the party committee&#x27;s organization department at each level has the power to recruit, train, monitor, appoint, and relocate these officials.

Party committees exist at the level of provinces, cities, counties, and neighbourhoods. These committees play a key role in directing local policy by selecting local leaders and assigning critical tasks. The Party secretary at each level is more senior than that of the leader of the government, with the CCP standing committee being the main source of power. Party committee members in each level are selected by the leadership in the level above, with provincial leaders selected by the central Organizational Department, and not removable by the local party secretary. Neighborhood committees are generally composed of older volunteers.

CCP committees exist inside of companies, both private and state-owned. A business that has more than three party members is legally required to establish a committee or branch. , more than half of China&#x27;s private firms have such organizations. These branches provide places for new member socialization and host morale boosting events for existing members. They also provide mechanisms that help private firm interface with government bodies and learn about policies which relate to their fields. On average, the profitability of private firms with a CCP branch is 12.6 per cent higher than the profitability of private firms.

Within state-owned enterprises, these branches are governing bodies that make important decisions and inculcate CCP ideology in employees. Party committees or branches within companies also provide various benefits to employees. These may include bonuses, interest-free loans, mentorship programs, and free medical and other services for those in need. Enterprises that have party branches generally provide more expansive benefits for employees in the areas of retirement, medical care, unemployment, injury, and birth and fertility. Increasingly, the CCP is requiring private companies to revise their charters to include the role of the party.

===Funding===
The funding of all CCP organizations mainly comes from state fiscal revenue. Data for the proportion of total CCP organizations&#x27; expenditures in total China fiscal revenue is unavailable.

===Members===
The CCP reached 99.19 million members at the end of 2023, a net increase of 1.1 million over the previous year. It is the second largest political party in the world after India&#x27;s Bharatiya Janata Party.

To join the CCP, an applicant must go through an approval process. Adults can file applications for membership with their local party branch. A prescreening process, akin to a background check, follows. Next, established party members at the local branch vet applicants&#x27; behaviour and political attitudes and may make a formal inquiry to a party branch near the applicants&#x27; parents residence to vet family loyalty to communism and the party. In 2014, only 2 million applications were accepted out of some 22 million applicants. Admitted members then spend a year as a probationary member. Probationary members are typically accepted into the party. Members must pay dues regardless of location and, in 2019, the CCP Central Committee issued a rule requiring members abroad to contact CCP cells at home at least once every six months.

In contrast to the past, when emphasis was placed on the applicants&#x27; ideological criteria, the current CCP stresses technical and educational qualifications. To become a probationary member, the applicant must take an admission oath before the party flag. The relevant CCP organization is responsible for observing and educating probationary members. Probationary members have duties similar to those of full members, with the exception that they may not vote in party elections nor stand for election. Many join the CCP through the Communist Youth League. Under Jiang Zemin, private entrepreneurs were allowed to become party members.

====Membership demographics====
, individuals who identify as farmers, herdsmen and fishermen make up 26 million members; members identifying as workers totalled 6.6 million. Another group, the &quot;Managing, professional and technical staff in enterprises and public institutions&quot;, made up 16.2 million, 11.5 million identified as working in administrative staff and 7.6 million described themselves as party cadres. The CCP systematically recruits white-collar workers over other social groups. By 2023, CCP membership had become more educated, younger, and less blue-collar than previously, with 56.2% of party members having a college degree or above. , around 30 to 35 per cent of Chinese entrepreneurs are or have been a party member. At the end of 2023, the CCP stated that it has approximately 7.59 million ethnic minority members or 7.7% of the party.

====Status of women====
, 30.19 million women are CCP members, representing 30.4% of the party. Women in China have low participation rates as political leaders. Women&#x27;s disadvantage is most evident in their severe underrepresentation in the more powerful political positions. At the top level of decision making, no woman has ever been among the members of the Politburo Standing Committee, while the broader Politburo currently does not have any female members. Just 3 of 27 government ministers are women, and importantly, since 1997, China has fallen to 53rd place from 16th in the world in terms of female representation in the National People&#x27;s Congress, according to the Inter-Parliamentary Union. CCP leaders such as Zhao Ziyang have vigorously opposed the participation of women in the political process. Within the party women face a glass ceiling.

====Benefits of membership====
A 2019 Binghamton University study found that CCP members gain a 20% wage premium in the market over non-members. A subsequent academic study found that the economic benefit of CCP membership is strongest on those in lower wealth brackets. CCP households also tend to accumulate wealth faster than non-CCP households. 

Certain CCP cadres have access to a special supply system for foodstuffs called &quot;tegong&quot;. CCP leadership cadres have access to a dedicated healthcare system managed by the CCP General Office.

===Communist Youth League===
The Communist Youth League (CYL) is the CCP&#x27;s youth wing, and the largest mass organization for youth in China. To join, an applicant has to be between the ages of 14 and 28. It controls and supervises Young Pioneers, a youth organization for children below the age of 14. The organizational structure of CYL is an exact copy of the CCP&#x27;s; the highest body is the National Congress, followed by the Central Committee, Politburo, and the Politburo Standing Committee. However, the Central Committee (and all central organs) of the CYL work under the guidance of the CCP central leadership. 2021 estimates put the number of CYL members at over 81 million.

==Symbols==

At the beginning of its history, the CCP did not have a single official standard for the flag, but instead allowed individual party committees to copy the flag of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Central Politburo decreed the establishment of a sole official flag on 28 April 1942: &quot;The flag of the CPC has the length-to-width proportion of 3:2 with a hammer and sickle in the upper-left corner, and with no five-pointed star. The Political Bureau authorizes the General Office to custom-make a number of standard flags and distribute them to all major organs&quot;.

According to &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot;, &quot;The red color symbolizes revolution; the hammer-and-sickle are tools of workers and peasants, meaning that the Communist Party of China represents the interests of the masses and the people; the yellow color signifies brightness.&quot;

==Party-to-party relations==
The International Department of the Chinese Communist Party is responsible for dialogue with global political parties.

===Communist parties===
The CCP continues to have relations with non-ruling communist and workers&#x27; parties and attends international communist conferences, most notably the International Meeting of Communist and Workers&#x27; Parties. While the CCP retains contact with major parties such as the Communist Party of Portugal, the Communist Party of France, the Communist Party of the Russian Federation, the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia, the Communist Party of Brazil, the Communist Party of Greece, the Communist Party of Nepal and the Communist Party of Spain, the party also retains relations with minor communist and workers&#x27; parties, such as the Communist Party of Australia, the Workers Party of Bangladesh, the Communist Party of Bangladesh (Marxist–Leninist) (Barua), the Communist Party of Sri Lanka, the Workers&#x27; Party of Belgium, the Hungarian Workers&#x27; Party, the Dominican Workers&#x27; Party, the Nepal Workers Peasants Party, and the Party for the Transformation of Honduras, for instance. It has prickly relations with the Japanese Communist Party. In recent years, noting the self-reform of the European social democratic movement in the 1980s and 1990s, the CCP &quot;has noted the increased marginalization of West European communist parties.&quot;

====Ruling parties of socialist states====
The CCP has retained close relations with the ruling parties of socialist states still espousing communism: Cuba, Laos, North Korea, and Vietnam. It spends a fair amount of time analysing the situation in the remaining socialist states, trying to reach conclusions as to why these states survived when so many did not, following the collapse of the Eastern European socialist states in 1989 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. In general, the analyses of the remaining socialist states and their chances of survival have been positive, and the CCP believes that the socialist movement will be revitalized sometime in the future.

The ruling party which the CCP is most interested in is the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV). In general the CPV is considered a model example of socialist development in the post-Soviet era. Chinese analysts on Vietnam believe that the introduction of the Đổi Mới reform policy at the 6th CPV National Congress is the key reason for Vietnam&#x27;s current success.

While the CCP is probably the organization with most access to North Korea, writing about North Korea is tightly circumscribed. The few reports accessible to the general public are those about North Korean economic reforms. While Chinese analysts of North Korea tend to speak positively of North Korea in public, in official discussions they show much disdain for North Korea&#x27;s economic system, the cult of personality which pervades society, the Kim family, the idea of hereditary succession in a socialist state, the security state, the use of scarce resources on the Korean People&#x27;s Army and the general impoverishment of the North Korean people. Circa 2008, there are those analysts who compare the current situation of North Korea with that of China during the Cultural Revolution. Over the years, the CCP has tried to persuade the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea (or WPK, North Korea&#x27;s ruling party) to introduce economic reforms by showing them key economic infrastructure in China. For instance, in 2006 the CCP invited then-WPK general secretary Kim Jong Il to Guangdong to showcase the success economic reforms had brought China. In general, the CCP considers the WPK and North Korea to be negative examples of a ruling communist party and socialist state.

There is a considerable degree of interest in Cuba within the CCP. Fidel Castro, the former First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba (PCC), is greatly admired, and books have been written focusing on the successes of the Cuban Revolution. Communication between the CCP and the PCC has increased since the 1990s. At the 4th Plenary Session of the 16th Central Committee, which discussed the possibility of the CCP learning from other ruling parties, praise was heaped on the PCC. When Wu Guanzheng, a Central Politburo member, met with Fidel Castro in 2007, he gave him a personal letter written by Hu Jintao: &quot;Facts have shown that China and Cuba are trustworthy good friends, good comrades, and good brothers who treat each other with sincerity. The two countries&#x27; friendship has withstood the test of a changeable international situation, and the friendship has been further strengthened and consolidated.&quot;

===Non-communist parties===
Since the decline and fall of communism in Eastern Europe, the CCP has begun establishing party-to-party relations with non-communist parties. These relations are sought so that the CCP can learn from them. For instance, the CCP has been eager to understand how the People&#x27;s Action Party of Singapore (PAP) maintains its total domination over Singaporean politics through its &quot;low-key presence, but total control.&quot; According to the CCP&#x27;s own analysis of Singapore, the PAP&#x27;s dominance can be explained by its &quot;well-developed social network, which controls constituencies effectively by extending its tentacles deeply into society through branches of government and party-controlled groups.&quot; While the CCP accepts that Singapore is a liberal democracy, they view it as a guided democracy led by the PAP. Other differences are, according to the CCP, &quot;that it is not a political party based on the working class—instead it is a political party of the elite... It is also a political party of the parliamentary system, not a revolutionary party.&quot; Other parties which the CCP studies and maintains strong party-to-party relations with are the United Malays National Organization, which has ruled Malaysia (1957–2018, 2020–2022), and the Liberal Democratic Party in Japan, which dominated Japanese politics since 1955.

Since Jiang Zemin&#x27;s time, the CCP has made friendly overtures to its erstwhile foe, the Kuomintang. The CCP emphasizes strong party-to-party relations with the KMT so as to strengthen the probability of the reunification of Taiwan with mainland China. However, several studies have been written on the KMT&#x27;s loss of power in 2000 after having ruled Taiwan since 1949 (the KMT officially ruled mainland China from 1928 to 1949). In general, one-party states or dominant-party states are of special interest to the party and party-to-party relations are formed so that the CCP can study them. The longevity of the Syrian Regional Branch of the Arab Socialist Ba&#x27;ath Party is attributed to the personalization of power in the al-Assad family, the strong presidential system, the inheritance of power, which passed from Hafez al-Assad to his son Bashar al-Assad, and the role given to the Syrian military in politics.

Circa 2008, the CCP has been especially interested in Latin America, as shown by the increasing number of delegates sent to and received from these countries. Of special fascination for the CCP is the 71-year-long rule of the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) in Mexico. While the CCP attributed the PRI&#x27;s long reign in power to the strong presidential system, tapping into the machismo culture of the country, its nationalist posture, its close identification with the rural populace and the implementation of nationalization alongside the marketization of the economy, the CCP concluded that the PRI failed because of the lack of inner-party democracy, its pursuit of social democracy, its rigid party structures that could not be reformed, its political corruption, the pressure of globalization, and American interference in Mexican politics. While the CCP was slow to recognize the pink tide in Latin America, it has strengthened party-to-party relations with several socialist and anti-American political parties over the years. The CCP has occasionally expressed some irritation over Hugo Chávez&#x27;s anti-capitalist and anti-American rhetoric. Despite this, the CCP reached an agreement in 2013 with the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV), which was founded by Chávez, for the CCP to educate PSUV cadres in political and social fields. By 2008, the CCP claimed to have established relations with 99 political parties in 29 Latin American countries.

Social democratic movements in Europe have been of great interest to the CCP since the early 1980s. With the exception of a short period in which the CCP forged party-to-party relations with far-right parties during the 1970s in an effort to halt &quot;Soviet expansionism&quot;, the CCP&#x27;s relations with European social democratic parties were its first serious efforts to establish cordial party-to-party relations with non-communist parties. The CCP credits the European social democrats with creating a &quot;capitalism with a human face&quot;. Before the 1980s, the CCP had a highly negative and dismissive view of social democracy, a view dating back to the Second International and the Marxist–Leninist view on the social democratic movement. By the 1980s, that view had changed and the CCP concluded that it could actually learn something from the social democratic movement. CCP delegates were sent all over Europe to observe. By the 1980s, most European social democratic parties were facing electoral decline and in a period of self-reform. The CCP followed this with great interest, laying most weight on reform efforts within the British Labour Party and the Social Democratic Party of Germany. The CCP concluded that both parties were re-elected because they modernized, replacing traditional state socialist tenets with new ones supporting privatization, shedding the belief in big government, conceiving a new view of the welfare state, changing their negative views of the market and moving from their traditional support base of trade unions to entrepreneurs, the young and students.

==Electoral history==

===National People&#x27;s Congress elections===
==See also==

* Politics of China
* Succession of power in China

==Notes==
==References==

===Citations===
===Sources===

====Books====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Dittmer, Lowell, et al. (eds.) &quot;Informal politics in East Asia,&quot; (2000), Informal politics in East Asia
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Pye, Lucian, &quot;The Dynamics of Chinese politics&quot; (1987) The Dynamics of Chinese politics
* Saich, Tony. &quot;From Rebel to Ruler: One Hundred Years of the Chinese Communist Party&quot; (2021)
* Saich, Tony. &quot;Finding Allies and Making Revolution The Early Years of the Chinese Communist Party&quot; (2020)
* Saich, Tony. &quot;Governance and Politics of China&quot; (2015)
* 
* 
* Snow, Edgar, Red Star Over China 1937 Red Star Over China - The Rise Of The Red Army
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Whitson, William W., &quot;The Chinese high command : a history of Communist military politics, 1927–71,&quot; (1973)
* 
* 
====Journal articles====
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="4" end="27" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="29" end="32" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="50" end="74" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Communist Party of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="76" end="79" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="102" end="119" title="One-party state" label="sole ruling party"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="127" end="158" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="190" end="200" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="236" end="253" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="266" end="276" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="291" end="358" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="proclaimed the establishment of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="433" end="462" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q44544" start="537" end="562" title="Constitution of the Chinese Communist Party" label="party&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924561" start="583" end="604" title="Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party" label="party&amp;#x27;s ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301091" start="634" end="672" title="socialism with Chinese characteristics" label="socialism with Chinese characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518581" start="732" end="789" title="List of largest political parties" label="second largest political party by membership in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="796" end="801" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="809" end="831" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q369681" start="843" end="853" title="Chen Duxiu" label="Chen Duxiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q378036" start="858" end="867" title="Li Dazhao" label="Li Dazhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="943" end="979" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4154205" start="984" end="1033" title="Far Eastern Bureau of the Communist International" label="Far Eastern Bureau of the Communist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="1220" end="1235" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="1400" end="1417" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="1541" end="1548" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10927676" start="1560" end="1580" title="Land Reform Movement (China)" label="land reform policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="1635" end="1659" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="1733" end="1757" title="Chinese Communist Revolution" label="the communist revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="1770" end="1792" title="Nationalist government" label="Nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="1804" end="1832" title="Kuomintang&amp;#x27;s retreat to Taiwan" label="KMT&amp;#x27;s retreat to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11127665" start="1982" end="1999" title="Death and state funeral of Mao Zedong" label="his death in 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q855055" start="2163" end="2178" title="Five-year plans of China" label="five-year plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="2195" end="2222" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="split with the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="2284" end="2295" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="2316" end="2335" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q196341" start="2404" end="2416" title="Gang of Four" label="Gang of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="2481" end="2494" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="2563" end="2586" title="Chinese economic reform" label="economic liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908597" start="2663" end="2689" title="primary stage of socialism" label="primary stage of socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132726" start="2728" end="2757" title="Capitalist mode of production (Marxist theory)" label="capitalist mode of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="2769" end="2797" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="collapse of the Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="2806" end="2837" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058417" start="2937" end="2953" title="List of socialist states" label="socialist states"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="3144" end="3161" title="Social democracy" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193852" start="3232" end="3253" title="democratic centralism" label="democratic centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183482" start="3423" end="3440" title="National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q50963" start="3519" end="3536" title="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076970" start="3661" end="3670" title="Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="3679" end="3697" title="Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q556184" start="3790" end="3809" title="Leader of the Chinese Communist Party" label="party&amp;#x27;s leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="3831" end="3848" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="3890" end="3933" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="Chairman of the Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="3980" end="3995" title="President of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="State President"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="4100" end="4116" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="4140" end="4150" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q564527" start="4202" end="4224" title="18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="18th Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q28414412" start="4306" end="4328" title="19th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="19th Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q114324061" start="4359" end="4381" title="20th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="20th Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="4433" end="4451" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639471" start="4456" end="4470" title="Marxist philosophy" label="Marxist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q369681" start="4505" end="4515" title="Chen Duxiu" label="Chen Duxiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q378036" start="4520" end="4529" title="Li Dazhao" label="Li Dazhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="4571" end="4579" title="Leninism" label="Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q874579" start="4584" end="4600" title="world revolution" label="world revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="4773" end="4792" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="4856" end="4903" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="founding of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="5049" end="5058" title="Bourgeoisie" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="5143" end="5154" title="proletariat" label="proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="5408" end="5436" title="Chinese Communist Revolution" label="Chinese Communist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q837331" start="5680" end="5689" title="Cai Hesen" label="Cai Hesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q852377" start="5783" end="5803" title="New Culture Movement" label="New Culture Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="6080" end="6096" title="anti-imperialism" label="anti-imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="6110" end="6121" title="Chinese nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255519" start="6135" end="6144" title="Democracy in China" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="6368" end="6404" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4154205" start="6409" end="6463" title="Far Eastern Bureau of the Communist International" label="Far Eastern Secretariat of the Communist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268189" start="6643" end="6675" title="1st National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="1st National Congress of the CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q41728" start="6929" end="6936" title="Site of the First National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="a house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571993" start="6944" end="6970" title="Shanghai French Concession" label="Shanghai French Concession"/>
<link wikidata="Q912306" start="7069" end="7079" title="South Lake (Jiaxing)" label="South Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q58178" start="7083" end="7090" title="Jiaxing" label="Jiaxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q233591" start="7324" end="7339" title="communist party" label="communist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="7359" end="7382" title="Communist International" label="Communist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="7618" end="7632" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="7657" end="7662" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q697046" start="7702" end="7710" title="Wu Peifu" label="Wu Peifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="7754" end="7764" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11061992" start="7794" end="7814" title="Government of the Republic of China in Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou government"/>
<link wikidata="Q814959" start="7831" end="7849" title="Beiyang government" label="Beiyang government"/>
<link wikidata="Q176578" start="7889" end="7904" title="Mikhail Borodin" label="Mikhail Borodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50963" start="7984" end="8012" title="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Central Committee of the CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="8028" end="8041" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="8178" end="8189" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267739" start="8296" end="8308" title="4th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="4th congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q260998" start="8503" end="8522" title="Three Principles of the People" label="Sun&amp;#x27;s ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551851" start="8644" end="8664" title="Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang" label="left wing of the KMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="8801" end="8816" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="9003" end="9017" title="Class conflict" label="class struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="9541" end="9560" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195058" start="9884" end="9900" title="Shanghai massacre of 1927" label="massacring 5,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q17588" start="9921" end="9931" title="Green Gang" label="Green Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q715844" start="10028" end="10035" title="Ye Ting" label="Ye Ting"/>
<link wikidata="Q197358" start="10183" end="10195" title="Zhang Zuolin" label="Zhang Zuolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15728987" start="10285" end="10293" title="Ye Dehui" label="Ye Dehui"/>
<link wikidata="Q174091" start="10341" end="10349" title="Changsha" label="Changsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10886434" start="10379" end="10386" title="He Jian" label="He Jian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036830" start="10809" end="10859" title="Chinese Red Army" label="Workers&amp;#x27; and Peasants&amp;#x27; Red Army of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q22513" start="10949" end="10955" title="Zhu De" label="Zhu De"/>
<link wikidata="Q171943" start="10988" end="10996" title="Nanchang" label="Nanchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q476634" start="11042" end="11059" title="Nanchang uprising" label="Nanchang uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q59100" start="11161" end="11168" title="Shantou" label="Shantou"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="11221" end="11227" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="11229" end="11239" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q992318" start="11337" end="11360" title="Autumn Harvest Uprising" label="Autumn Harvest Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326780" start="11708" end="11726" title="Jinggang Mountains" label="Jinggang Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q57052" start="11730" end="11737" title="Jiangxi" label="Jiangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193852" start="11875" end="11896" title="democratic centralism" label="democratic centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="12275" end="12285" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q700892" start="12296" end="12304" title="Li Lisan" label="Li Lisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23084" start="12403" end="12418" title="Gutian Congress" label="Gutian Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="12767" end="12806" title="Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo Standing Committee of the CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="12859" end="12869" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q700939" start="12874" end="12887" title="Zhang Wentian" label="Zhang Wentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q244941" start="13157" end="13176" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q20148" start="13271" end="13285" title="Zhang Xueliang" label="Zhang Xueliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143850" start="13335" end="13354" title="Second United Front" label="Second United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708520" start="14022" end="14041" title="Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Chairman of the CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="14061" end="14079" title="Japanese surrender" label="Japanese surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="14628" end="14648" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="14839" end="14848" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q515388" start="15008" end="15019" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="16185" end="16252" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="proclamation of the founding of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="16339" end="16367" title="Chinese Communist Revolution" label="Chinese Communist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061644" start="16597" end="16629" title="Central People&amp;#x27;s Government of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China (1949–1954)" label="Central People&amp;#x27;s Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988" start="16980" end="16990" title="Liu Shaoqi" label="Liu Shaoqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357324" start="17197" end="17219" title="Anti-Rightist Campaign" label="Anti-Rightist Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="17522" end="17537" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="17660" end="17678" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454958" start="17948" end="17968" title="Great Chinese Famine" label="Great Chinese Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q277560" start="18297" end="18313" title="de-Stalinization" label="de-Stalinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="18326" end="18343" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q118365" start="18426" end="18457" title="dictatorship of the proletariat" label="dictatorship of the proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="18588" end="18607" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="18720" end="18733" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q381823" start="18735" end="18746" title="Peng Dehuai" label="Peng Dehuai"/>
<link wikidata="Q700713" start="18752" end="18759" title="He Long" label="He Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q196341" start="18791" end="18803" title="Gang of Four" label="Gang of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q236017" start="18828" end="18838" title="Jiang Qing" label="Jiang Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41570" start="18998" end="19009" title="Hua Guofeng" label="Hua Guofeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q99850" start="19140" end="19150" title="Hu Yaobang" label="Hu Yaobang"/>
<link wikidata="Q99829" start="19155" end="19166" title="Zhao Ziyang" label="Zhao Ziyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="19190" end="19211" title="Chinese economic reform" label="reform and opening-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="19464" end="19478" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247862" start="19663" end="19707" title="1978 Truth Criterion Controversy" label="Practice is the Sole Criterion for the Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q288205" start="19817" end="19830" title="Two Whatevers" label="Two Whatevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10893860" start="20056" end="20077" title="Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="historical resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="20235" end="20278" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13713793" start="20465" end="20489" title="socialist market economy" label="socialist market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q431420" start="20565" end="20585" title="Deng Xiaoping Theory" label="Deng Xiaoping Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q44544" start="20616" end="20639" title="Constitution of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="20718" end="20729" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q656448" start="21398" end="21414" title="Three Represents" label="Three Represents"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="21746" end="21755" title="bourgeois" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="21781" end="21790" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146169" start="21918" end="21939" title="collective leadership" label="collective leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406295" start="22050" end="22087" title="Social issues in China" label="wide range of serious social problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991653" start="22162" end="22195" title="Scientific Outlook on Development" label="Scientific Outlook on Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q249253" start="22212" end="22230" title="Harmonious Society" label="Harmonious Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q137566" start="22320" end="22342" title="18th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="18th National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10845594" start="22473" end="22513" title="Anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping" label="a wide-reaching anti-corruption campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q52161605" start="22705" end="22725" title="Xi Jinping Administration" label="Xi&amp;#x27;s leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q38247759" start="22943" end="22955" title="Xi Jinping Thought" label="his ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506436" start="23208" end="23224" title="Xinjiang internment camps" label="internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754778" start="23243" end="23262" title="Persecution of Uyghurs in China" label="repressive measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q106829136" start="23535" end="23579" title="100th Anniversary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="100th anniversary of the CCP&amp;#x27;s founding"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163894" start="23592" end="23607" title="Two Centenaries" label="Two Centenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q108920230" start="23727" end="23765" title="Resolution on the Major Achievements and Historical Experience of the Party over the Past Century" label="resolution on the Party&amp;#x27;s history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780812" start="23964" end="23978" title="Chinese nation" label="Chinese nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107694756" start="24153" end="24212" title="CPC and World Political Parties Summit" label="Communist Party of China and World Political Parties Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q966646" start="24596" end="24628" title="Generations of Chinese leadership" label="generation of Chinese leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="24654" end="24683" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="25082" end="25098" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190004" start="25200" end="25268" title="Historical materialism" label="universal laws governing the development of history of human society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132726" start="25336" end="25372" title="Capitalist mode of production (Marxist theory)" label="contradictions in capitalist society"/>
<link wikidata="Q54340" start="25474" end="25493" title="People&amp;#x27;s Daily" label="People&amp;#x27;s Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="25501" end="25519" title="Mao Zedong Thought" label="Mao Zedong Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q204839" start="25686" end="25704" title="Xinhua News Agency" label="Xinhua News Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q14788509" start="25771" end="25793" title="14th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="14th National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301091" start="25825" end="25863" title="socialism with Chinese characteristics" label="socialism with Chinese characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="25999" end="26014" title="state socialism" label="state socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="26019" end="26033" title="planned economy" label="state planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q847856" start="26260" end="26281" title="seek truth from facts" label="seek truth from facts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088062" start="26687" end="26709" title="16th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="16th National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q190004" start="27527" end="27551" title="Historical materialism" label="economic laws of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873256" start="27905" end="27927" title="16th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="16th Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991653" start="27973" end="28006" title="Scientific Outlook on Development" label="Scientific Outlook on Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q865354" start="28127" end="28147" title="scientific socialism" label="scientific socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="28149" end="28172" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="28174" end="28188" title="social welfare" label="social welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="28192" end="28202" title="humanism" label="humanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q249253" start="28268" end="28296" title="Socialist Harmonious Society" label="Socialist Harmonious Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q23791320" start="28710" end="28732" title="19th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="19th National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q375332" start="28917" end="28937" title="socialist patriotism" label="socialist patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="28942" end="28961" title="Chinese nationalism" label="Chinese nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="29116" end="29132" title="central planning" label="central planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="29140" end="29151" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q557233" start="29711" end="29719" title="Chen Yun" label="Chen Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q564527" start="30148" end="30170" title="18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="18th Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q287260" start="30255" end="30274" title="resource allocation" label="resource allocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="30403" end="30416" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q190004" start="30621" end="30643" title="historical materialism" label="historical materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="30759" end="30772" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="30826" end="30835" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q8291875" start="32082" end="32091" title="Leng Rong" label="Leng Rong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908597" start="32615" end="32641" title="primary stage of socialism" label="primary stage of socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10489406" start="32959" end="32979" title="Robert Lawrence Kuhn" label="Robert Lawrence Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q269915" start="33293" end="33303" title="Sinology" label="sinologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176615" start="33304" end="33319" title="David Shambaugh" label="David Shambaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247862" start="33349" end="33393" title="1978 Truth Criterion Controversy" label="Practice Is the Sole Criterion for the Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574353" start="33715" end="33749" title="Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union&amp;#x27;s state ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="33879" end="33910" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q55615855" start="34069" end="34080" title="Kerry Brown (historian)" label="Kerry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="34163" end="34172" title="Pragmatism" label="pragmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q544432" start="35160" end="35170" title="Kang Sheng" label="Kang Sheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="35216" end="35229" title="State Council of China" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155502" start="35238" end="35265" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (China)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="35368" end="35382" title="Hierarchy" label="hierarchically"/>
<link wikidata="Q28034047" start="35510" end="35525" title="leadership core" label="leadership core"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="35546" end="35562" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="35623" end="35635" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="CMC chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="35640" end="35653" title="President of China" label="PRC president"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="36492" end="36502" title="centralism" label="centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268180" start="36578" end="36599" title="5th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="5th National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="37103" end="37110" title="liberty" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315911" start="37115" end="37125" title="discipline" label="discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192996" start="37552" end="37596" title="Central Commission for Discipline Inspection" label="Central Commission for Discipline Inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q779313" start="37736" end="37756" title="Corruption in China" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274087" start="38573" end="38601" title="United Front Work Department" label="United Front Work Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855859" start="38651" end="38664" title="popular front" label="popular front"/>
<link wikidata="Q574619" start="38689" end="38724" title="List of political parties in China" label="legally-permitted political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q10883540" start="38741" end="38767" title="people&amp;#x27;s organization" label="people&amp;#x27;s organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="38810" end="38841" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19215" start="38850" end="38905" title="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference" label="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225141" start="39096" end="39105" title="Influence operations" label="influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q183482" start="39188" end="39205" title="National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554581" start="39255" end="39276" title="9th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="9th National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q50963" start="39609" end="39626" title="Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192996" start="39643" end="39687" title="Central Commission for Discipline Inspection" label="Central Commission for Discipline Inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147896" start="40539" end="40554" title="plenary session" label="plenary session"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="40603" end="40620" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q190338" start="40676" end="40703" title="Central Military Commission (China)" label="Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076970" start="40715" end="40724" title="Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q508283" start="40820" end="40831" title="Secretariat of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="42201" end="42219" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056046" start="42556" end="42570" title="General Office of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074635" start="42788" end="42811" title="Organization Department of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Organization Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153569" start="42912" end="42932" title="Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Publicity Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q10883540" start="43137" end="43163" title="people&amp;#x27;s organization" label="people&amp;#x27;s organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050132" start="43226" end="43250" title="International Department of the Chinese Communist Party" label="International Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q117187884" start="43345" end="43367" title="Social Work Department" label="Social Work Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q912139" start="43510" end="43556" title="Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission" label="Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q10871787" start="43663" end="43693" title="Central Policy Research Office" label="Central Policy Research Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q190343" start="43792" end="43812" title="Central Party School of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Central Party School"/>
<link wikidata="Q55708534" start="43940" end="43981" title="Institute of Party History and Literature" label="Institute of Party History and Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429265" start="44423" end="44429" title="Qiushi" label="Qiushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51675998" start="44511" end="44528" title="China Media Group" label="China Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q207936" start="44545" end="44569" title="China Central Television" label="China Central Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072025" start="44578" end="44598" title="China National Radio" label="China National Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q375117" start="44609" end="44634" title="China Radio International" label="China Radio International"/>
<link wikidata="Q840285" start="44774" end="44805" title="Hong Kong and Macau Work Office" label="Hong Kong and Macau Work Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021636" start="44811" end="44832" title="Taiwan Affairs Office" label="Taiwan Affairs Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q18651624" start="45295" end="45306" title="party group" label="party group"/>
<link wikidata="Q117661303" start="45516" end="45526" title="Rush Doshi" label="Rush Doshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q156728" start="45673" end="45685" title="Nomenklatura" label="Nomenklatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615742" start="45880" end="45889" title="Provinces of China" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289426" start="45899" end="45907" title="Counties of China" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598268" start="47123" end="47146" title="State-owned enterprises of China" label="state-owned enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="48171" end="48193" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071253" start="49579" end="49601" title="Communist Youth League of China" label="Communist Youth League"/>
<link wikidata="Q255274" start="50139" end="50158" title="white-collar worker" label="white-collar worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048886" start="51405" end="51418" title="glass ceiling" label="glass ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q863813" start="51459" end="51480" title="Binghamton University" label="Binghamton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807865" start="51921" end="51931" title="Healthcare in China" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493450" start="52055" end="52065" title="youth wing" label="youth wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120100" start="52211" end="52225" title="Young Pioneers of China" label="Young Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170266" start="53051" end="53068" title="hammer and sickle" label="hammer and sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050132" start="53589" end="53644" title="International Department of the Chinese Communist Party" label="International Department of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440449" start="53883" end="53943" title="International Meeting of Communist and Workers&amp;#x27; Parties" label="International Meeting of Communist and Workers&amp;#x27; Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q769829" start="54006" end="54033" title="Portuguese Communist Party" label="Communist Party of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="54039" end="54064" title="French Communist Party" label="Communist Party of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q192187" start="54070" end="54111" title="Communist Party of the Russian Federation" label="Communist Party of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q913567" start="54117" end="54155" title="Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q504000" start="54161" end="54186" title="Communist Party of Brazil" label="Communist Party of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q192406" start="54192" end="54217" title="Communist Party of Greece" label="Communist Party of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="54223" end="54247" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist−Leninist)" label="Communist Party of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q478811" start="54256" end="54280" title="Communist Party of Spain" label="Communist Party of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120586" start="54375" end="54403" title="Communist Party of Australia" label="Communist Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382630" start="54409" end="54436" title="Workers Party of Bangladesh" label="Workers Party of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351508" start="54442" end="54498" title="Communist Party of Bangladesh (Marxist–Leninist) (Barua)" label="Communist Party of Bangladesh (Marxist–Leninist) (Barua)"/>
<link wikidata="Q600703" start="54504" end="54532" title="Communist Party of Sri Lanka" label="Communist Party of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q925616" start="54538" end="54568" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Belgium" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q584730" start="54574" end="54603" title="Hungarian Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Hungarian Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290856" start="54609" end="54638" title="Dominican Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Dominican Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800560" start="54644" end="54672" title="Nepal Workers Peasants Party" label="Nepal Workers Peasants Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141036" start="54682" end="54722" title="Party for the Transformation of Honduras" label="Party for the Transformation of Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q641600" start="54772" end="54796" title="Japanese Communist Party" label="Japanese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="55109" end="55124" title="socialist state" label="socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="55142" end="55151" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="55153" end="55157" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="55159" end="55163" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="55165" end="55176" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="55182" end="55189" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="55378" end="55427" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="collapse of the Eastern European socialist states"/>
<link wikidata="Q427325" start="55748" end="55774" title="Communist Party of Vietnam" label="Communist Party of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q342587" start="55945" end="55952" title="Đổi Mới" label="Đổi Mới"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118516" start="55974" end="55999" title="6th National Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam" label="6th CPV National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q705574" start="56103" end="56129" title="China–North Korea relations" label="most access to North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851547" start="56248" end="56276" title="North Korean economic reform" label="North Korean economic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q224623" start="56419" end="56453" title="Economy of North Korea" label="North Korea&amp;#x27;s economic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369391" start="56459" end="56478" title="North Korean cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220705" start="56507" end="56517" title="Kim dynasty (North Korea)" label="Kim family"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="56630" end="56655" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q49623" start="56902" end="56930" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q707631" start="57100" end="57121" title="General Secretary of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="WPK general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="57122" end="57133" title="Kim Jong Il" label="Kim Jong Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="57137" end="57146" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="57402" end="57414" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453787" start="57427" end="57442" title="First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba" label="First Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q371402" start="57450" end="57473" title="Communist Party of Cuba" label="Communist Party of Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="57562" end="57578" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222425" start="57580" end="57621" title="China–Cuba relations" label="Communication between the CCP and the PCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q709473" start="57825" end="57837" title="Wu Guanzheng" label="Wu Guanzheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q371395" start="58560" end="58586" title="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155533" start="58642" end="58662" title="Politics of Singapore" label="Singaporean politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="59062" end="59079" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499669" start="59099" end="59115" title="guided democracy" label="guided democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="59327" end="59347" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875977" start="59355" end="59374" title="vanguard party" label="revolutionary party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668154" start="59477" end="59512" title="United Malays National Organization" label="United Malays National Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="59530" end="59538" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232595" start="59571" end="59595" title="Liberal Democratic Party (Japan)" label="Liberal Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q865455" start="59622" end="59639" title="Japanese politics" label="Japanese politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243030" start="60275" end="60297" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Syria Region" label="Syrian Regional Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q797513" start="60305" end="60337" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party (Syrian-dominated faction)" label="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087185" start="60391" end="60406" title="al-Assad family" label="al-Assad family"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="60419" end="60438" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q118725" start="60484" end="60498" title="Hafez al-Assad" label="Hafez al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q44329" start="60510" end="60525" title="Bashar al-Assad" label="Bashar al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q849180" start="60553" end="60568" title="Syrian military" label="Syrian military"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="60809" end="60842" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q842254" start="60972" end="60980" title="machismo" label="machismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="61105" end="61120" title="nationalization" label="nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481003" start="61135" end="61148" title="marketization" label="marketization"/>
<link wikidata="Q876431" start="61156" end="61163" title="Economy of Mexico" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="61264" end="61280" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004096" start="61341" end="61361" title="Corruption in Mexico" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155509" start="61423" end="61439" title="Mexican politics" label="Mexican politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882688" start="61481" end="61490" title="pink tide" label="pink tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q574827" start="61581" end="61594" title="anti-American" label="anti-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8440" start="61685" end="61696" title="Hugo Chávez" label="Hugo Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q389647" start="61704" end="61719" title="anti-capitalist" label="anti-capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q197864" start="61808" end="61843" title="United Socialist Party of Venezuela" label="United Socialist Party of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090550" start="62315" end="62334" title="Soviet empire" label="Soviet expansionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188592" start="62731" end="62751" title="Second International" label="Second International"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="63210" end="63230" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="British Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="63239" end="63273" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="63374" end="63389" title="state socialist" label="state socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="63422" end="63435" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985410" start="63460" end="63474" title="big government" label="big government"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="63505" end="63518" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q904852" start="63757" end="63774" title="Politics of China" label="Politics of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632613" start="63777" end="63805" title="Succession of power in China" label="Succession of power in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059846" start="64464" end="64483" title="Red Star Over China" label="Red Star Over China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7176" wikidata="Q192116" url="?curid=7176" title="Cryogenics">
<text>In physics, cryogenics is the production and behaviour of materials at very low temperatures.

The 13th International Institute of Refrigeration&#x27;s (IIR) International Congress of Refrigeration (held in Washington, DC in 1971) endorsed a universal definition of &quot;cryogenics&quot; and &quot;cryogenic&quot; by accepting a threshold of to distinguish these terms from conventional refrigeration. This is a logical dividing line, since the normal boiling points of the so-called permanent gases (such as helium, hydrogen, neon, nitrogen, oxygen, and normal air) lie below 120 K, while the Freon refrigerants, hydrocarbons, and other common refrigerants have boiling points above 120 K.

Discovery of superconducting materials with critical temperatures significantly above the boiling point of nitrogen has provided new interest in reliable, low-cost methods of producing high-temperature cryogenic refrigeration. The term &quot;high temperature cryogenic&quot; describes temperatures ranging from above the boiling point of liquid nitrogen, , up to . The discovery of superconductive properties is first attributed to Heike Kamerlingh Onnes on July 10, 1908. The discovery came after the ability to reach a temperature of 2 K. These first superconductive properties were observed in mercury at a temperature of 4.2 K.

Cryogenicists use the Kelvin or Rankine temperature scale, both of which measure from absolute zero, rather than more usual scales such as Celsius which measures from the freezing point of water at sea level or Fahrenheit which measures from the freezing point of a particular brine solution at sea level.

== Definitions and distinctions ==

; Cryogenics: The branches of engineering that involve the study of very low temperatures (ultra low temperature i.e. below 123 K), how to produce them, and how materials behave at those temperatures.

; Cryobiology: The branch of biology involving the study of the effects of low temperatures on organisms (most often for the purpose of achieving cryopreservation). Other applications include Lyophilization (freeze-drying) of pharmaceutical components and medicine.

; Cryoconservation of animal genetic resources: The conservation of genetic material with the intention of conserving a breed. The conservation of genetic material is not limited to non-humans. Many services provide genetic storage or the preservation of stem cells at birth. They may be used to study the generation of cell lines or for stem-cell therapy.

; Cryosurgery: The branch of surgery applying cryogenic temperatures to destroy and kill tissue, e.g. cancer cells. Commonly referred to as Cryoablation.

; Cryoelectronics: The study of electronic phenomena at cryogenic temperatures. Examples include superconductivity and variable-range hopping.

; Cryonics: Cryopreserving humans and animals with the intention of future revival. &quot;Cryogenics&quot; is sometimes erroneously used to mean &quot;Cryonics&quot; in popular culture and the press.

== Etymology ==

The word &quot;cryogenics&quot; stems from Greek &quot;κρύος (cryos)&quot; – &quot;cold&quot; + &quot;γενής (genis)&quot; – &quot;generating&quot;.

== Cryogenic fluids==

Cryogenic fluids with their boiling point in Kelvin and degree Celsius.
== Industrial applications ==

Liquefied gases, such as liquid nitrogen and liquid helium, are used in many cryogenic applications. Liquid nitrogen is the most commonly used element in cryogenics and is legally purchasable around the world. Liquid helium is also commonly used and allows for the lowest attainable temperatures to be reached.

These liquids may be stored in Dewar flasks, which are double-walled containers with a high vacuum between the walls to reduce heat transfer into the liquid. Typical laboratory Dewar flasks are spherical, made of glass and protected in a metal outer container. Dewar flasks for extremely cold liquids such as liquid helium have another double-walled container filled with liquid nitrogen. Dewar flasks are named after their inventor, James Dewar, the man who first liquefied hydrogen. Thermos bottles are smaller vacuum flasks fitted in a protective casing.

Cryogenic barcode labels are used to mark Dewar flasks containing these liquids, and will not frost over down to −195 degrees Celsius.

Cryogenic transfer pumps are the pumps used on LNG piers to transfer liquefied natural gas from LNG carriers to LNG storage tanks, as are cryogenic valves.

=== Cryogenic processing ===
The field of cryogenics advanced during World War II when scientists found that metals frozen to low temperatures showed more resistance to wear. Based on this theory of cryogenic hardening, the commercial cryogenic processing industry was founded in 1966 by Bill and Ed Busch. With a background in the heat treating industry, the Busch brothers founded a company in Detroit called CryoTech in 1966. Busch originally experimented with the possibility of increasing the life of metal tools to anywhere between 200% and 400% of the original life expectancy using cryogenic tempering instead of heat treating. This evolved in the late 1990s into the treatment of other parts.

Cryogens, such as liquid nitrogen, are further used for specialty chilling and freezing applications. Some chemical reactions, like those used to produce the active ingredients for the popular statin drugs, must occur at low temperatures of approximately . Special cryogenic chemical reactors are used to remove reaction heat and provide a low temperature environment. The freezing of foods and biotechnology products, like vaccines, requires nitrogen in blast freezing or immersion freezing systems. Certain soft or elastic materials become hard and brittle at very low temperatures, which makes cryogenic milling (cryomilling) an option for some materials that cannot easily be milled at higher temperatures.

Cryogenic processing is not a substitute for heat treatment, but rather an extension of the heating–quenching–tempering cycle. Normally, when an item is quenched, the final temperature is ambient. The only reason for this is that most heat treaters do not have cooling equipment. There is nothing metallurgically significant about ambient temperature. The cryogenic process continues this action from ambient temperature down to .
In most instances the cryogenic cycle is followed by a heat tempering procedure. As all alloys do not have the same chemical constituents, the tempering procedure varies according to the material&#x27;s chemical composition, thermal history and/or a tool&#x27;s particular service application.

The entire process takes 3–4 days.

=== Fuels ===
Another use of cryogenics is cryogenic fuels for rockets with liquid hydrogen as the most widely used example. Liquid oxygen (LOX) is even more widely used but as an oxidizer, not a fuel. NASA&#x27;s workhorse Space Shuttle used cryogenic hydrogen/oxygen propellant as its primary means of getting into orbit. LOX is also widely used with RP-1 kerosene, a non-cryogenic hydrocarbon, such as in the rockets built for the Soviet space program by Sergei Korolev.

Russian aircraft manufacturer Tupolev developed a version of its popular design Tu-154 with a cryogenic fuel system, known as the Tu-155. The plane uses a fuel referred to as liquefied natural gas or LNG, and made its first flight in 1989.

== Other applications ==

Some applications of cryogenics:

* Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is one of the most common methods to determine the physical and chemical properties of atoms by detecting the radio frequency absorbed and subsequent relaxation of nuclei in a magnetic field. This is one of the most commonly used characterization techniques and has applications in numerous fields. Primarily, the strong magnetic fields are generated by supercooling electromagnets, although there are spectrometers that do not require cryogens. In traditional superconducting solenoids, liquid helium is used to cool the inner coils because it has a boiling point of around 4 K at ambient pressure. Inexpensive metallic superconductors can be used for the coil wiring. So-called high-temperature superconducting compounds can be made to super conduct with the use of liquid nitrogen, which boils at around 77 K.
* Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a complex application of NMR where the geometry of the resonances is deconvoluted and used to image objects by detecting the relaxation of protons that have been perturbed by a radio-frequency pulse in the strong magnetic field. This is most commonly used in health applications.
* Cryogenic electron microscopy (cryoEM) is a popular method in structural biology for elucidating the structures of proteins, cells, and other biological systems. Samples are plunge-frozen into a cryogen such as liquid ethane cooled by liquid nitrogen, and are then kept at liquid nitrogen temperature as they are inserted into an electron microscope for imaging. Electron microscopes are also themselves cooled by liquid nitrogen.
* In large cities, it is difficult to transmit power by overhead cables, so underground cables are used. But underground cables get heated and the resistance of the wire increases, leading to waste of power. Superconductors could be used to increase power throughput, although they would require cryogenic liquids such as nitrogen or helium to cool special alloy-containing cables to increase power transmission. Several feasibility studies have been performed and the field is the subject of an agreement within the International Energy Agency.

* Cryogenic gases are used in transportation and storage of large masses of frozen food. When very large quantities of food must be transported to regions like war zones, earthquake hit regions, etc., they must be stored for a long time, so cryogenic food freezing is used. Cryogenic food freezing is also helpful for large scale food processing industries.
*Many infrared (forward looking infrared) cameras require their detectors to be cryogenically cooled.
* Certain rare blood groups are stored at low temperatures, such as −165°C, at blood banks.
* Cryogenics technology using liquid nitrogen and CO2 has been built into nightclub effect systems to create a chilling effect and white fog that can be illuminated with colored lights.
* Cryogenic cooling is used to cool the tool tip at the time of machining in manufacturing process. It increases the tool life. Oxygen is used to perform several important functions in the steel manufacturing process.
* Many rockets and lunar landers use cryogenic gases as propellants. These include liquid oxygen, liquid hydrogen, and liquid methane.
* By freezing an automobile or truck tire in liquid nitrogen, the rubber is made brittle and can be crushed into small particles. These particles can be used again for other items.
* Experimental research on certain physics phenomena, such as spintronics and magnetotransport properties, requires cryogenic temperatures for the effects to be observable.
* Certain vaccines must be stored at cryogenic temperatures. For example, the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine must be stored at temperatures of . (See cold chain.)

== Production ==

Cryogenic cooling of devices and material is usually achieved via the use of liquid nitrogen, liquid helium, or a mechanical cryocooler (which uses high-pressure helium lines). Gifford-McMahon cryocoolers, pulse tube cryocoolers and Stirling cryocoolers are in wide use with selection based on required base temperature and cooling capacity. The most recent development in cryogenics is the use of magnets as regenerators as well as refrigerators. These devices work on the principle known as the magnetocaloric effect.

== Detectors ==

There are various cryogenic detectors which are used to detect particles.

For cryogenic temperature measurement down to 30 K, Pt100 sensors, a resistance temperature detector (RTD), are used. For temperatures lower than 30 K, it is necessary to use a silicon diode for accuracy.

== See also ==
* Absolute zero
* Lowest temperature recorded on Earth
* Cryogenic grinding
* Flash freezing
* Frozen food

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Haselden, G. G. (1971), &quot;Cryogenic fundamentals&quot;, Academic Press, New York, .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="12" end="22" title="Cryogenics" label="cryogenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="80" end="91" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152339" start="104" end="144" title="International Institute of Refrigeration" label="International Institute of Refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="453" end="466" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="495" end="498" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="510" end="516" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="518" end="526" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q654" start="528" end="532" title="neon" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="534" end="542" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="544" end="550" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="563" end="566" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858303" start="595" end="600" title="Freon" label="Freon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="615" end="626" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="706" end="721" title="superconducting" label="superconducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q62891" start="1125" end="1147" title="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes" label="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="1348" end="1354" title="Kelvin" label="Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207488" start="1358" end="1365" title="Rankine scale" label="Rankine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="1412" end="1425" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="1465" end="1472" title="Celsius" label="Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42289" start="1537" end="1547" title="Fahrenheit" label="Fahrenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q672832" start="1873" end="1884" title="Cryobiology" label="Cryobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="1900" end="1907" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="1966" end="1974" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144664" start="2017" end="2033" title="cryopreservation" label="cryopreservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965835" start="2140" end="2184" title="Cryoconservation of animal genetic resources" label="Cryoconservation of animal genetic resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="2393" end="2402" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533033" start="2476" end="2493" title="stem-cell therapy" label="stem-cell therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705075" start="2498" end="2509" title="Cryosurgery" label="Cryosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q202448" start="2636" end="2648" title="Cryoablation" label="Cryoablation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190511" start="2653" end="2668" title="Cryoelectronics" label="Cryoelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="2748" end="2765" title="superconductivity" label="superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554730" start="2770" end="2792" title="variable-range hopping" label="variable-range hopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q633581" start="2797" end="2805" title="Cryonics" label="Cryonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144664" start="2807" end="2821" title="Cryopreservation" label="Cryopreserving"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="2964" end="2979" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="3056" end="3061" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="3230" end="3236" title="Kelvin" label="Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557441" start="3288" end="3301" title="Liquefied gas" label="Liquefied gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="3313" end="3328" title="liquid nitrogen" label="liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203476" start="3333" end="3346" title="liquid helium" label="liquid helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="3553" end="3583" title="boiling point" label="lowest attainable temperatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q23664" start="3631" end="3642" title="Dewar flask" label="Dewar flask"/>
<link wikidata="Q277579" start="4034" end="4045" title="James Dewar" label="James Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="4075" end="4083" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23664" start="4085" end="4092" title="Thermos" label="Thermos"/>
<link wikidata="Q23664" start="4113" end="4125" title="vacuum flask" label="vacuum flask"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709854" start="4342" end="4350" title="LNG pier" label="LNG pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="4364" end="4385" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15247" start="4391" end="4402" title="LNG carrier" label="LNG carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459355" start="4407" end="4424" title="LNG storage tank" label="LNG storage tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190521" start="4651" end="4670" title="cryogenic hardening" label="cryogenic hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190525" start="4687" end="4707" title="cryogenic processor" label="cryogenic processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458918" start="4784" end="4797" title="heat treating" label="heat treating"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="4848" end="4855" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190521" start="5042" end="5061" title="cryogenic tempering" label="cryogenic tempering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458918" start="5073" end="5086" title="heat treating" label="heat treating"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="5180" end="5188" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q954845" start="5348" end="5354" title="statin" label="statin"/>
<link wikidata="Q557573" start="5430" end="5446" title="chemical reactor" label="chemical reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="5579" end="5586" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q898288" start="5706" end="5713" title="brittle" label="brittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44494" start="5762" end="5769" title="mill (grinding)" label="milling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190520" start="5771" end="5782" title="cryomilling" label="cryomilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q81619" start="6672" end="6686" title="cryogenic fuel" label="cryogenic fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q622779" start="6705" end="6720" title="liquid hydrogen" label="liquid hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q618153" start="6754" end="6767" title="Liquid oxygen" label="Liquid oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="6809" end="6817" title="oxidizer" label="oxidizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="6831" end="6835" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="6853" end="6866" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="6946" end="6951" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q520336" start="6982" end="6986" title="RP-1" label="RP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="7063" end="7083" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviet space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q170842" start="7087" end="7101" title="Sergei Korolev" label="Sergei Korolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q194009" start="7134" end="7141" title="Tupolev" label="Tupolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="7184" end="7190" title="Tu-154" label="Tu-154"/>
<link wikidata="Q170085" start="7234" end="7240" title="Tu-155" label="Tu-155"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="7279" end="7300" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="7407" end="7433" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance" label="Nuclear magnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886955" start="7842" end="7855" title="Benchtop NMR spectrometer" label="spectrometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="8255" end="8281" title="Magnetic resonance imaging" label="Magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190506" start="8573" end="8602" title="Cryogenic electron microscopy" label="Cryogenic electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q908902" start="8635" end="8653" title="structural biology" label="structural biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="8688" end="8696" title="Protein" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="8698" end="8703" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="8903" end="8922" title="electron microscope" label="electron microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q200928" start="9042" end="9056" title="electric power transmission" label="transmit power"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="9521" end="9548" title="International Energy Agency" label="International Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q751728" start="9627" end="9638" title="frozen food" label="frozen food"/>
<link wikidata="Q682023" start="9925" end="9949" title="forward looking infrared" label="forward looking infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="10133" end="10148" title="liquid nitrogen" label="liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="10177" end="10186" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="10366" end="10387" title="manufacturing process" label="manufacturing process"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="10514" end="10520" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703812" start="10526" end="10538" title="lunar lander" label="lunar lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q258659" start="10885" end="10896" title="spintronics" label="spintronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="11006" end="11013" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q97154240" start="11074" end="11106" title="Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine" label="Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11148" end="11158" title="cold chain#Uses" label="cold chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="11257" end="11272" title="liquid nitrogen" label="liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203476" start="11274" end="11287" title="liquid helium" label="liquid helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241150" start="11294" end="11315" title="Cryocooler" label="mechanical cryocooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241150" start="11357" end="11372" title="Gifford-McMahon Refrigerator" label="Gifford-McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118028" start="11386" end="11408" title="Pulse tube refrigerator" label="pulse tube cryocoolers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11413" end="11433" title="Stirling engine#Stirling cryocoolers" label="Stirling cryocoolers"/>
<link wikidata="Q899364" start="11677" end="11691" title="magnetocaloric" label="magnetocaloric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190524" start="11736" end="11755" title="cryogenic detectors" label="cryogenic detectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q848041" start="11862" end="11899" title="Resistance thermometer" label="resistance temperature detector (RTD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515014" start="11970" end="11983" title="silicon bandgap temperature sensor" label="silicon diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="12016" end="12029" title="Absolute zero" label="Absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694023" start="12032" end="12068" title="Lowest temperature recorded on Earth" label="Lowest temperature recorded on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190520" start="12071" end="12089" title="Cryogenic grinding" label="Cryogenic grinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q386332" start="12092" end="12106" title="Flash freezing" label="Flash freezing"/>
<link wikidata="Q751728" start="12109" end="12120" title="Frozen food" label="Frozen food"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7179" wikidata="Q311093" url="?curid=7179" title="Cary Elwes">
<text>Ivan Simon Cary Elwes (; born 26 October 1962) is an English actor. He starred as Westley in &quot;The Princess Bride&quot; (1987), and also had lead roles in films such as &quot;Robin Hood: Men in Tights&quot; (1993) and the &quot;Saw&quot; series. The accolades he has received include nominations for a Screen Actors Guild Award and two Satellite Awards. Elwes&#x27; other performances in films include &quot;Glory&quot; (1989), &quot;Days of Thunder&quot; (1990), &quot;Hot Shots!&quot; (1991), &quot;Bram Stoker&#x27;s Dracula&quot; (1992), &quot;Twister&quot; (1996), &quot;Kiss the Girls&quot; (1997), &quot;Liar Liar&quot; (1997), &quot;Shadow of the Vampire&quot; (2000), &quot;The Cat&#x27;s Meow&quot; (2001), &quot;Ella Enchanted&quot; (2004), &quot;Pope John Paul II&quot; (2005), &quot;No Strings Attached&quot; (2011), &quot;Burning at Both Ends&quot; (2022), &quot;BlackBerry,&quot; and &quot;&quot; (both 2023).

Elwes has appeared on television in a number of series including &quot;The X-Files&quot;, &quot;Seinfeld&quot;, &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot;, &quot;Psych&quot;, and &quot;Life in Pieces&quot;. In 2019, he appeared in the Netflix drama series &quot;Stranger Things,&quot; the Amazon Prime comedy series &quot;The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel,&quot; and in 2024, he appeared in the Paramount+ comedy series &quot;Knuckles&quot;. Elwes has written a memoir of his time working on &quot;The Princess Bride&quot; called &quot;As You Wish&quot;, which was published in 2014.

== Early life and education ==

Elwes was born on 26 October 1962 in Westminster, London. He is the youngest of three sons of portrait painter Dominick Elwes and Tessa Kennedy, an interior designer and socialite. Cary is the brother of artist Damian Elwes and film producers Cassian Elwes and Milica Kastner. Cary&#x27;s stepfather, Elliott Kastner, was an American film producer and the first American to set up independent film production in the United Kingdom. Cary&#x27;s paternal grandfather was the portrait painter Simon Elwes, whose own father was the diplomat and tenor Gervase Elwes (1866–1921).

One of Cary Elwes&#x27; relatives is John Elwes, a British miser who was the inspiration for Ebenezer Scrooge in &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot; (1843), having been referenced by Charles Dickens himself in chapter six of his last completed novel, &quot;Our Mutual Friend&quot;. Elwes himself played five roles in the 2009 film adaptation of &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot;. Through his maternal grandfather, Elwes is also related to Sir Alexander William &quot;Blackie&quot; Kennedy, one of the first photographers to document the archaeological site of Petra following the collapse of the Ottoman Empire.

Elwes was brought up as a Catholic and was an altar boy at Westminster Cathedral. His paternal relatives include such clerics as Dudley Charles Cary-Elwes (1868–1932), the Bishop of Northampton, and Abbot Columba Cary-Elwes (Ampleforth Abbey, Saint Louis Abbey). He discussed this in an interview while he was filming the 2005 CBS television film &quot;Pope John Paul II&quot;, in which he played the young priest Karol Wojtyła.

Elwes&#x27;s parents divorced when he was four years old. In 1975, when Elwes was 13, his father died by suicide. He was educated at Harrow School, and the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art. In 1981, he moved to the United States to study acting at Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville, New York. While living there, Elwes studied acting at both the Actors Studio and the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute under the tutelage of Al Pacino&#x27;s mentor, Charlie Laughton (not to be confused with English actor Charles Laughton). As a teenager, he also worked as a production assistant on the films &quot;Absolution&quot;, &quot;Octopussy&quot;, and &quot;Superman&quot;, where he was assigned to Marlon Brando. When Elwes introduced himself to the actor, Brando insisted on calling him &quot;Rocky&quot; after Rocky Marciano.

== Career ==
=== 1984–1999 ===

Elwes made his acting debut in 1984 in Marek Kanievska&#x27;s film &quot;Another Country&quot;, which was loosely based on the English boarding school exploits of British spies Burgess, Philby and MacLean. He played James Harcourt, a gay student. He then played Guilford Dudley in the British historical drama film &quot;Lady Jane&quot;, opposite Helena Bonham Carter. He was cast as stable-boy-turned-swashbuckler Westley in Rob Reiner&#x27;s fantasy-comedy &quot;The Princess Bride&quot; (1987), which was based on the novel of the same name by William Goldman. It was a modest box office success, but received critical acclaim. As a result of years of reviews, it earned a score of 97% on the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes. Since being released on home video and television, the film has become a cult classic.

Elwes continued to work steadily, varying between dramatic roles, such as in the Oscar-winning &quot;Glory&quot; (1989) and comedic roles, as in &quot;Hot Shots!&quot; (1991). He played a rival driver to Tom Cruise in &quot;Days of Thunder&quot; (1990). In 1993, he starred as Robin Hood in Mel Brooks&#x27;s comedy &quot;Robin Hood: Men in Tights&quot;. Elwes then appeared in supporting roles in such films as Francis Ford Coppola&#x27;s adaptation of &quot;Bram Stoker&#x27;s Dracula&quot; (1992), &quot;The Crush&quot; (1993), &quot;The Jungle Book&quot; (1994), &quot;Twister&quot; (1996), &quot;Liar Liar&quot; (1997), and &quot;Kiss the Girls&quot;. In 1999, he portrayed famed theatre and film producer John Houseman for Tim Robbins in his ensemble film based on Orson Welles&#x27;s musical, &quot;Cradle Will Rock&quot;. Following that, he travelled to Luxembourg to work with John Malkovich and Willem Dafoe in &quot;Shadow of the Vampire&quot;.

Elwes made his first television appearance in 1996 as David Lookner on &quot;Seinfeld&quot;. Two years later he played astronaut Michael Collins in the Golden Globe Award-winning HBO miniseries &quot;From the Earth To the Moon&quot;. The following year Elwes was nominated for a Golden Satellite Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Mini-Series or Motion Picture Made for Television for his portrayal of Colonel James Burton in &quot;The Pentagon Wars&quot; directed by Richard Benjamin. In 1999, he guest starred as Dr. John York in an episode of the television series &quot;The Outer Limits&quot;.

=== 2000–2009 ===

In 2001, he co-starred in Peter Bogdanovich&#x27;s ensemble film &quot;The Cat&#x27;s Meow&quot; portraying film mogul Thomas Ince, who died mysteriously while vacationing with William Randolph Hearst on his yacht. Shortly afterward Elwes received another Golden Satellite Award nomination for his work on the ensemble NBC Television film &quot;Uprising&quot; opposite Jon Voight directed by Jon Avnet. Elwes had a recurring role in the final season (from 2001 to 2002) of Chris Carter&#x27;s hit series &quot;The X-Files&quot; as FBI Assistant Director Brad Follmer. In 2003 Elwes portrayed Kerry Max Cook in the off-Broadway play &quot;The Exonerated&quot; in New York, directed by Bob Balaban (18–23 March 2003).

In 2004, Elwes starred in the horror–thriller &quot;Saw&quot; which, at a budget of a little over $1 million, grossed over $100 million worldwide. The same year he appeared in &quot;Ella Enchanted&quot;, this time as the villain, not the hero. Also in 2004, he portrayed serial killer Ted Bundy in the A&amp;E Network film &quot;The Riverman&quot;, which became one of the highest rated original films in the network&#x27;s history and garnered a prestigious BANFF Rockie Award nomination. The following year, Elwes played the young Karol Wojtyła in the CBS television film &quot;Pope John Paul II&quot;. The TV film was highly successful not only in North America but also in Europe, where it broke box office records in the late Pope&#x27;s native Poland and became the first film ever to break $1 million in three days. He made an uncredited appearance as Sam Green, the man who introduced Andy Warhol to Edie Sedgwick, in the 2006 film &quot;Factory Girl&quot;. In 2007, he appeared in Garry Marshall&#x27;s &quot;Georgia Rule&quot; opposite Jane Fonda.

In 2007, he made a guest appearance on the &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot; episode &quot;Dependent&quot; as a Mafia lawyer. In 2009, he played the role of Pierre Despereaux, an international art thief, in the fourth-season premiere of &quot;Psych&quot;. Also in 2009 Elwes joined the cast of Robert Zemeckis&#x27;s motion capture adaptation of Charles Dickens&#x27; &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot; portraying five roles. That same year he was chosen by Steven Spielberg to appear in his motion capture adaptation of Belgian artist Hergé&#x27;s popular comic strip &quot;The Adventures of Tintin: The Secret of the Unicorn&quot;.
Elwes&#x27;s voice-over work includes the narrator in James Patterson&#x27;s audiobook &quot;The Jester&quot;, as well as characters in film and television animations such as &quot;Quest for Camelot&quot;, &quot;Pinky and The Brain&quot;, &quot;Batman Beyond&quot;, and the English versions of the Studio Ghibli films, &quot;Porco Rosso&quot;, &quot;Whisper of the Heart&quot; and &quot;The Cat Returns&quot;. For the 2004 video game &quot;The Bard&#x27;s Tale&quot;, he served as screenwriter, improviser, and voice actor of the main character The Bard. In 2009, Elwes reunited with Jason Alexander for the Indian film, &quot;Delhi Safari&quot;. The following year Elwes portrayed the part of Gremlin Gus in Disney&#x27;s video game, &quot;Epic Mickey 2: The Power of Two&quot;. In 2014, he appeared in &quot;&quot; as the voice of scientists Edmond Halley and Robert Hooke.

=== 2010–present ===

In 2010, he returned to the &quot;Saw&quot; franchise in &quot;Saw 3D&quot; (2010), the seventh film in the series, as Dr. Lawrence Gordon. In 2010, he returned to &quot;Psych&quot;, reprising his role in the second half of the fifth season, again in the show&#x27;s sixth season, and again in the show&#x27;s eighth season premiere. In 2014, Elwes played Hugh Ashmeade, Director of the CIA, in the second season of the BYUtv series &quot;Granite Flats&quot;. In 2011, he was selected by Ivan Reitman to star alongside Natalie Portman in &quot;No Strings Attached&quot;. That same year, Elwes and Garry Marshall teamed up again in the ensemble romantic comedy &quot;New Year&#x27;s Eve&quot; opposite Robert de Niro and Halle Berry.

In 2012, Elwes starred in the independent drama &quot;The Citizen&quot;. and the following year Elwes joined Selena Gomez for the comedy ensemble, &quot;Behaving Badly&quot; directed by Tim Garrick. In 2015, he completed &quot;Sugar Mountain&quot; directed by Richard Gray; the drama &quot;We Don&#x27;t Belong Here&quot;, opposite Anton Yelchin and Catherine Keener directed by Peer Pedersen, and &quot;Being Charlie&quot; which reunited Elwes with director Rob Reiner after 28 years and premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival. In 2016, Elwes starred opposite Penelope Cruz in Fernando Trueba&#x27;s Spanish-language period pic &quot;The Queen of Spain&quot;, a sequel to Trueba&#x27;s 1998 drama &quot;The Girl of Your Dreams&quot;. This also re-united Elwes with his &quot;Princess Bride&quot; co-star, Mandy Patinkin.
In October 2014 Touchstone (Simon &amp; Schuster) published Elwes&#x27;s memoir of the making of &quot;The Princess Bride&quot;, entitled &quot;As You Wish: Inconceivable Tales from the Making of The Princess Bride&quot;, which he co-wrote with Joe Layden. The book featured never-before-told stories, exclusive behind-the-scenes photographs, and interviews with co-stars Robin Wright, Wallace Shawn, Billy Crystal, Christopher Guest, Fred Savage and Mandy Patinkin, as well as screenwriter William Goldman, producer Norman Lear, and director Rob Reiner. The book debuted on &quot;The New York Times&quot; Best Seller list.

In 2014, Elwes co-wrote the screenplay for a film entitled &quot;Elvis &amp; Nixon&quot;, about the pair&#x27;s famous meeting at the White House in 1970. The film starred Michael Shannon and Kevin Spacey; it was bought by Amazon as their first theatrical feature and released on 22 April 2016. In May 2015, Elwes was cast as Arthur Davenport, a shrewd and eccentric world-class collector of illegal art and antiquities in Crackle&#x27;s first streaming network series drama, &quot;The Art of More&quot;, which explored the cutthroat world of premium auction houses. The series debuted on 19 November and was picked up for a second season.

In April 2018 Elwes portrayed Larry Kline, mayor of Hawkins, for the third season of the Netflix series &quot;Stranger Things&quot;, which premiered in July 2019. He was nominated along with the cast for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series. In May 2019, he joined the third season of the Amazon series &quot;The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel&quot; as Gavin Hawk.

== Personal life ==
Elwes met photographer Lisa Marie Kurbikoff in 1991 at a chili cook-off in Malibu, California; they were engaged in 1997. They married in 2000 and have one daughter. Elwes and his family lost their home in the Palisades Fire during the January 2025 Southern California wildfires, but evacuated safely.

In March 2021, Elwes posted on his social media accounts that his younger half-sister Milica had died after battling Stage 4 cancer for more than a year.

Elwes is known for his feud with Republican Texas Senator and &quot;Princess Bride&quot; fan Ted Cruz. According to the &quot;Hollywood Reporter&quot;, Elwes initiated the 2020 fundraiser that re-united many &quot;Princess Bride&quot; cast members to support Joe Biden in the battleground state of Wisconsin. The &quot;Princess Bride&quot; Reunion raised more than $4 million for Wisconsin Democrats.

=== &quot;Saw&quot; lawsuit ===
In August 2005, Elwes filed a lawsuit against Evolution Entertainment, his management firm and producer of &quot;Saw&quot;. Elwes said he was promised a minimum of 1% of the producers&#x27; net profits and did not receive the full amount. The case was settled out of court. Elwes returned to the series in 2010 reprising his role in &quot;Saw 3D&quot;.

== Filmography ==
=== Film ===
=== Television ===
=== Video games ===
== Awards and honors ==
== Works ==

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q311093" start="0" end="21" title="Cary Elwes" label="Ivan Simon Cary Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="99" end="117" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="" start="179" end="204" title="Robin Hood: Men in Tights" label="Robin Hood: Men in Tights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145690" start="226" end="248" title="Saw (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Saw&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q268200" start="306" end="331" title="Screen Actors Guild Awards" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q40024" start="340" end="356" title="Satellite Awards" label="Satellite Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q862317" start="412" end="417" title="Glory (1989 film)" label="Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q603696" start="438" end="453" title="Days of Thunder" label="Days of Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q832105" start="474" end="484" title="Hot Shots!" label="Hot Shots!"/>
<link wikidata="Q107325" start="505" end="531" title="Bram Stoker&amp;#x27;s Dracula (1992 film)" label="Bram Stoker&amp;#x27;s Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q683663" start="552" end="559" title="Twister (1996 film)" label="Twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q60016" start="580" end="594" title="Kiss the Girls (1997 film)" label="Kiss the Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q48980" start="615" end="624" title="Liar Liar" label="Liar Liar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324090" start="645" end="666" title="Shadow of the Vampire" label="Shadow of the Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q663298" start="687" end="706" title="The Cat&amp;#x27;s Meow" label="The Cat&amp;#x27;s Meow"/>
<link wikidata="Q939325" start="727" end="741" title="Ella Enchanted (film)" label="Ella Enchanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q130627" start="762" end="779" title="Pope John Paul II (miniseries)" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q474087" start="800" end="819" title="No Strings Attached (2011 film)" label="No Strings Attached"/>
<link wikidata="Q112206187" start="840" end="860" title="Burning at Both Ends (film)" label="Burning at Both Ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q116315647" start="881" end="891" title="BlackBerry (film)" label="BlackBerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="1001" end="1012" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="1026" end="1034" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="1048" end="1074" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48758" start="1088" end="1093" title="Psych" label="Psych"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875190" start="1111" end="1125" title="Life in Pieces" label="Life in Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="1161" end="1168" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813413" start="1188" end="1203" title="Stranger Things (season 3)" label="Stranger Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="1215" end="1227" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q30634329" start="1248" end="1273" title="The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel" label="The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27903045" start="1313" end="1323" title="Paramount+" label="Paramount+"/>
<link wikidata="Q118777408" start="1344" end="1352" title="Knuckles (TV series)" label="Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="1380" end="1386" title="memoir" label="memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="1572" end="1591" title="Westminster" label="Westminster, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290920" start="1646" end="1660" title="Dominick Elwes" label="Dominick Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705605" start="1665" end="1678" title="Tessa Kennedy" label="Tessa Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701241" start="1746" end="1758" title="Damian Elwes" label="Damian Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049340" start="1778" end="1791" title="Cassian Elwes" label="Cassian Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q475223" start="1836" end="1851" title="Elliott Kastner" label="Elliott Kastner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474828" start="2025" end="2036" title="Simon Elwes" label="Simon Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553476" start="2082" end="2095" title="Gervase Elwes" label="Gervase Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452710" start="2147" end="2157" title="John Elwes (politician)" label="John Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="2161" end="2168" title="British people" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q626756" start="2203" end="2219" title="Ebenezer Scrooge" label="Ebenezer Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q62879" start="2229" end="2246" title="A Christmas Carol" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="2287" end="2302" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557935" start="2361" end="2378" title="Our Mutual Friend" label="Our Mutual Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q86791" start="2425" end="2445" title="A Christmas Carol (2009 film)" label="2009 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719295" start="2539" end="2588" title="Alexander Kennedy" label="Sir Alexander William &amp;quot;Blackie&amp;quot; Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="2660" end="2665" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2696" end="2710" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2739" end="2747" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q139627" start="2759" end="2768" title="altar boy" label="altar boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q739364" start="2772" end="2793" title="Westminster Cathedral" label="Westminster Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="2831" end="2838" title="clerics" label="clerics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311833" start="2842" end="2867" title="Dudley Charles Cary-Elwes" label="Dudley Charles Cary-Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q873197" start="2885" end="2906" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Northampton" label="Bishop of Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149530" start="2918" end="2936" title="Columba Cary-Elwes" label="Columba Cary-Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012194" start="2938" end="2954" title="Ampleforth Abbey" label="Ampleforth Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401652" start="2956" end="2973" title="Saint Louis Abbey" label="Saint Louis Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3040" end="3043" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q130627" start="3066" end="3083" title="Pope John Paul II (miniseries)" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="3127" end="3140" title="Karol Wojtyła" label="Karol Wojtyła"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247373" start="3276" end="3289" title="Harrow School" label="Harrow School"/>
<link wikidata="Q385471" start="3299" end="3339" title="London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art" label="London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051840" start="3399" end="3421" title="Sarah Lawrence College" label="Sarah Lawrence College"/>
<link wikidata="Q928168" start="3425" end="3445" title="Bronxville, New York" label="Bronxville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q216458" start="3500" end="3513" title="Actors Studio" label="Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542213" start="3522" end="3562" title="Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute" label="Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="3585" end="3594" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264" start="3666" end="3682" title="Charles Laughton" label="Charles Laughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q332658" start="3760" end="3770" title="Absolution (1978 film)" label="Absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q204398" start="3784" end="3793" title="Octopussy" label="Octopussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213053" start="3811" end="3819" title="Superman (1978 film)" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="3852" end="3865" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q188362" start="3966" end="3980" title="Rocky Marciano" label="Rocky Marciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290385" start="4054" end="4069" title="Marek Kanievska" label="Marek Kanievska"/>
<link wikidata="Q567975" start="4088" end="4103" title="Another Country (1984 film)" label="Another Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="4150" end="4165" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q918668" start="4192" end="4199" title="Guy Burgess" label="Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q296313" start="4201" end="4207" title="Kim Philby" label="Philby"/>
<link wikidata="Q523120" start="4212" end="4219" title="Donald Maclean (spy)" label="MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q453480" start="4277" end="4292" title="Guilford Dudley" label="Guilford Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q940321" start="4336" end="4345" title="Lady Jane (1986 film)" label="Lady Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="4362" end="4382" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="4441" end="4451" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="4480" end="4498" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935913" start="4536" end="4558" title="The Princess Bride (novel)" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q506885" start="4562" end="4577" title="William Goldman" label="William Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="4738" end="4753" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="4828" end="4840" title="cult film" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="4924" end="4929" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q862317" start="4944" end="4949" title="Glory (1989 film)" label="Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q832105" start="4994" end="5004" title="Hot Shots!" label="Hot Shots!"/>
<link wikidata="Q603696" start="5067" end="5082" title="Days of Thunder" label="Days of Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="5120" end="5130" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q104266" start="5134" end="5144" title="Mel Brooks" label="Mel Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5165" end="5190" title="Robin Hood: Men in Tights" label="Robin Hood: Men in Tights"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="5255" end="5275" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q107325" start="5303" end="5329" title="Bram Stoker&amp;#x27;s Dracula (1992 film)" label="Bram Stoker&amp;#x27;s Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167290" start="5350" end="5359" title="The Crush (1993 film)" label="The Crush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097616" start="5380" end="5395" title="The Jungle Book (1994 film)" label="The Jungle Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q683663" start="5416" end="5423" title="Twister (1996 film)" label="Twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q48980" start="5444" end="5453" title="Liar Liar" label="Liar Liar"/>
<link wikidata="Q60016" start="5478" end="5492" title="Kiss the Girls (1997 film)" label="Kiss the Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q315734" start="5554" end="5567" title="John Houseman" label="John Houseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q95048" start="5572" end="5583" title="Tim Robbins" label="Tim Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="5614" end="5626" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171556" start="5649" end="5665" title="Cradle Will Rock" label="Cradle Will Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="5705" end="5715" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q172261" start="5729" end="5743" title="John Malkovich" label="John Malkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q188772" start="5748" end="5760" title="Willem Dafoe" label="Willem Dafoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324090" start="5770" end="5791" title="Shadow of the Vampire" label="Shadow of the Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="5877" end="5885" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859" start="5929" end="5944" title="Michael Collins (astronaut)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="5952" end="5970" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="5979" end="5982" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="5983" end="5993" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="6000" end="6026" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth To the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40024" start="6079" end="6101" title="Golden Satellite Award" label="Golden Satellite Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q114937583" start="6219" end="6231" title="James G. Burton" label="James Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q747046" start="6241" end="6258" title="The Pentagon Wars" label="The Pentagon Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q495813" start="6277" end="6293" title="Richard Benjamin" label="Richard Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621450" start="6383" end="6399" title="The Outer Limits (1995 TV series)" label="The Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q158250" start="6453" end="6470" title="Peter Bogdanovich" label="Peter Bogdanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q663298" start="6498" end="6517" title="The Cat&amp;#x27;s Meow" label="The Cat&amp;#x27;s Meow"/>
<link wikidata="Q942822" start="6546" end="6557" title="Thomas H. Ince" label="Thomas Ince"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="6604" end="6627" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q170173" start="6635" end="6640" title="yacht" label="yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q40024" start="6683" end="6705" title="Golden Satellite Award" label="Golden Satellite Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q686165" start="6772" end="6780" title="Uprising (2001 film)" label="Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q167520" start="6796" end="6806" title="Jon Voight" label="Jon Voight"/>
<link wikidata="Q939079" start="6819" end="6828" title="Jon Avnet" label="Jon Avnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q437267" start="6900" end="6912" title="Chris Carter (screenwriter)" label="Chris Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="6937" end="6948" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="6958" end="6980" title="FBI Assistant Director" label="FBI Assistant Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953932" start="6981" end="6993" title="Brad Follmer" label="Brad Follmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394581" start="7019" end="7033" title="Kerry Max Cook" label="Kerry Max Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="7041" end="7053" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715097" start="7065" end="7079" title="The Exonerated (play)" label="The Exonerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q621490" start="7111" end="7122" title="Bob Balaban" label="Bob Balaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="7174" end="7180" title="Horror film" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="7181" end="7189" title="Thriller film" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q486239" start="7196" end="7199" title="Saw (2004 film)" label="Saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q939325" start="7326" end="7340" title="Ella Enchanted (film)" label="Ella Enchanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q192218" start="7429" end="7438" title="Ted Bundy" label="Ted Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="7446" end="7461" title="A&amp;amp;E (TV channel)" label="A&amp;amp;E Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q386573" start="7603" end="7621" title="Banff World Media Festival" label="BANFF Rockie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="7677" end="7690" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Karol Wojtyła"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="7698" end="7701" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q130627" start="7724" end="7741" title="Pope John Paul II (miniseries)" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="7894" end="7900" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410727" start="8003" end="8012" title="Samuel Adams Green" label="Sam Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="8037" end="8048" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q232340" start="8052" end="8065" title="Edie Sedgwick" label="Edie Sedgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365106" start="8090" end="8102" title="Factory Girl (2006 film)" label="Factory Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q315087" start="8134" end="8148" title="Garry Marshall" label="Garry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q772974" start="8162" end="8174" title="Georgia Rule" label="Georgia Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q41142" start="8190" end="8200" title="Jane Fonda" label="Jane Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8252" end="8289" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8310" end="8319" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit (season 8)#ep14" label="Dependent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18550" start="8331" end="8336" title="Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020280" start="8376" end="8393" title="Pierre Despereaux" label="Pierre Despereaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q48758" start="8462" end="8467" title="Psych" label="Psych"/>
<link wikidata="Q187364" start="8513" end="8528" title="Robert Zemeckis" label="Robert Zemeckis"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="8536" end="8550" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="8565" end="8580" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q86791" start="8593" end="8610" title="A Christmas Carol (2009 film)" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="8672" end="8688" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q52985" start="8750" end="8755" title="Hergé" label="Hergé"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8789" end="8840" title="The Adventures of Tintin: The Secret of the Unicorn" label="The Adventures of Tintin: The Secret of the Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="8861" end="8871" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="Q311671" start="8902" end="8917" title="James Patterson" label="James Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="8925" end="8934" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743143" start="8941" end="8951" title="The Jester (novel)" label="The Jester"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="8993" end="9013" title="television animation" label="television animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764174" start="9029" end="9046" title="Quest for Camelot" label="Quest for Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500726" start="9060" end="9079" title="Pinky and The Brain" label="Pinky and The Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339570" start="9093" end="9106" title="Batman Beyond" label="Batman Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="9146" end="9159" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q498375" start="9173" end="9184" title="Porco Rosso" label="Porco Rosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q842292" start="9198" end="9218" title="Whisper of the Heart (film)" label="Whisper of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q51543" start="9235" end="9250" title="The Cat Returns" label="The Cat Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572697" start="9288" end="9308" title="The Bard&amp;#x27;s Tale (2004)" label="The Bard&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q311754" start="9432" end="9447" title="Jason Alexander" label="Jason Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q328799" start="9456" end="9467" title="Indian film" label="Indian film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253809" start="9475" end="9487" title="Delhi Safari" label="Delhi Safari"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9589" end="9620" title="Epic Mickey 2: The Power of Two" label="Epic Mickey 2: The Power of Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="9692" end="9705" title="Edmond Halley" label="Edmond Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="9710" end="9722" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q676284" start="9810" end="9816" title="Saw 3D" label="Saw 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983002" start="9870" end="9885" title="Lawrence Gordon (character)" label="Lawrence Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48758" start="9917" end="9922" title="Psych" label="Psych"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021225" start="9975" end="9987" title="Psych (season 5)" label="fifth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q377668" start="10014" end="10026" title="Psych (season 6)" label="sixth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q15614776" start="10057" end="10070" title="Psych (season 8)" label="eighth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="10134" end="10137" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972677" start="10186" end="10199" title="Granite Flats" label="Granite Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q380272" start="10235" end="10247" title="Ivan Reitman" label="Ivan Reitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q37876" start="10266" end="10281" title="Natalie Portman" label="Natalie Portman"/>
<link wikidata="Q474087" start="10291" end="10310" title="No Strings Attached (2011 film)" label="No Strings Attached"/>
<link wikidata="Q315087" start="10344" end="10358" title="Garry Marshall" label="Garry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052260" start="10413" end="10432" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve (2011 film)" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="10448" end="10462" title="Robert de Niro" label="Robert de Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033016" start="10467" end="10478" title="Halle Berry" label="Halle Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249345" start="10535" end="10546" title="The Citizen (film)" label="The Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83287" start="10590" end="10602" title="Selena Gomez" label="Selena Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393003" start="10634" end="10648" title="Behaving Badly (film)" label="Behaving Badly"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649466" start="10708" end="10722" title="Sugar Mountain (film)" label="Sugar Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649415" start="10771" end="10796" title="We Don&amp;#x27;t Belong Here (film)" label="We Don&amp;#x27;t Belong Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q314133" start="10813" end="10826" title="Anton Yelchin" label="Anton Yelchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q230378" start="10831" end="10847" title="Catherine Keener" label="Catherine Keener"/>
<link wikidata="Q20313214" start="10885" end="10898" title="Being Charlie" label="Being Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="10940" end="10950" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="10987" end="11022" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q39666" start="11056" end="11069" title="Penelope Cruz" label="Penelope Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q381934" start="11073" end="11088" title="Fernando Trueba" label="Fernando Trueba"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925057" start="11130" end="11148" title="The Queen of Spain" label="The Queen of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q766770" start="11199" end="11222" title="The Girl of Your Dreams" label="The Girl of Your Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="11271" end="11285" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q267097" start="11301" end="11315" title="Mandy Patinkin" label="Mandy Patinkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="11345" end="11365" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="11420" end="11438" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q272972" start="11689" end="11701" title="Robin Wright" label="Robin Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q311068" start="11703" end="11716" title="Wallace Shawn" label="Wallace Shawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="11718" end="11731" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q336074" start="11733" end="11750" title="Christopher Guest" label="Christopher Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q447392" start="11752" end="11763" title="Fred Savage" label="Fred Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q267097" start="11768" end="11782" title="Mandy Patinkin" label="Mandy Patinkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q506885" start="11808" end="11823" title="William Goldman" label="William Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270283" start="11834" end="11845" title="Norman Lear" label="Norman Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="11860" end="11870" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="11892" end="11939" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;The New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q18914954" start="12007" end="12024" title="Elvis &amp;amp; Nixon" label="Elvis &amp;amp; Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="12076" end="12087" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q41449" start="12114" end="12129" title="Michael Shannon" label="Michael Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="12134" end="12146" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="12165" end="12171" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180408" start="12365" end="12372" title="Crackle (company)" label="Crackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028739" start="12424" end="12439" title="The Art of More" label="The Art of More"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="12672" end="12679" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798734" start="12693" end="12708" title="Stranger Things" label="Stranger Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530270" start="12791" end="12877" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series" label="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740868" start="12926" end="12932" title="Amazon Studios" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30634329" start="12946" end="12971" title="The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel" label="The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13071" end="13085" title="Cook-off#Chili cook-off" label="chili cook-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="13089" end="13107" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q131700096" start="13224" end="13238" title="Palisades Fire" label="Palisades Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131704535" start="13250" end="13292" title="January 2025 Southern California wildfires" label="January 2025 Southern California wildfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="13505" end="13515" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="13565" end="13573" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="13598" end="13616" title="Hollywood Reporter" label="Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q102115687" start="13785" end="13819" title="Princess Bride Reunion" label="&amp;quot;Princess Bride&amp;quot; Reunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255727" start="13852" end="13871" title="Democratic Party of Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418607" start="13952" end="13975" title="Evolution Entertainment" label="Evolution Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q486239" start="14019" end="14022" title="Saw (2004 film)" label="Saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q167412" start="14158" end="14178" title="legal settlement" label="settled out of court"/>
<link wikidata="Q676284" start="14245" end="14251" title="Saw 3D" label="Saw 3D"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7180" wikidata="Q363684" url="?curid=7180" title="Chris Sarandon">
<text>Christopher Sarandon (; born July 24, 1942) is an American actor. He is well known for playing Jerry Dandrige in &quot;Fright Night&quot; (1985), Prince Humperdinck in &quot;The Princess Bride&quot; (1987), Detective Mike Norris in &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; (1988), and Jack Skellington’s speaking voice in &quot;The Nightmare Before Christmas&quot; (1993). He was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance as Leon Shermer in &quot;Dog Day Afternoon&quot; (1975).

==Early life==
Chris Sarandon was born and raised in Beckley, West Virginia, the son of Greek-American restaurateurs Chris and Cliffie (née Cardullias) Sarandon. His father, whose surname was originally &quot;Sarondonethes&quot;, was born to Greek parents in Istanbul, Turkey.

Sarandon graduated from Woodrow Wilson High School in Beckley. He earned a degree in speech at West Virginia University, and earned his master&#x27;s degree in theater from Catholic University of America (CUA) in Washington, D.C.

==Career==

After graduation, he toured with numerous improvisational companies and became much involved with regional theatre, making his professional debut in the play &quot;The Rose Tattoo&quot; during 1965. In the summer of 1968 he and his then-wife, Susan Sarandon, worked as actors at the Wayside Theatre in Middletown, Virginia. Later that year Sarandon moved to New York City, where he obtained his first television role as Dr. Tom Halverson for the series &quot;The Guiding Light&quot; (1973–1974). He appeared in the primetime television movies &quot;The Satan Murders&quot; (1974) and &quot;Thursday&#x27;s Game&quot; before obtaining the role in &quot;Dog Day Afternoon&quot; (1975), a performance which earned him nominations for Best New Male Star of the Year at the Golden Globes and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.

Sarandon appeared in the Broadway play &quot;The Rothschilds&quot; and &quot;The Two Gentlemen of Verona&quot;, as well making regular appearances at numerous Shakespeare and George Bernard Shaw festivals in the United States and Canada. He also had a series of television roles, some of which (such as &quot;A Tale of Two Cities&quot; in 1980) corresponded to his affinity for the classics. He also had roles in the thriller movie &quot;Lipstick&quot; (1976) and as a demon in the movie &quot;The Sentinel&quot; (1977).

To avoid being typecast in villainous roles, Sarandon accepted various roles of other types during the years to come, portraying the title role of Christ in the made-for-television movie &quot;The Day Christ Died&quot; (1980). He received accolades for his portrayal of Sydney Carton in a TV-movie version of &quot;A Tale of Two Cities&quot; (1980), co-starred with Dennis Hopper in the 1983 movie &quot;The Osterman Weekend&quot;, which was based on the Robert Ludlum novel of the same name, and co-starred with Goldie Hawn in the movie &quot;Protocol&quot; (1984). These were followed by another mainstream success as the vampire-next-door in the horror movie &quot;Fright Night&quot; (1985). He starred in the 1986 TV movie &quot;Liberty&quot;, which addressed the making of New York City&#x27;s Statue of Liberty.
One of his most endearing roles onscreen is that of Prince Humperdinck in Rob Reiner&#x27;s 1987 movie &quot;The Princess Bride&quot;, though he also has had supporting parts in many other successful films, including his lead turn in the original horror classic &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; (1988). In 1992, he played Joseph Curwen/Charles Dexter Ward in &quot;The Resurrected&quot;. He also played Jack Skellington, the main character of Tim Burton&#x27;s animated Disney movie &quot;The Nightmare Before Christmas&quot; (1993), and has since reprised the role in other productions, including the Disney/Square video games &quot;Kingdom Hearts&quot; and &quot;Kingdom Hearts II&quot; and the Capcom sequel to the original movie, &quot;Oogie&#x27;s Revenge&quot;. Sarandon also reprised his role as Jack Skellington for several Disneyland Halloween events and attractions including; &quot;Halloween Screams&quot;, the &quot;Frightfully Fun Parade,&quot; and the Haunted Mansion Holiday, a three-month overlay of the Haunted Mansion, where Jack and his friends take control of a mansion in an attempt to introduce Christmas, much as his character did in the movie.

Sarandon appeared in TV again with a recurring role as Dr. Burke on NBC&#x27;s long-running medical drama &quot;ER&quot;.

In 1991 he performed on Broadway in the short-lived musical &quot;Nick &amp; Nora&quot; (based on the movie &quot;The Thin Man&quot;) with Joanna Gleason, the daughter of Monty Hall. Sarandon married Gleason in 1994. They have appeared together in a number of movies, including &quot;Edie &amp; Pen&quot; (1996), &quot;American Perfekt&quot; (1997), and &quot;Let the Devil Wear Black&quot; (1999). During the 2000s he made guest appearances in several TV series, notably as the Necromancer demon, Armand, in &quot;Charmed&quot;, and as superior court judge Barry Krumble for six episodes of &quot;Judging Amy&quot;.

In 2006 he played Signor Naccarelli in the six-time Tony Award-winning Broadway musical play &quot;The Light in the Piazza&quot; at Lincoln Center. Most recently he appeared in &quot;Cyrano de Bergerac&quot; as Antoine de Guiche, with Kevin Kline, Jennifer Garner, and Daniel Sunjata.

In 2016 he performed in the Off-Broadway production of the Dave Malloy musical &quot;Preludes&quot; as Anton Chekhov, Tchaikovsky, Alexander Glazunov, Leo Tolstoy, Tsar Nicholas II, and The Master.

He is on the advisory board for the Greenbrier Valley Theatre in Lewisburg, West Virginia.

==Personal life==
Sarandon has been married three times: he married actress Susan Sarandon in 1967. The two met while attending Catholic University of America together in Washington, D.C. The marriage lasted for twelve years; the pair divorced in 1979. After his divorce from Susan, he married his second wife, fashion model Lisa Ann Cooper, in 1980. The couple had two daughters and one son: Stephanie (born 1982), Alexis (born 1984), and Michael (born 1988). After nine years, the marriage ended in divorce in 1989. 

In 1994, he married his third wife, actress and singer Joanna Gleason. The couple met while performing in Broadway&#x27;s short-lived 1991 musical &quot;Nick &amp; Nora&quot;; they returned to the stage together in 1998&#x27;s &quot;Thorn and Bloom&quot;. They also collaborated in several films together, such as &quot;Road Ends&quot;, &quot;Edie &amp; Pen&quot;, &quot;Let the Devil Wear Black&quot;, and &quot;American Perfekt&quot;.

Sarandon is a member of the Greek Orthodox Church.

== Filmography ==
=== Film ===
=== Television ===
=== Video games ===
=== Theme parks and live attractions ===
* &quot;Haunted Mansion Holiday&quot; – Jack Skellington
* &quot;Halloween Screams&quot; – Jack Skellington
* &quot;Frightfully Fun Parade&quot; – Jack Skellington
* &quot;Disney on Ice&quot; – Jack Skellington

=== Music videos ===
* &quot;Hands Clean&quot; — Alanis Morissette

==Theatre==
==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Chris Sarandon – &quot;Downstage Center&quot; interview at American Theatre Wing.org
* The West Virginia &amp; Regional History Center at West Virginia University houses the papers of Chris Sarandon as a part of the Distinguished West Virginians Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q363684" start="0" end="20" title="Chris Sarandon" label="Christopher Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183437" start="95" end="109" title="Jerry Dandrige" label="Jerry Dandrige"/>
<link wikidata="Q371456" start="119" end="131" title="Fright Night" label="Fright Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q398634" start="146" end="164" title="Prince Humperdinck" label="Prince Humperdinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="174" end="192" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q935945" start="238" end="255" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play (1988 film)" label="Child&amp;#x27;s Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708262" start="274" end="290" title="Jack Skellington" label="Jack Skellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q322328" start="317" end="347" title="The Nightmare Before Christmas" label="The Nightmare Before Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="387" end="426" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q458656" start="472" end="489" title="Dog Day Afternoon" label="Dog Day Afternoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q813745" start="558" end="580" title="Beckley, West Virginia" label="Beckley, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467740" start="747" end="752" title="Ottoman Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602105" start="753" end="760" title="Greeks in Turkey" label="parents"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="764" end="772" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="774" end="780" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033197" start="807" end="833" title="Woodrow Wilson High School (Beckley, West Virginia)" label="Woodrow Wilson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q115376" start="878" end="902" title="West Virginia University" label="West Virginia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="919" end="939" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="943" end="950" title="theater" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="956" end="986" title="Catholic University of America" label="Catholic University of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="996" end="1012" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7309244" start="1124" end="1140" title="Regional theatre in the United States" label="regional theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219620" start="1190" end="1205" title="The Rose Tattoo" label="The Rose Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="1269" end="1283" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301526" start="1309" end="1324" title="Wayside Theatre" label="Wayside Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1384" end="1397" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145764" start="1485" end="1502" title="The Guiding Light" label="The Guiding Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799399" start="1616" end="1636" title="Thursday&amp;#x27;s Game" label="Thursday&amp;#x27;s Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q458656" start="1678" end="1695" title="Dog Day Afternoon" label="Dog Day Afternoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="1795" end="1808" title="Golden Globes" label="Golden Globes"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="1817" end="1856" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1884" end="1892" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761593" start="1904" end="1919" title="The Rothschilds (musical)" label="The Rothschilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q232042" start="1936" end="1963" title="The Two Gentlemen of Verona" label="The Two Gentlemen of Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2018" end="2029" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="2034" end="2053" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2071" end="2084" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2089" end="2095" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768442" start="2297" end="2305" title="Lipstick (1976 film)" label="Lipstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="2328" end="2333" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q609312" start="2353" end="2365" title="The Sentinel (1977 film)" label="The Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="2396" end="2404" title="Typecasting (acting)" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2514" end="2524" title="Jesus Christ" label="title role"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="2542" end="2561" title="made-for-television" label="made-for-television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492541" start="2574" end="2593" title="The Day Christ Died" label="The Day Christ Died"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659855" start="2651" end="2664" title="Sydney Carton" label="Sydney Carton"/>
<link wikidata="Q308918" start="2696" end="2716" title="A Tale of Two Cities" label="A Tale of Two Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q102711" start="2747" end="2760" title="Dennis Hopper" label="Dennis Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170020" start="2785" end="2805" title="The Osterman Weekend (film)" label="The Osterman Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q224113" start="2836" end="2849" title="Robert Ludlum" label="Robert Ludlum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188459" start="2894" end="2905" title="Goldie Hawn" label="Goldie Hawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q638547" start="2925" end="2933" title="Protocol (film)" label="Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q371456" start="3049" end="3061" title="Fright Night" label="Fright Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="3273" end="3283" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="3308" end="3326" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q935945" start="3467" end="3484" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play (1988 film)" label="Child&amp;#x27;s Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126299" start="3561" end="3576" title="The Resurrected" label="The Resurrected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708262" start="3599" end="3615" title="Jack Skellington" label="Jack Skellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="3639" end="3649" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="3657" end="3665" title="animation" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="3666" end="3672" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q322328" start="3685" end="3715" title="The Nightmare Before Christmas" label="The Nightmare Before Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q739552" start="3805" end="3811" title="Square (video game company)" label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q755167" start="3830" end="3844" title="Kingdom Hearts" label="Kingdom Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q626802" start="3861" end="3878" title="Kingdom Hearts II" label="Kingdom Hearts II"/>
<link wikidata="Q14428" start="3893" end="3899" title="Capcom" label="Capcom"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3936" end="3956" title="The Nightmare Before Christmas: Oogie&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="Oogie&amp;#x27;s Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="4028" end="4038" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643118" start="4089" end="4106" title="Halloween Screams" label="Halloween Screams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838539" start="4124" end="4146" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Halloween Party" label="Frightfully Fun Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11338480" start="4162" end="4185" title="Haunted Mansion Holiday" label="Haunted Mansion Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030983" start="4216" end="4231" title="The Haunted Mansion" label="Haunted Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="4433" end="4436" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q207375" start="4477" end="4479" title="ER (TV series)" label="ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="4512" end="4520" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026670" start="4554" end="4569" title="Nick &amp;amp; Nora (musical)" label="Nick &amp;amp; Nora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198497" start="4602" end="4614" title="The Thin Man (film)" label="The Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q273830" start="4627" end="4641" title="Joanna Gleason" label="Joanna Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q936132" start="4659" end="4669" title="Monty Hall" label="Monty Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714378" start="4772" end="4786" title="Edie &amp;amp; Pen" label="Edie &amp;amp; Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q466010" start="4807" end="4823" title="American Perfekt" label="American Perfekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533081" start="4848" end="4872" title="Let the Devil Wear Black" label="Let the Devil Wear Black"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4963" end="4984" title="List of Charmed characters#The Necromancer" label="the Necromancer demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162371" start="5003" end="5010" title="Charmed" label="Charmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247192" start="5086" end="5097" title="Judging Amy" label="Judging Amy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="5158" end="5168" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747285" start="5205" end="5228" title="The Light in the Piazza (musical)" label="The Light in the Piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="5238" end="5252" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048916" start="5289" end="5307" title="Cyrano de Bergerac (play)" label="Cyrano de Bergerac"/>
<link wikidata="Q105817" start="5341" end="5352" title="Kevin Kline" label="Kevin Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q172044" start="5354" end="5369" title="Jennifer Garner" label="Jennifer Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q648565" start="5375" end="5389" title="Daniel Sunjata" label="Daniel Sunjata"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935103" start="5451" end="5462" title="Dave Malloy" label="Dave Malloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858215" start="5477" end="5485" title="Preludes (musical)" label="Preludes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="5495" end="5508" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="5510" end="5521" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q25872" start="5523" end="5541" title="Alexander Glazunov" label="Alexander Glazunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="5543" end="5554" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="5556" end="5572" title="Tsar Nicholas II" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q731071" start="5656" end="5680" title="Lewisburg, West Virginia" label="Lewisburg, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="5759" end="5773" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="5811" end="5841" title="Catholic University of America" label="Catholic University of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5854" end="5870" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q273830" start="6258" end="6272" title="Joanna Gleason" label="Joanna Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714378" start="6546" end="6560" title="Edie &amp;amp; Pen" label="Edie &amp;amp; Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533081" start="6574" end="6598" title="Let the Devil Wear Black" label="Let the Devil Wear Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q466010" start="6616" end="6632" title="American Perfekt" label="American Perfekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="6669" end="6690" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11338480" start="6812" end="6835" title="Haunted Mansion Holiday" label="Haunted Mansion Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708262" start="6844" end="6860" title="Jack Skellington" label="Jack Skellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643118" start="6869" end="6886" title="Halloween Screams" label="Halloween Screams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838539" start="6920" end="6942" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Halloween Party" label="Frightfully Fun Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030504" start="6976" end="6989" title="Disney on Ice" label="Disney on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q942339" start="7045" end="7056" title="Hands Clean" label="Hands Clean"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="7065" end="7082" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745239" start="7221" end="7246" title="American Theatre Wing" label="American Theatre Wing.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986943" start="7253" end="7296" title="West Virginia &amp;amp; Regional History Center" label="West Virginia &amp;amp; Regional History Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q115376" start="7300" end="7324" title="West Virginia University" label="West Virginia University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7182" wikidata="Q336074" url="?curid=7182" title="Christopher Guest">
<text>Christopher Haden-Guest, 5th Baron Haden-Guest (born 5 February 1948), known professionally as Christopher Guest, is a British-American actor, comedian, screenwriter and director. Guest has written, directed, and starred in his series of comedy films shot in mockumentary style. He wrote and acted in the rock satire &quot;This Is Spinal Tap&quot; (1984), and later directed a string of satirical mockumentary films such as &quot;Waiting for Guffman&quot; (1996), &quot;Best in Show&quot; (2000), &quot;A Mighty Wind&quot; (2003), &quot;For Your Consideration&quot; (2006), and &quot;Mascots&quot; (2016). His acting credits include roles in &quot;Death Wish&quot; (1974), &quot;Little Shop of Horrors&quot; (1986), &quot;The Princess Bride&quot; (1987) and &quot;A Few Good Men&quot; (1992). For one season (1984-85), he was a regular cast member on the long running NBC sketch comedy series &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;.

Guest holds a hereditary British peerage as the 5th Baron Haden-Guest, but has publicly expressed a desire to see the House of Lords reformed as a democratically elected chamber. Though he was initially active in the Lords, his career there was cut short by the House of Lords Act 1999, which removed the right of most hereditary peers to a seat in the parliament. When using his title, he is normally styled as Lord Haden-Guest. Guest is married to the actress Jamie Lee Curtis, who is styled as The Right Honourable the Lady Haden-Guest; however, she opts not to use her title.

== Early life ==
Guest was born 5 February 1948 in New York City, the son of Peter Haden-Guest, a British United Nations diplomat who later became the 4th Baron Haden-Guest, and his second wife, the former Jean Pauline Hindes, an American former vice president of casting at CBS. Guest&#x27;s paternal grandfather, Leslie, Baron Haden-Guest, was a Labour Party politician, who was a convert to Judaism. Guest&#x27;s paternal grandmother, a descendant of the Dutch Jewish Goldsmid family, was the daughter of Colonel Albert Goldsmid, a British officer who founded the Jewish Lads&#x27; and Girls&#x27; Brigade and the Maccabaeans. Guest&#x27;s maternal grandparents were Jewish emigrants from Russia. Both of Guest&#x27;s parents had become atheists, and Guest himself had no religious upbringing. In 1938, his uncle, David Guest, a lecturer and Communist Party member, was killed in the Spanish Civil War, fighting in the International Brigades.

Guest spent parts of his childhood in his father&#x27;s native United Kingdom. He attended the High School of Music &amp; Art (New York City), studying classical music (clarinet) at the Stockbridge School in the village of Interlaken in Stockbridge, Massachusetts. He later took up the mandolin, became interested in country music, and played guitar with Arlo Guthrie, a fellow student at Stockbridge School. Guest later began performing with bluegrass bands until he took up rock and roll. Guest went to Bard College for a year and then studied acting at New York University&#x27;s Graduate Acting Program at the Tisch School of the Arts, graduating in 1971.

== Career ==

=== 1970s ===
Guest began his career in theatre during the early 1970s with one of his earliest professional performances being the role of Norman in Michael Weller&#x27;s &quot;Moonchildren&quot; for the play&#x27;s American premiere at the Arena Stage in Washington, DC, in November 1971. Guest continued with the production when it moved to Broadway in 1972. The following year, he began making contributions to &quot;The National Lampoon Radio Hour&quot; for a variety of National Lampoon audio recordings. He both performed comic characters (Flash Bazbo—Space Explorer, Mr. Rogers, music critic Roger de Swans, and sleazy record company rep Ron Fields) and wrote, arranged, and performed numerous musical parodies (of Bob Dylan, James Taylor, and others). He was featured alongside Chevy Chase and John Belushi in the off-Broadway revue &quot;National Lampoon&#x27;s Lemmings&quot;. Two of his earliest film roles were small parts as uniformed police officers in the 1972 film &quot;The Hot Rock&quot; and 1974&#x27;s &quot;Death Wish&quot;.

Guest played a small role in the 1977 &quot;All in the Family&quot; episode &quot;Mike and Gloria Meet&quot;, where in a flashback sequence Mike and Gloria recall their first blind date, set up by Michael&#x27;s college buddy Jim (Guest), who dated Gloria&#x27;s girlfriend Debbie (Priscilla Lopez).

Guest also had a small but important role in &quot;it Happened One Christmas&quot;, the 1977 gender-reversed TV remake of the Frank Capra classic &quot;it&#x27;s a Wonderful Life,&quot; starring Marlo Thomas as Mary Bailey (the Jimmy Stewart role), with Cloris Leachman as Mary&#x27;s guardian angel and Orson Welles as the villainous Mr. Potter. Guest played Mary&#x27;s brother Harry, who returned from the Army in the final scene, speaking one of the last lines of the film: &quot;A toast! To my big sister Mary, the richest person in town!&quot;

=== 1980s ===
Guest&#x27;s biggest role of the first two decades of his career is likely that of Nigel Tufnel in the 1984 Rob Reiner film &quot;This Is Spinal Tap&quot;. Guest made his first appearance as Tufnel on the 1978 sketch comedy program &quot;The TV Show&quot;.

Along with Martin Short, Billy Crystal, and Harry Shearer, Guest was hired as a one-year-only cast member for the 1984–1985 season on NBC&#x27;s &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. Recurring characters on SNL played by Guest include Frankie, of Willie and Frankie (coworkers who recount in detail physically painful situations in which they have found themselves, remarking laconically &quot;I hate when that happens&quot;); Herb Minkman, a novelty toymaker with his brother Al (played by Crystal); Rajeev Vindaloo, an eccentric foreign man in the same vein as Andy Kaufman&#x27;s Latka character from &quot;Taxi&quot;; and Señor Cosa, a Spanish ventriloquist often seen on the recurring spoof of &quot;The Joe Franklin Show&quot;. He also experimented behind the camera with pre-filmed sketches, notably directing a documentary-style short starring Shearer and Short as synchronized swimmers. In another short film from SNL, Guest and Crystal appear in blackface as retired Negro league baseball players, &quot;The Rooster and the King&quot;.

He appeared as Count Rugen (the &quot;six-fingered man&quot;) in &quot;The Princess Bride&quot;. He had a cameo role as the first customer, a pedestrian, in the 1986 musical remake of &quot;The Little Shop of Horrors&quot;. As a co-writer and director, Guest made the Hollywood satire &quot;The Big Picture&quot;.

Upon his father succeeding to the family peerage in 1987, he was known as &quot;the Hon. Christopher Haden-Guest&quot;. This was his official style and name until he inherited the barony in 1996.

=== 1990–present ===
The experience of making &quot;This is Spinal Tap&quot; directly informed the second phase of his career. Starting in 1996, Guest began writing, directing, and acting in his own series of substantially improvised films. Many of them are considered definitive examples of what came to be known as &quot;mockumentaries&quot;—not a term Guest appreciates.

Together, Guest, his frequent writing partner Eugene Levy, and a small band of actors have formed a loose repertory group, which appears in several films. These include Catherine O&#x27;Hara, Michael McKean, Parker Posey, Bob Balaban, Jane Lynch, John Michael Higgins, Harry Shearer, Jennifer Coolidge, Ed Begley Jr., Jim Piddock and Fred Willard. Guest and Levy write backgrounds for each of the characters and notecards for each specific scene, outlining the plot, and then leave it up to the actors to improvise the dialogue, which is supposed to result in a much more natural conversation than scripted dialogue would. Typically, everyone who appears in these movies receives the same fee and the same portion of profits. Among the films performed in this manner, which have been written and directed by Guest, include &quot;Waiting for Guffman&quot; (1996), about a community theatre group, &quot;Best in Show&quot; (2000), about the dog show circuit, &quot;A Mighty Wind&quot; (2003), about folk singers, &quot;For Your Consideration&quot; (2006), about the hype surrounding Oscar season, and &quot;Mascots&quot; (2016), about a sports team mascot competition.

Guest had a guest voice-over role in the animated comedy series &quot;SpongeBob SquarePants&quot; as SpongeBob&#x27;s cousin, Stanley.

Guest again collaborated with Reiner in &quot;A Few Good Men&quot; (1992), appearing as Dr. Stone. In the 2000s, Guest appeared in the 2005 biographical musical &quot;Mrs Henderson Presents&quot; and in the 2009 comedy &quot;The Invention of Lying&quot;.

He is also currently a member of the musical group The Beyman Bros, which he formed with childhood friend David Nichtern and Spinal Tap&#x27;s current keyboardist C. J. Vanston. Their debut album &quot;Memories of Summer as a Child&quot; was released on January 20, 2009.

In 2010, the United States Census Bureau paid $2.5 million to have a television commercial directed by Guest shown during television coverage of Super Bowl XLIV.

Guest holds an honorary doctorate from and is a member of the board of trustees for Berklee College of Music in Boston.

In 2013, Guest was the co-writer and producer of the HBO series &quot;Family Tree,&quot; in collaboration with Jim Piddock, a lighthearted story in the style he made famous in &quot;This is Spinal Tap&quot;, in which the main character, Tom Chadwick, inherits a box of curios from his great aunt, spurring interest in his ancestry.

On August 11, 2015, Netflix announced that &quot;Mascots&quot;, a film directed by Guest and co-written with Jim Piddock, about the competition for the World Mascot Association championship&#x27;s Gold Fluffy Award, would debut in 2016.

Guest replayed his role as Count Tyrone Rugen in the &quot;Princess Bride&quot; Reunion on September 13, 2020.

== Family ==

Guest became the 5th Baron Haden-Guest, of Great Saling, in the County of Essex, when his father died in 1996. He succeeded upon the ineligibility of his older half-brother, Anthony Haden-Guest, who was born before his parents married. According to a 2004 article in &quot;The Guardian&quot;, Guest attended the House of Lords regularly until the House of Lords Act 1999 barred most hereditary peers from their seats. In the article Guest remarked:
Guest married actress Jamie Lee Curtis in 1984 at the home of their mutual friend Rob Reiner. They have two daughters, through adoption. Guest was played by Seth Green in the film &quot;A Futile and Stupid Gesture.&quot;

== Filmography ==
=== Film ===
=== Television ===
===Recurring cast members===
Guest has worked multiple times with certain actors, notably with frequent writing partner Eugene Levy, who has appeared in five of his projects. Other repeat collaborators of Guest include Fred Willard (7 projects); Michael McKean, Bob Balaban, and Ed Begley Jr. (6 projects each); Paul Benedict, Parker Posey, Jim Piddock, Michael Hitchcock and Harry Shearer (5 projects each); Catherine O&#x27;Hara, Larry Miller, John Michael Higgins, Jane Lynch, and Jennifer Coolidge (4 projects each); Fran Drescher and Rob Reiner (3 projects each)

== Awards and nominations ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* 
* &quot;Nowt so queer as folk&quot;. &quot;The Guardian&quot; (UK). January 10, 2004. Richard Grant. Interview for release of &quot;A Mighty Wind&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q336074" start="0" end="46" title="Christopher Guest" label="Christopher Haden-Guest, 5th Baron Haden-Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q336074" start="95" end="112" title="Christopher Guest" label="Christopher Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="259" end="271" title="mockumentary" label="mockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810384" start="323" end="341" title="This Is Spinal Tap" label="This Is Spinal Tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699996" start="430" end="449" title="Waiting for Guffman" label="Waiting for Guffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q830324" start="470" end="482" title="Best in Show (film)" label="Best in Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754773" start="503" end="516" title="A Mighty Wind" label="A Mighty Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076762" start="537" end="559" title="For Your Consideration (film)" label="For Your Consideration"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949909" start="584" end="591" title="Mascots (2016 film)" label="Mascots"/>
<link wikidata="Q841961" start="648" end="658" title="Death Wish (1974 film)" label="Death Wish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199259" start="679" end="701" title="Little Shop of Horrors (1986 film)" label="Little Shop of Horrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="722" end="740" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q108946" start="764" end="778" title="A Few Good Men" label="A Few Good Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426671" start="797" end="807" title="Saturday Night Live (Season 10)" label="one season"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="868" end="871" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="899" end="918" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="941" end="951" title="Hereditary peer" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q21488839" start="952" end="967" title="Peerages in the United Kingdom" label="British peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q808621" start="979" end="996" title="Baron Haden-Guest" label="Baron Haden-Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1045" end="1059" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="1189" end="1212" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767753" start="1329" end="1335" title="Style (manner of address)" label="styled"/>
<link wikidata="Q336074" start="1339" end="1355" title="Christopher Guest" label="Lord Haden-Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q106997" start="1389" end="1405" title="Jamie Lee Curtis" label="Jamie Lee Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480896" start="1424" end="1444" title="The Right Honourable" label="The Right Honourable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174471" start="1585" end="1602" title="Peter Haden-Guest, 4th Baron Haden-Guest" label="Peter Haden-Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q808621" start="1663" end="1680" title="Baron Haden-Guest" label="Baron Haden-Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q75411040" start="1714" end="1733" title="Jean Haden-Guest, Lady Haden-Guest" label="Jean Pauline Hindes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1783" end="1786" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497083" start="1823" end="1848" title="Leslie Haden-Guest, 1st Baron Haden-Guest" label="Leslie, Baron Haden-Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="1856" end="1868" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086136" start="1891" end="1909" title="Conversion to Judaism" label="convert to Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580311" start="1979" end="1994" title="Goldsmid family" label="Goldsmid family"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799162" start="2016" end="2023" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710321" start="2024" end="2039" title="Albert Goldsmid" label="Albert Goldsmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189870" start="2075" end="2116" title="Jewish Lads&amp;#x27; and Girls&amp;#x27; Brigade" label="Jewish Lads&amp;#x27; and Girls&amp;#x27; Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588811" start="2125" end="2136" title="Maccabaeans" label="Maccabaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="2248" end="2255" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234453" start="2325" end="2336" title="David Guest (communist)" label="David Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="2353" end="2368" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="2395" end="2412" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q132518" start="2430" end="2452" title="International Brigades" label="International Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739610" start="2550" end="2580" title="High School of Music &amp;amp; Art" label="High School of Music &amp;amp; Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617950" start="2641" end="2659" title="Stockbridge School" label="Stockbridge School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083805" start="2678" end="2688" title="Old Curtisville Historic District" label="Interlaken"/>
<link wikidata="Q222705" start="2692" end="2703" title="Stockbridge, Massachusetts" label="Stockbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="2705" end="2718" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="2741" end="2749" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="2772" end="2785" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q552925" start="2810" end="2822" title="Arlo Guthrie" label="Arlo Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="2898" end="2907" title="Bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="2931" end="2944" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="2960" end="2972" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="3011" end="3030" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3038" end="3061" title="Tisch School of the Arts#Graduate Acting Program" label="Graduate Acting Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q797078" start="3069" end="3093" title="Tisch School of the Arts" label="Tisch School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15498371" start="3280" end="3294" title="Michael Weller" label="Michael Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907674" start="3308" end="3320" title="Moonchildren" label="Moonchildren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788912" start="3372" end="3383" title="Arena Stage" label="Arena Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="3474" end="3482" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753193" start="3551" end="3582" title="The National Lampoon Radio Hour" label="The National Lampoon Radio Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q310926" start="3917" end="3928" title="Chevy Chase" label="Chevy Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q23858" start="3933" end="3945" title="John Belushi" label="John Belushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="3953" end="3965" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973988" start="3978" end="4010" title="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Lemmings" label="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Lemmings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546058" start="4118" end="4130" title="The Hot Rock (film)" label="The Hot Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q841961" start="4159" end="4169" title="Death Wish (1974 film)" label="Death Wish"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4260" end="4280" title="List of All in the Family episodes#Season 8: 1977–1978" label="Mike and Gloria Meet"/>
<link wikidata="Q473432" start="4299" end="4308" title="flashback (narrative)" label="flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922150" start="4460" end="4475" title="Priscilla Lopez" label="Priscilla Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032682" start="5127" end="5139" title="Nigel Tufnel" label="Nigel Tufnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810384" start="5174" end="5192" title="This Is Spinal Tap" label="This Is Spinal Tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q329744" start="5313" end="5325" title="Martin Short" label="Martin Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="5327" end="5340" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q345325" start="5346" end="5359" title="Harry Shearer" label="Harry Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426671" start="5416" end="5432" title="Saturday Night Live season 10" label="1984–1985 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="5436" end="5439" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="5453" end="5472" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q299983" start="5860" end="5872" title="Andy Kaufman" label="Andy Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496872" start="5880" end="5885" title="Latka Gravas" label="Latka"/>
<link wikidata="Q427529" start="5907" end="5911" title="Taxi (TV series)" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209910" start="6002" end="6023" title="The Joe Franklin Show" label="The Joe Franklin Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="6274" end="6295" title="Negro league baseball" label="Negro league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="6415" end="6433" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199259" start="6518" end="6524" title="Little Shop of Horrors (1986 film)" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q500296" start="6534" end="6560" title="The Little Shop of Horrors" label="The Little Shop of Horrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q339045" start="6635" end="6650" title="The Big Picture (1989 film)" label="The Big Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="6700" end="6707" title="peerage" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767753" start="6801" end="6806" title="Style (manner of address)" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="7079" end="7089" title="Improvisational comedy" label="improvised"/>
<link wikidata="Q312129" start="7277" end="7288" title="Eugene Levy" label="Eugene Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="7337" end="7346" title="repertory" label="repertory"/>
<link wikidata="Q233365" start="7400" end="7421" title="Catherine O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Catherine O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384181" start="7423" end="7437" title="Michael McKean" label="Michael McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q204586" start="7439" end="7451" title="Parker Posey" label="Parker Posey"/>
<link wikidata="Q621490" start="7453" end="7464" title="Bob Balaban" label="Bob Balaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q228852" start="7466" end="7476" title="Jane Lynch" label="Jane Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q967130" start="7478" end="7498" title="John Michael Higgins" label="John Michael Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q345325" start="7500" end="7513" title="Harry Shearer" label="Harry Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q230278" start="7515" end="7532" title="Jennifer Coolidge" label="Jennifer Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q464425" start="7534" end="7547" title="Ed Begley Jr." label="Ed Begley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q10306924" start="7549" end="7560" title="Jim Piddock" label="Jim Piddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q449521" start="7565" end="7577" title="Fred Willard" label="Fred Willard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699996" start="8060" end="8079" title="Waiting for Guffman" label="Waiting for Guffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800684" start="8102" end="8119" title="community theatre" label="community theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q830324" start="8133" end="8145" title="Best in Show (film)" label="Best in Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q627933" start="8170" end="8178" title="dog show" label="dog show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754773" start="8194" end="8207" title="A Mighty Wind" label="A Mighty Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="8228" end="8240" title="folk music" label="folk singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076762" start="8248" end="8270" title="For Your Consideration (film)" label="For Your Consideration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943319" start="8312" end="8324" title="Oscar season" label="Oscar season"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949909" start="8336" end="8343" title="Mascots (2016 film)" label="Mascots"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="8378" end="8384" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q83279" start="8469" end="8490" title="SpongeBob SquarePants" label="SpongeBob SquarePants"/>
<link wikidata="Q108946" start="8581" end="8595" title="A Few Good Men" label="A Few Good Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423667" start="8702" end="8724" title="Mrs Henderson Presents" label="Mrs Henderson Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q178966" start="8760" end="8782" title="The Invention of Lying" label="The Invention of Lying"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717425" start="8842" end="8857" title="The Beyman Bros" label="The Beyman Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238027" start="8897" end="8911" title="David Nichtern" label="David Nichtern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006588" start="8954" end="8967" title="C. J. Vanston" label="C. J. Vanston"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="9077" end="9104" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q268882" start="9209" end="9224" title="Super Bowl XLIV" label="Super Bowl XLIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="9311" end="9335" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="9401" end="9404" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656125" start="9418" end="9429" title="Family Tree (TV series)" label="Family Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q10306924" start="9459" end="9470" title="Jim Piddock" label="Jim Piddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="9701" end="9708" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949909" start="9730" end="9737" title="Mascots (2016 film)" label="Mascots"/>
<link wikidata="Q102115687" start="9972" end="10006" title="Princess Bride Reunion" label="&amp;quot;Princess Bride&amp;quot; Reunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q808621" start="10066" end="10083" title="Baron Haden-Guest" label="Baron Haden-Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798007" start="10088" end="10100" title="Great Saling" label="Great Saling"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="10109" end="10124" title="Essex" label="County of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852869" start="10219" end="10238" title="Anthony Haden-Guest" label="Anthony Haden-Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="10248" end="10279" title="illegitimacy" label="born before his parents married"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10318" end="10330" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="10357" end="10371" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="10392" end="10415" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q106997" start="10516" end="10532" title="Jamie Lee Curtis" label="Jamie Lee Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="10576" end="10586" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="10621" end="10629" title="adoption" label="adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q186757" start="10651" end="10661" title="Seth Green" label="Seth Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925037" start="10680" end="10707" title="A Futile and Stupid Gesture (film)" label="A Futile and Stupid Gesture"/>
<link wikidata="Q312129" start="10886" end="10897" title="Eugene Levy" label="Eugene Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q449521" start="10985" end="10997" title="Fred Willard" label="Fred Willard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384181" start="11012" end="11026" title="Michael McKean" label="Michael McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q621490" start="11028" end="11039" title="Bob Balaban" label="Bob Balaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q464425" start="11045" end="11058" title="Ed Begley Jr." label="Ed Begley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1645740" start="11078" end="11091" title="Paul Benedict" label="Paul Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q204586" start="11093" end="11105" title="Parker Posey" label="Parker Posey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10306924" start="11107" end="11118" title="Jim Piddock" label="Jim Piddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q919870" start="11120" end="11137" title="Michael Hitchcock" label="Michael Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q345325" start="11142" end="11155" title="Harry Shearer" label="Harry Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q233365" start="11175" end="11196" title="Catherine O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Catherine O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q943028" start="11198" end="11210" title="Larry Miller (comedian)" label="Larry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q967130" start="11212" end="11232" title="John Michael Higgins" label="John Michael Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q228852" start="11234" end="11244" title="Jane Lynch" label="Jane Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q230278" start="11250" end="11267" title="Jennifer Coolidge" label="Jennifer Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q230632" start="11287" end="11300" title="Fran Drescher" label="Fran Drescher"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="11305" end="11315" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="11463" end="11475" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7183" wikidata="Q235302" url="?curid=7183" title="Carol Kane">
<text>Carolyn Laurie Kane (born June 18, 1952) is an American actress. She gained recognition for her role in &quot;Hester Street&quot; (1975), for which she received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress. She became known in the 1970s and 1980s in films such as &quot;Dog Day Afternoon&quot; (1975), &quot;Annie Hall&quot; (1977), &quot;When a Stranger Calls&quot; (1979), &quot;The Princess Bride&quot; (1987), &quot;Scrooged&quot; (1988) and &quot;Flashback&quot; (1990).

Kane appeared on the television series &quot;Taxi&quot; in the early 1980s, as Simka Gravas, the wife of Latka, the character played by Andy Kaufman, winning two Emmy Awards for her work. She has played the character of Madame Morrible in the musical &quot;Wicked&quot;, both in touring productions and on Broadway from 2005 to 2014. From 2015 to 2020, she was a main cast member on the Netflix series &quot;Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt&quot;, in which she played Lillian Kaushtupper. She currently plays the recurring role of Pelia in &quot;Star Trek: Strange New Worlds&quot; (2023present).

== Early life ==
Kane was born on June 18, 1952, in Cleveland, the daughter of Joy, a jazz singer, teacher, dancer, and pianist, and architect Michael Kane. Her family is Jewish, and her grandparents emigrated from Russia, Austria, and Poland. Due to her father&#x27;s occupation, Kane moved frequently as a child; she briefly lived in Paris at age eight, where she began learning to speak French. Additionally, she resided in Haiti at age 10. Her parents divorced when she was 12 years old.

She attended the Cherry Lawn School, a boarding school in Darien, Connecticut, until 1965. She studied theater at HB Studio and also went to the Professional Children&#x27;s School in New York City. She became a member of both the Screen Actors Guild and the Actors&#x27; Equity Association at age 14. Kane made her professional theater debut in a 1966 production of &quot;The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie&quot; starring Tammy Grimes, her first job as a member of Actors&#x27; Equity.

== Career ==

=== 1971–1979: Career beginnings and early recognition ===
Kane&#x27;s on-screen career began while she was still a teenager, when she appeared in minor roles in films such as &quot;Desperate Characters&quot; and Mike Nichols&#x27;s &quot;Carnal Knowledge&quot; in 1971, the latter of which led her to befriend lead actor Jack Nicholson. In 1972, she was cast in her first leading role in the Canadian production &quot;Wedding in White&quot;, where she played a teenage rape victim who is forced into marriage by her father. She also appeared as a sex worker in Hal Ashby&#x27;s 1973 film &quot;The Last Detail&quot;, where she collaborated with Nicholson yet again.

In 1975, Kane was cast in Joan Micklin Silver&#x27;s feature-length debut &quot;Hester Street&quot;, in which she played a Russian-Jewish immigrant who struggles with her husband to assimilate in late 19th-century New York. For her performance in the film, Kane garnered her sole Academy Award nomination for Best Actress at the 48th Academy Awards, and it remains her favorite of all her roles. Additionally, 1975 saw her appear as a bank teller in Sidney Lumet&#x27;s crime drama &quot;Dog Day Afternoon&quot;, which received numerous Academy Award nominations in other categories that same year. This also marked her first on-screen collaboration with Al Pacino, whom she had known prior to the film thanks to their shared background in theater.

Despite this recognition, however, Kane has recounted waiting for approximately a year before being cast in her next role, which she has attributed to the trend of actors being typecast after receiving awards attention. Her return to the screen would come with Gene Wilder&#x27;s 1977 comedy &quot;The World&#x27;s Greatest Lover,&quot; which she has credited for identifying the comedic talents that would become her staple in later years. During the same year, she was cast in Woody Allen&#x27;s romantic comedy &quot;Annie Hall&quot;, where she played Allison Portchnik, the first wife of Allen&#x27;s character Alvy Singer. She also appeared in Ken Russell&#x27;s film &quot;Valentino&quot;, which, like &quot;The World&#x27;s Greatest Lover&quot;, takes inspiration from the silent film era, as it is a biographical drama loosely inspired by the life of Rudolph Valentino.After this, Kane appeared in the horror films &quot;The Mafu Cage&quot; (1978) and &quot;When a Stranger Calls&quot; (1979); ironically, Kane herself is largely averse to horror, and she admits to being unable to watch the latter. In 1979, she also appeared in a cameo role in &quot;The Muppet Movie&quot;.

=== 1980–1990: &quot;Taxi&quot; and transition into comedy ===
From 1980 to 1983, Kane portrayed Simka Dahblitz-Gravas, the wife of Andy Kaufman&#x27;s character Latka Gravas, on the American television series &quot;Taxi&quot;. She has theorized that she was cast in &quot;Taxi&quot; in part due to her work in &quot;Hester Street&quot;, where a significant portion of her dialogue was spoken in Yiddish, since Simka speaks a fictional language with a vaguely Eastern European accent.

Kane has attributed the on-screen rapport she shared with Kaufman to their different work ethics: where she was trained in the theater and enjoyed rehearsal time, Kaufman was rooted more in stand-up comedy and did not care for rehearsals, a contrast that she believes enhanced their believability as a married couple. However, she maintains that she and Kaufman had a loving relationship on set, and she has spoken fondly of him in retrospective interviews. Kane received two Emmy Awards for her work on &quot;Taxi&quot;. Her role on the series has largely been credited as the beginning of her pivot towards more comedic roles, as she began to regularly appear in sitcoms and comedy films after the series ended.

In 1984, Kane appeared in episode 12, season 3 of &quot;Cheers&quot; as Amanda, an acquaintance of Diane Chambers from her time spent in a mental institution. She was also a regular on the 1986 series &quot;All Is Forgiven.&quot;

In 1987, Kane appeared in &quot;Ishtar&quot;, Elaine May&#x27;s notorious box-office flop turned cult classic, playing the frustrated girlfriend of Dustin Hoffman&#x27;s character. That year also saw her make one of her most recognizable film appearances in Rob Reiner&#x27;s fantasy romance &quot;The Princess Bride&quot;, where she played Valerie, the wife of Miracle Max (Billy Crystal). In 1988, Kane appeared in the Cinemax Comedy Experiment &quot;Rap Master Ronnie: A Report Card&quot; alongside Jon Cryer and the Smothers Brothers. During the same year, she was also featured in the Bill Murray vehicle &quot;Scrooged&quot;, where she portrayed a contemporary version of the Ghost of Christmas Present, depicted in the film as a fairy. For this performance, &quot;Variety&quot; called her &quot;unquestionably [the] pic&#x27;s comic highlight&quot;. Additionally, she played a potential love interest for Steve Martin&#x27;s character in the 1990 film &quot;My Blue Heaven&quot;.

=== 1990–2004: Television and film regularity ===
Kane became a regular on the NBC series &quot;American Dreamer&quot;, which ran from 1990 to 1991&quot;.&quot; In 1993, she appeared in &quot;Addams Family Values&quot; where she replaced Judith Malina as Grandmama Addams; this role saw her reunite with her &quot;Taxi&quot; castmate Christopher Lloyd. She also guest starred on a 1994 episode of &quot;Seinfeld&quot;, as well as a 1996 episode of &quot;Ellen.&quot; In 1996, she was given a supporting role in the short-lived sitcom &quot;Pearl&quot;. From there, she continued to appear in a number of film roles throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, including &quot;The Pallbearer&quot; (1996), &quot;Office Killer&quot; (1997), &quot;Jawbreaker&quot; (1999), and &quot;My First Mister&quot; (2001). In 1998, she voiced Mother Duck in the American version of the animated television film &quot;The First Snow of Winter&quot;.

In 1999, she made a cameo in the Andy Kaufman biopic &quot;Man on the Moon&quot; as herself playing the &quot;Taxi&quot; character.

=== 2005–2014: &quot;Wicked&quot; and career expansion ===
Kane is also known for her portrayal of the evil headmistress Madame Morrible in the Broadway musical &quot;Wicked&quot;, whom she played in various productions from 2005 to 2014. Kane made her &quot;Wicked&quot; debut on the 1st National Tour, playing the role from March 9 through December 19, 2005. She then reprised the role in the Broadway production from January 10 through November 12, 2006. She again played the role for the Los Angeles production which began performances on February 7, 2007. She left the production on December 30, 2007, and later returned on August 26, 2008, until the production closed on January 11, 2009.

In January 2009, she guest starred in the television series &quot;Two and a Half Men&quot; as the mother of Alan Harper&#x27;s receptionist.

She then transferred with the Los Angeles company of &quot;Wicked&quot; to reprise her role once again, this time in the San Francisco production, which began performances January 27, 2009. She ended her limited engagement on March 22, 2009.

In March 2010, Kane appeared in the ABC series &quot;Ugly Betty&quot; as Justin Suarez&#x27;s acting teacher.

Kane starred in the off-Broadway play &quot;Love, Loss, and What I Wore&quot; in February 2010. She made her West End debut in January 2011 in a major revival of Lillian Hellman&#x27;s drama &quot;The Children&#x27;s Hour&quot; at London&#x27;s Comedy Theatre, where she starred alongside Keira Knightley, Elisabeth Moss and Ellen Burstyn. In May 2012, Kane appeared on Broadway as Betty Chumley in a revival of the play &quot;Harvey&quot;.

Kane returned to the Broadway company of &quot;Wicked&quot; from July 1, 2013, through February 22, 2014, a period that included the show&#x27;s 10th anniversary.

In 2014, she was cast in a recurring role on the television series &quot;Gotham&quot; as Gertrude Kapelput, the mother of Oswald Cobblepot, also known as Penguin.

=== 2015–present: &quot;Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt&quot; and legacy roles ===
In 2015, Kane was cast in the recurring role of Lillian Kaushtupper, the landlord to the title character of the Netflix series &quot;Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt&quot;. Kane joined the cast due in part to her admiration of showrunner Tina Fey, with whom she had previously wanted to collaborate on the NBC series &quot;30 Rock&quot;. She was promoted to a series regular for the show&#x27;s second season. &quot;Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt&quot; ran for four seasons, making it one of Kane&#x27;s longest television roles to date. She reprised the role in the &quot;interactive&quot; television special &quot;Kimmy vs the Reverend&quot;.

In 2018, Kane was cast in Jacques Audiard&#x27;s Western film &quot;The Sisters Brothers&quot;. In 2019, she appeared in Jim Jarmusch&#x27;s horror comedy &quot;The Dead Don&#x27;t Die,&quot; marking another collaboration with Bill Murray. That same year, she was featured in the recurring role of Bianca Nova in season one of the HBO series &quot;Los Espookys&quot;, where she reunited with her &quot;Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt&quot; castmate Fred Armisen.

In 2020, Kane was featured in the ensemble cast of the Amazon series &quot;Hunters,&quot; which also includes her longtime acquaintance Al Pacino. Additionally, during the same year, she participated in two cast reunion fundraisers, one with the cast of &quot;Taxi&quot; for the Actors Fund, the other with the cast of &quot;The Princess Bride&quot; for the Democratic Party of Wisconsin.

It was announced on &quot;Star Trek&quot; Day 2022 that Kane would join the cast of &quot;Star Trek: Strange New Worlds&quot; for season two as Chief Engineer Pelia. Prior to her casting, Kane had never seen an episode of the original &quot;Star Trek&quot; series, though she has said the show&#x27;s writers thought this oversight improved her performance.

In 2024, Kane starred in Nathan Silver&#x27;s comedy film &quot;Between the Temples&quot;, in which she portrays a woman who, having been raised by secular parents, decides to have a bat mitzvah later in life. Kane has stated that she drew inspiration from Silver&#x27;s mother, who studied for a bat mitzvah in her sixties; she was also inspired by her own mother, who, at age 55, moved to Paris to become a musician. For her work in the film, she received the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress, and was nominated for Best Supporting Performance at the Independent Spirit Awards. In December 2024, she was announced as part of the cast of Darren Aronofsky&#x27;s upcoming film &quot;Caught Stealing&quot;, where she is slated to play a minor role in which she only speaks Yiddish.

== Personal life ==
Kane was in a relationship with actor Woody Harrelson from 1986 to 1988. The two have remained friends since their break-up, and Harrelson was seen attending Kane&#x27;s 60th birthday party in 2012.

She has never been married, nor has she had any children. Regarding the latter decision, she has said, &quot;I never felt that I would be calm and stable enough to be the kind of mother I&#x27;d like to be. I don&#x27;t think everyone randomly is mother material.&quot;
She has been godmother to actress Bianca Hunter since birth and taken the role of grandmother to her 4 children. 
Kane is often noted for her high, breathy, slow voice, though her vocal timbre has grown raspier with age. Kane, who has often altered her voice to suit various roles, has confessed to disliking it, telling &quot;People&quot; magazine in 2020 that she wishes her voice was &quot;deep and beautiful and sexy&quot;.

== Filmography ==

=== Film ===
=== Television ===
=== Stage ===
=== Music videos ===
== Awards and nominations ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235302" start="0" end="19" title="Carol Kane" label="Carolyn Laurie Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559935" start="110" end="123" title="Hester Street (film)" label="Hester Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="164" end="188" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q458656" start="270" end="287" title="Dog Day Afternoon" label="Dog Day Afternoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q233464" start="308" end="318" title="Annie Hall" label="Annie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363764" start="339" end="360" title="When a Stranger Calls (1979 film)" label="When a Stranger Calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="381" end="399" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q535395" start="420" end="428" title="Scrooged" label="Scrooged"/>
<link wikidata="Q143901" start="452" end="461" title="Flashback (1990 film)" label="Flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q427529" start="522" end="526" title="Taxi (TV series)" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496872" start="582" end="587" title="Latka Gravas" label="Latka"/>
<link wikidata="Q299983" start="613" end="625" title="Andy Kaufman" label="Andy Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="639" end="649" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="697" end="712" title="List of Wicked characters#Madame Morrible" label="Madame Morrible"/>
<link wikidata="Q616439" start="734" end="740" title="Wicked (musical)" label="Wicked"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="783" end="791" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889037" start="885" end="910" title="Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt" label="Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315945" start="938" end="957" title="Lillian Kaushtupper" label="Lillian Kaushtupper"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1016" end="1045" title="Star Trek: Strange New Worlds" label="Star Trek: Strange New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1154" end="1158" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="1495" end="1500" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629067" start="1675" end="1684" title="HB Studio" label="HB Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247941" start="1706" end="1741" title="Professional Children&amp;#x27;s School" label="Professional Children&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141037" start="1792" end="1811" title="Screen Actors Guild" label="Screen Actors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677733" start="1820" end="1851" title="Actors&amp;#x27; Equity Association" label="Actors&amp;#x27; Equity Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074335" start="1934" end="1963" title="The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie (novel)" label="The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514842" start="1979" end="1991" title="Tammy Grimes" label="Tammy Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015930" start="2240" end="2260" title="Desperate Characters (film)" label="Desperate Characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q51537" start="2271" end="2283" title="Mike Nichols" label="Mike Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703964" start="2297" end="2313" title="Carnal Knowledge (film)" label="Carnal Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="2380" end="2394" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979101" start="2477" end="2493" title="Wedding in White" label="Wedding in White"/>
<link wikidata="Q852857" start="2606" end="2616" title="sex worker" label="sex worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q358370" start="2620" end="2629" title="Hal Ashby" label="Hal Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171440" start="2653" end="2668" title="The Last Detail" label="The Last Detail"/>
<link wikidata="Q519772" start="2752" end="2771" title="Joan Micklin Silver" label="Joan Micklin Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559935" start="2806" end="2819" title="Hester Street (film)" label="Hester Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="2849" end="2863" title="History of the Jews in Russia" label="Russian-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="3035" end="3047" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q388978" start="3055" end="3074" title="48th Academy Awards" label="48th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q51559" start="3176" end="3188" title="Sidney Lumet" label="Sidney Lumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q458656" start="3214" end="3231" title="Dog Day Afternoon" label="Dog Day Afternoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="3381" end="3390" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q191966" start="3737" end="3748" title="Gene Wilder" label="Gene Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288590" start="3774" end="3805" title="The World&amp;#x27;s Greatest Lover" label="The World&amp;#x27;s Greatest Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="3955" end="3966" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q233464" start="3996" end="4006" title="Annie Hall" label="Annie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q55249" start="4125" end="4136" title="Ken Russell" label="Ken Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132963" start="4155" end="4164" title="Valentino (1977 film)" label="Valentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="4256" end="4267" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q188692" start="4335" end="4352" title="Rudolph Valentino" label="Rudolph Valentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276480" start="4405" end="4418" title="The Mafu Cage" label="The Mafu Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363764" start="4442" end="4463" title="When a Stranger Calls (1979 film)" label="When a Stranger Calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518589" start="4636" end="4652" title="The Muppet Movie" label="The Muppet Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q299983" start="4793" end="4805" title="Andy Kaufman" label="Andy Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496872" start="4823" end="4835" title="Latka Gravas" label="Latka Gravas"/>
<link wikidata="Q427529" start="4877" end="4881" title="Taxi (TV series)" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="5057" end="5064" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="5121" end="5135" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q145806" start="5337" end="5352" title="stand-up comedy" label="stand-up comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="5623" end="5633" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="5812" end="5818" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q732063" start="5918" end="5924" title="Cheers" label="Cheers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271418" start="5961" end="5975" title="Diane Chambers" label="Diane Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729011" start="6069" end="6084" title="All Is Forgiven (TV series)" label="All Is Forgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215067" start="6125" end="6131" title="Ishtar (film)" label="Ishtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q454156" start="6139" end="6149" title="Elaine May" label="Elaine May"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="6190" end="6202" title="Cult film" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="6241" end="6255" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Dustin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="6351" end="6361" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="6391" end="6409" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="6468" end="6481" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642952" start="6514" end="6539" title="Cinemax Comedy Experiment" label="Cinemax Comedy Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954307" start="6546" end="6578" title="Rap Master Ronnie" label="Rap Master Ronnie: A Report Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q310367" start="6595" end="6604" title="Jon Cryer" label="Jon Cryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233993" start="6613" end="6630" title="Smothers Brothers" label="Smothers Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29250" start="6683" end="6694" title="Bill Murray" label="Bill Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q535395" start="6709" end="6717" title="Scrooged" label="Scrooged"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966844" start="6775" end="6801" title="Ghost of Christmas Present" label="Ghost of Christmas Present"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="7005" end="7017" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q733607" start="7058" end="7072" title="My Blue Heaven (1990 American film)" label="My Blue Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="7160" end="7163" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743633" start="7177" end="7193" title="American Dreamer (TV series)" label="American Dreamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q204725" start="7273" end="7293" title="Addams Family Values" label="Addams Family Values"/>
<link wikidata="Q213844" start="7319" end="7332" title="Judith Malina" label="Judith Malina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170748" start="7336" end="7352" title="Grandmama (The Addams Family)" label="Grandmama Addams"/>
<link wikidata="Q109324" start="7415" end="7432" title="Christopher Lloyd" label="Christopher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="7484" end="7492" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q82226" start="7535" end="7540" title="Ellen (TV series)" label="Ellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158020" start="7621" end="7626" title="Pearl (TV series)" label="Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q602289" start="7750" end="7764" title="The Pallbearer" label="The Pallbearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q370951" start="7785" end="7798" title="Office Killer" label="Office Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199877" start="7819" end="7829" title="Jawbreaker (film)" label="Jawbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q831476" start="7854" end="7869" title="My First Mister" label="My First Mister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734191" start="7978" end="8002" title="The First Snow of Winter" label="The First Snow of Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125282" start="8070" end="8085" title="Man on the Moon (film)" label="Man on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8265" end="8280" title="List of Wicked characters#Madame Morrible" label="Madame Morrible"/>
<link wikidata="Q616439" start="8311" end="8317" title="Wicked (musical)" label="Wicked"/>
<link wikidata="Q189267" start="8906" end="8924" title="Two and a Half Men" label="Two and a Half Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q12856732" start="8948" end="8959" title="List of Two and a Half Men characters" label="Alan Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="9261" end="9264" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q276528" start="9278" end="9288" title="Ugly Betty" label="Ugly Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190501" start="9298" end="9311" title="Justin Suarez" label="Justin Suarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="9356" end="9368" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690084" start="9380" end="9407" title="Love, Loss, and What I Wore" label="Love, Loss, and What I Wore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="9445" end="9453" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q233701" start="9498" end="9513" title="Lillian Hellman" label="Lillian Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722470" start="9533" end="9557" title="The Children&amp;#x27;s Hour (play)" label="The Children&amp;#x27;s Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662026" start="9581" end="9595" title="Harold Pinter Theatre" label="Comedy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q42581" start="9625" end="9640" title="Keira Knightley" label="Keira Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q233466" start="9642" end="9656" title="Elisabeth Moss" label="Elisabeth Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q211144" start="9661" end="9674" title="Ellen Burstyn" label="Ellen Burstyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613041" start="9763" end="9769" title="Harvey (play)" label="Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726959" start="10015" end="10021" title="Gotham (TV series)" label="Gotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q39069990" start="10064" end="10080" title="Oswald Cobblepot (Gotham)" label="Oswald Cobblepot"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315945" start="10231" end="10250" title="Lillian Kaushtupper" label="Lillian Kaushtupper"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017207" start="10272" end="10287" title="Kimmy Schmidt" label="title character"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="10295" end="10302" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889037" start="10316" end="10341" title="Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt" label="Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14540" start="10414" end="10422" title="Tina Fey" label="Tina Fey"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="10482" end="10485" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189350" start="10499" end="10506" title="30 Rock" label="30 Rock"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10787" end="10808" title="Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt: Kimmy vs the Reverend" label="Kimmy vs the Reverend"/>
<link wikidata="Q382389" start="10843" end="10858" title="Jacques Audiard" label="Jacques Audiard"/>
<link wikidata="Q172980" start="10866" end="10873" title="Western film" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q29558633" start="10885" end="10905" title="The Sisters Brothers (film)" label="The Sisters Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191755" start="10938" end="10950" title="Jim Jarmusch" label="Jim Jarmusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q224700" start="10958" end="10971" title="Comedy horror" label="horror comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564530" start="10978" end="11001" title="The Dead Don&amp;#x27;t Die (2019 film)" label="The Dead Don&amp;#x27;t Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="11148" end="11151" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621311" start="11165" end="11177" title="Los Espookys" label="Los Espookys"/>
<link wikidata="Q14535" start="11260" end="11272" title="Fred Armisen" label="Fred Armisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="11330" end="11336" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635302" start="11350" end="11357" title="Hunters (2020 TV series)" label="Hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="11411" end="11420" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677737" start="11554" end="11565" title="Entertainment Community Fund" label="Actors Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255727" start="11633" end="11662" title="Democratic Party of Wisconsin" label="Democratic Party of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130366308" start="11685" end="11710" title="Star Trek Day" label="&amp;quot;Star Trek&amp;quot; Day"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11755" end="11784" title="Star Trek: Strange New Worlds" label="Star Trek: Strange New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="11906" end="11915" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q47537514" start="12049" end="12062" title="Nathan Silver" label="Nathan Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q123690367" start="12088" end="12107" title="Between the Temples" label="Between the Temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="12172" end="12179" title="Secularity" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q75673" start="12207" end="12218" title="Bar and bat mitzvah" label="bat mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790297" start="12486" end="12548" title="New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q131388112" start="12607" end="12632" title="40th Independent Spirit Awards" label="Independent Spirit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q192762" start="12693" end="12709" title="Darren Aronofsky" label="Darren Aronofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q130248726" start="12731" end="12758" title="Caught Stealing (film)" label="&amp;quot;Caught Stealing&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q201279" start="12894" end="12909" title="Woody Harrelson" label="Woody Harrelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112938" start="13360" end="13373" title="Bianca Hunter" label="Bianca Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="13653" end="13659" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7184" wikidata="Q263809" url="?curid=7184" title="C*-algebra">
<text>In mathematics, specifically in functional analysis, a C∗-algebra (pronounced &quot;C-star&quot;) is a Banach algebra together with an involution satisfying the properties of the adjoint. A particular case is that of a complex algebra &quot;A&quot; of continuous linear operators on a complex Hilbert space with two additional properties:

* &quot;A&quot; is a topologically closed set in the norm topology of operators.
* &quot;A&quot; is closed under the operation of taking adjoints of operators.

Another important class of non-Hilbert C*-algebras includes the algebra formula_1 of complex-valued continuous functions on &quot;X&quot; that vanish at infinity, where &quot;X&quot; is a locally compact Hausdorff space.

C*-algebras were first considered primarily for their use in quantum mechanics to model algebras of physical observables. This line of research began with Werner Heisenberg&#x27;s matrix mechanics and in a more mathematically developed form with Pascual Jordan around 1933. Subsequently, John von Neumann attempted to establish a general framework for these algebras, which culminated in a series of papers on rings of operators. These papers considered a special class of C*-algebras that are now known as von Neumann algebras.

Around 1943, the work of Israel Gelfand and Mark Naimark yielded an abstract characterisation of C*-algebras making no reference to operators on a Hilbert space.

C*-algebras are now an important tool in the theory of unitary representations of locally compact groups, and are also used in algebraic formulations of quantum mechanics. Another active area of research is the program to obtain classification, or to determine the extent of which classification is possible, for separable simple nuclear C*-algebras.

== Abstract characterization ==

We begin with the abstract characterization of C*-algebras given in the 1943 paper by Gelfand and Naimark.

A C*-algebra, &quot;A&quot;, is a Banach algebra over the field of complex numbers, together with a map formula_2 for formula_3 with the following properties:

* It is an involution, for every &quot;x&quot; in &quot;A&quot;:
::formula_4

* For all &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot; in &quot;A&quot;:
::formula_5
::formula_6

* For every complex number formula_7 and every &quot;x&quot; in &quot;A&quot;:
::formula_8

* For all &quot;x&quot; in &quot;A&quot;:
::formula_9

Remark. The first four identities say that &quot;A&quot; is a *-algebra. The last identity is called the C* identity and is equivalent to:

formula_10

which is sometimes called the B*-identity. For history behind the names C*- and B*-algebras, see the history section below.

The C*-identity is a very strong requirement. For instance, together with the spectral radius formula, it implies that the C*-norm is uniquely determined by the algebraic structure:

::formula_11

A bounded linear map, &quot;π&quot; : &quot;A&quot; → &quot;B&quot;, between C*-algebras &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; is called a *-homomorphism if

* For &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; in &quot;A&quot;

::formula_12

* For &quot;x&quot; in &quot;A&quot;

::formula_13

In the case of C*-algebras, any *-homomorphism &quot;π&quot; between C*-algebras is contractive, i.e. bounded with norm ≤ 1. Furthermore, an injective *-homomorphism between C*-algebras is isometric. These are consequences of the C*-identity.

A bijective *-homomorphism &quot;π&quot; is called a C*-isomorphism, in which case &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; are said to be isomorphic.

== Some history: B*-algebras and C*-algebras ==
The term B*-algebra was introduced by C. E. Rickart in 1946 to describe Banach *-algebras that satisfy the condition:

* formula_14 for all &quot;x&quot; in the given B*-algebra. (B*-condition)

This condition automatically implies that the *-involution is isometric, that is, formula_15. Hence, formula_16, and therefore, a B*-algebra is also a C*-algebra. Conversely, the C*-condition implies the B*-condition. This is nontrivial, and can be proved without using the condition formula_17. For these reasons, the term B*-algebra is rarely used in current terminology, and has been replaced by the term &#x27;C*-algebra&#x27;.

The term C*-algebra was introduced by I. E. Segal in 1947 to describe norm-closed subalgebras of &quot;B&quot;(&quot;H&quot;), namely, the space of bounded operators on some Hilbert space &quot;H&quot;. &#x27;C&#x27; stood for &#x27;closed&#x27;. In his paper Segal defines a C*-algebra as a &quot;uniformly closed, self-adjoint algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space&quot;.

== Structure of C*-algebras ==

C*-algebras have a large number of properties that are technically convenient. Some of these properties can be established by using the continuous functional calculus or by reduction to commutative C*-algebras. In the latter case, we can use the fact that the structure of these is completely determined by the Gelfand isomorphism.

=== Self-adjoint elements ===

Self-adjoint elements are those of the form formula_18. The set of elements of a C*-algebra &quot;A&quot; of the form formula_19 forms a closed convex cone. This cone is identical to the elements of the form formula_20. Elements of this cone are called &quot;non-negative&quot; (or sometimes &quot;positive&quot;, even though this terminology conflicts with its use for elements of formula_21)

The set of self-adjoint elements of a C*-algebra &quot;A&quot; naturally has the structure of a partially ordered vector space; the ordering is usually denoted formula_22. In this ordering, a self-adjoint element formula_23 satisfies formula_24 if and only if the spectrum of formula_25 is non-negative, if and only if formula_26 for some formula_27. Two self-adjoint elements formula_28 and formula_29 of &quot;A&quot; satisfy formula_30 if formula_31.

This partially ordered subspace allows the definition of a positive linear functional on a C*-algebra, which in turn is used to define the states of a C*-algebra, which in turn can be used to construct the spectrum of a C*-algebra using the GNS construction.

=== Quotients and approximate identities ===

Any C*-algebra &quot;A&quot; has an approximate identity. In fact, there is a directed family {&quot;e&quot;λ}λ∈I of self-adjoint elements of &quot;A&quot; such that

:: formula_32
:: formula_33

: In case &quot;A&quot; is separable, &quot;A&quot; has a sequential approximate identity. More generally, &quot;A&quot; will have a sequential approximate identity if and only if &quot;A&quot; contains a strictly positive element, i.e. a positive element &quot;h&quot; such that &quot;hAh&quot; is dense in &quot;A&quot;.

Using approximate identities, one can show that the algebraic quotient of a C*-algebra by a closed proper two-sided ideal, with the natural norm, is a C*-algebra.

Similarly, a closed two-sided ideal of a C*-algebra is itself a C*-algebra.

== Examples ==

=== Finite-dimensional C*-algebras ===
The algebra M(&quot;n&quot;, C) of &quot;n&quot; × &quot;n&quot; matrices over C becomes a C*-algebra if we consider matrices as operators on the Euclidean space, C&quot;n&quot;, and use the operator norm ||·|| on matrices. The involution is given by the conjugate transpose. More generally, one can consider finite direct sums of matrix algebras. In fact, all C*-algebras that are finite dimensional as vector spaces are of this form, up to isomorphism. The self-adjoint requirement means finite-dimensional C*-algebras are semisimple, from which fact one can deduce the following theorem of Artin–Wedderburn type:

Theorem. A finite-dimensional C*-algebra, &quot;A&quot;, is canonically isomorphic to a finite direct sum
:formula_34
where min &quot;A&quot; is the set of minimal nonzero self-adjoint central projections of &quot;A&quot;.

Each C*-algebra, &quot;Ae&quot;, is isomorphic (in a noncanonical way) to the full matrix algebra M(dim(&quot;e&quot;), C). The finite family indexed on min &quot;A&quot; given by {dim(&quot;e&quot;)}&quot;e&quot; is called the &quot;dimension vector&quot; of &quot;A&quot;. This vector uniquely determines the isomorphism class of a finite-dimensional C*-algebra. In the language of K-theory, this vector is the positive cone of the &quot;K&quot;0 group of &quot;A&quot;.

A †-algebra (or, more explicitly, a &quot;†-closed algebra&quot;) is the name occasionally used in physics for a finite-dimensional C*-algebra. The dagger, †, is used in the name because physicists typically use the symbol to denote a Hermitian adjoint, and are often not worried about the subtleties associated with an infinite number of dimensions. (Mathematicians usually use the asterisk, *, to denote the Hermitian adjoint.) †-algebras feature prominently in quantum mechanics, and especially quantum information science.

An immediate generalization of finite dimensional C*-algebras are the approximately finite dimensional C*-algebras.

=== C*-algebras of operators ===
The prototypical example of a C*-algebra is the algebra &quot;B(H)&quot; of bounded (equivalently continuous) linear operators defined on a complex Hilbert space &quot;H&quot;; here &quot;x*&quot; denotes the adjoint operator of the operator &quot;x&quot; : &quot;H&quot; → &quot;H&quot;. In fact, every C*-algebra, &quot;A&quot;, is *-isomorphic to a norm-closed adjoint closed subalgebra of &quot;B&quot;(&quot;H&quot;) for a suitable Hilbert space, &quot;H&quot;; this is the content of the Gelfand–Naimark theorem.

=== C*-algebras of compact operators ===
Let &quot;H&quot; be a separable infinite-dimensional Hilbert space. The algebra &quot;K&quot;(&quot;H&quot;) of compact operators on &quot;H&quot; is a norm closed subalgebra of &quot;B&quot;(&quot;H&quot;). It is also closed under involution; hence it is a C*-algebra.

Concrete C*-algebras of compact operators admit a characterization similar to Wedderburn&#x27;s theorem for finite dimensional C*-algebras:

Theorem. If &quot;A&quot; is a C*-subalgebra of &quot;K&quot;(&quot;H&quot;), then there exists Hilbert spaces {&quot;Hi&quot;}&quot;i&quot;∈&quot;I&quot; such that
:formula_35
where the (C*-)direct sum consists of elements (&quot;Ti&quot;) of the Cartesian product Π &quot;K&quot;(&quot;Hi&quot;) with ||&quot;Ti&quot;|| → 0.

Though &quot;K&quot;(&quot;H&quot;) does not have an identity element, a sequential approximate identity for &quot;K&quot;(&quot;H&quot;) can be developed. To be specific, &quot;H&quot; is isomorphic to the space of square summable sequences &quot;l&quot;2; we may assume that &quot;H&quot; = &quot;l&quot;2. For each natural number &quot;n&quot; let &quot;Hn&quot; be the subspace of sequences of &quot;l&quot;2 which vanish for indices &quot;k&quot; ≥ &quot;n&quot; and let &quot;en&quot; be the orthogonal projection onto &quot;Hn&quot;. The sequence {&quot;en&quot;}&quot;n&quot; is an approximate identity for &quot;K&quot;(&quot;H&quot;).

&quot;K&quot;(&quot;H&quot;) is a two-sided closed ideal of &quot;B&quot;(&quot;H&quot;). For separable Hilbert spaces, it is the unique ideal. The quotient of &quot;B&quot;(&quot;H&quot;) by &quot;K&quot;(&quot;H&quot;) is the Calkin algebra.

=== Commutative C*-algebras ===
Let &quot;X&quot; be a locally compact Hausdorff space. The space formula_1 of complex-valued continuous functions on &quot;X&quot; that &quot;vanish at infinity&quot; (defined in the article on local compactness) forms a commutative C*-algebra formula_1 under pointwise multiplication and addition. The involution is pointwise conjugation. formula_1 has a multiplicative unit element if and only if formula_39 is compact. As does any C*-algebra, formula_1 has an approximate identity. In the case of formula_1 this is immediate: consider the directed set of compact subsets of formula_39, and for each compact formula_43 let formula_44 be a function of compact support which is identically 1 on formula_43. Such functions exist by the Tietze extension theorem, which applies to locally compact Hausdorff spaces. Any such sequence of functions formula_46 is an approximate identity.

The Gelfand representation states that every commutative C*-algebra is *-isomorphic to the algebra formula_1, where formula_39 is the space of characters equipped with the weak* topology. Furthermore, if formula_1 is isomorphic to formula_50 as C*-algebras, it follows that formula_39 and formula_52 are homeomorphic. This characterization is one of the motivations for the noncommutative topology and noncommutative geometry programs.

=== C*-enveloping algebra ===
Given a Banach *-algebra &quot;A&quot; with an approximate identity, there is a unique (up to C*-isomorphism) C*-algebra E(&quot;A&quot;) and *-morphism π from &quot;A&quot; into E(&quot;A&quot;) that is universal, that is, every other continuous *-morphism factors uniquely through π. The algebra E(&quot;A&quot;) is called the C*-enveloping algebra of the Banach *-algebra &quot;A&quot;.

Of particular importance is the C*-algebra of a locally compact group &quot;G&quot;. This is defined as the enveloping C*-algebra of the group algebra of &quot;G&quot;. The C*-algebra of &quot;G&quot; provides context for general harmonic analysis of &quot;G&quot; in the case &quot;G&quot; is non-abelian. In particular, the dual of a locally compact group is defined to be the primitive ideal space of the group C*-algebra. See spectrum of a C*-algebra.

=== Von Neumann algebras ===

Von Neumann algebras, known as W* algebras before the 1960s, are a special kind of C*-algebra. They are required to be closed in the weak operator topology, which is weaker than the norm topology.

The Sherman–Takeda theorem implies that any C*-algebra has a universal enveloping W*-algebra, such that any homomorphism to a W*-algebra factors through it.

== Type for C*-algebras ==
A C*-algebra &quot;A&quot; is of type I if and only if for all non-degenerate representations π of &quot;A&quot; the von Neumann algebra π(&quot;A&quot;) (that is, the bicommutant of π(&quot;A&quot;)) is a type I von Neumann algebra. In fact it is sufficient to consider only factor representations, i.e. representations π for which π(&quot;A&quot;) is a factor.

A locally compact group is said to be of type I if and only if its group C*-algebra is type I.

However, if a C*-algebra has non-type I representations, then by results of James Glimm it also has representations of type II and type III. Thus for C*-algebras and locally compact groups, it is only meaningful to speak of type I and non type I properties.

== C*-algebras and quantum field theory ==
In quantum mechanics, one typically describes a physical system with a C*-algebra &quot;A&quot; with unit element; the self-adjoint elements of &quot;A&quot; (elements &quot;x&quot; with &quot;x*&quot; = &quot;x&quot;) are thought of as the &quot;observables&quot;, the measurable quantities, of the system. A &quot;state&quot; of the system is defined as a positive functional on &quot;A&quot; (a C-linear map φ : &quot;A&quot; → C with φ(&quot;u*u&quot;) ≥ 0 for all &quot;u&quot; ∈ &quot;A&quot;) such that φ(1) = 1. The expected value of the observable &quot;x&quot;, if the system is in state φ, is then φ(&quot;x&quot;).

This C*-algebra approach is used in the Haag–Kastler axiomatization of local quantum field theory, where every open set of Minkowski spacetime is associated with a C*-algebra.

== See also ==
* Banach algebra
* Banach *-algebra
* *-algebra
* Hilbert C*-module
* Operator K-theory
* Operator system, a unital subspace of a C*-algebra that is *-closed.
* Gelfand–Naimark–Segal construction
*Jordan operator algebra

== Notes ==
==References==

* . An excellent introduction to the subject, accessible for those with a knowledge of basic functional analysis.
* . This book is widely regarded as a source of new research material, providing much supporting intuition, but it is difficult.
* . This is a somewhat dated reference, but is still considered as a high-quality technical exposition. It is available in English from North Holland press.
* . Mathematically rigorous reference which provides extensive physics background.
* .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="32" end="51" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q263809" start="55" end="65" title="C*-algebra" label="C∗-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q806066" start="103" end="117" title="Banach algebra" label="Banach algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q846862" start="135" end="145" title="involution (mathematics)" label="involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509647" start="179" end="186" title="Hermitian adjoint" label="adjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="219" end="226" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="227" end="234" title="algebra over a field" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091024" start="252" end="278" title="continuous linear operator" label="continuous linear operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="285" end="292" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="293" end="306" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="375" end="385" title="closed set" label="closed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q980557" start="393" end="406" title="norm topology" label="norm topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509647" start="477" end="484" title="adjoint of an operator" label="adjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="689" end="704" title="locally compact" label="locally compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="705" end="714" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="784" end="801" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623243" start="805" end="810" title="model (abstract)" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q845789" start="832" end="842" title="observable" label="observable"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="878" end="895" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q603198" start="903" end="919" title="matrix mechanics" label="matrix mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q61761" start="969" end="983" title="Pascual Jordan" label="Pascual Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="1011" end="1027" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="1133" end="1137" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970172" start="1230" end="1249" title="von Neumann algebra" label="von Neumann algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q315414" start="1278" end="1292" title="Israel Gelfand" label="Israel Gelfand"/>
<link wikidata="Q195922" start="1297" end="1309" title="Mark Naimark" label="Mark Naimark"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359539" start="1471" end="1493" title="unitary representation" label="unitary representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147620" start="1498" end="1519" title="locally compact group" label="locally compact group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602075" start="1746" end="1764" title="nuclear C*-algebra" label="nuclear C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q806066" start="1943" end="1957" title="Banach algebra" label="Banach algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1976" end="1990" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q370502" start="2009" end="2012" title="Map (mathematics)" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449422" start="2080" end="2090" title="Semigroup with involution" label="involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836000" start="2438" end="2447" title="*-algebra" label="*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2629" end="2636" title="#Some_history:_B.2A-algebras_and_C.2A-algebras" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q249748" start="2731" end="2754" title="spectral radius" label="spectral radius formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342396" start="2852" end="2870" title="bounded linear map" label="bounded linear map"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165685" start="3208" end="3219" title="Contraction (operator theory)" label="contractive"/>
<link wikidata="Q740207" start="3313" end="3322" title="isometry" label="isometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q18926943" start="3597" end="3610" title="Charles Earl Rickart" label="C. E. Rickart"/>
<link wikidata="Q806066" start="3631" end="3647" title="Banach *-algebra" label="Banach *-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q381347" start="4225" end="4236" title="Irving Segal" label="I. E. Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767119" start="4740" end="4770" title="continuous functional calculus" label="continuous functional calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499675" start="4915" end="4934" title="Gelfand isomorphism" label="Gelfand isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256541" start="5112" end="5123" title="convex cone" label="convex cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="5459" end="5476" title="partial order" label="partially ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="5477" end="5489" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365748" start="5627" end="5635" title="Spectrum (functional analysis)" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233279" start="5877" end="5903" title="positive linear functional" label="positive linear functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917249" start="5957" end="5963" title="State (functional analysis)" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575320" start="6024" end="6048" title="spectrum of a C*-algebra" label="spectrum of a C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530428" start="6059" end="6075" title="GNS construction" label="GNS construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q621743" start="6160" end="6180" title="approximate identity" label="approximate identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737793" start="6525" end="6550" title="Hereditary C*-subalgebra" label="strictly positive element"/>
<link wikidata="Q41118" start="6706" end="6714" title="quotient" label="quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="6760" end="6765" title="Ideal (ring theory)" label="ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="7005" end="7013" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q980557" start="7131" end="7144" title="operator norm" label="operator norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051983" start="7195" end="7214" title="conjugate transpose" label="conjugate transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142861" start="7256" end="7266" title="direct sum of modules" label="direct sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851437" start="7465" end="7475" title="Semisimple algebra" label="semisimple"/>
<link wikidata="Q776578" start="7533" end="7549" title="Artin–Wedderburn theorem" label="Artin–Wedderburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152398" start="7617" end="7628" title="Canonical form" label="canonically"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097836" start="8165" end="8173" title="operator K-theory" label="K-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715875" start="8194" end="8207" title="ordered group" label="positive cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="8354" end="8361" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q282364" start="8403" end="8409" title="dagger (typography)" label="dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509647" start="8490" end="8507" title="Hermitian adjoint" label="Hermitian adjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="8719" end="8736" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122216" start="8753" end="8780" title="quantum information science" label="quantum information science"/>
<link wikidata="Q291562" start="8853" end="8896" title="approximately finite dimensional C*-algebra" label="approximately finite dimensional C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="9043" end="9058" title="linear operator" label="linear operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="9081" end="9094" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509647" start="9142" end="9158" title="adjoint operator" label="adjoint operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226682" start="9427" end="9450" title="Gelfand–Naimark theorem" label="Gelfand–Naimark theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q680081" start="9517" end="9526" title="separable space" label="separable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155314" start="9607" end="9623" title="Compact operator on Hilbert space" label="compact operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q980557" start="9647" end="9658" title="norm closed" label="norm closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q621743" start="10319" end="10339" title="approximate identity" label="approximate identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41118" start="11029" end="11037" title="quotient" label="quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027067" start="11109" end="11123" title="Calkin algebra" label="Calkin algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="11181" end="11196" title="locally compact" label="locally compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="11353" end="11370" title="locally compact" label="local compactness"/>
<link wikidata="Q621743" start="11622" end="11642" title="approximate identity" label="approximate identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346677" start="11894" end="11918" title="Tietze extension theorem" label="Tietze extension theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499675" start="12046" end="12068" title="Gelfand representation" label="Gelfand representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062934" start="12185" end="12195" title="Character (mathematics)" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q505760" start="12214" end="12228" title="Weak topology" label="weak* topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="12259" end="12269" title="isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="12346" end="12358" title="homeomorphism" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049229" start="12416" end="12439" title="noncommutative topology" label="noncommutative topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746792" start="12444" end="12467" title="noncommutative geometry" label="noncommutative geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q621743" start="12556" end="12576" title="approximate identity" label="approximate identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417809" start="12713" end="12722" title="universal morphism" label="universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147620" start="12948" end="12969" title="locally compact group" label="locally compact group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019511" start="13037" end="13050" title="group algebra of a locally compact group" label="group algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q876215" start="13130" end="13147" title="harmonic analysis" label="harmonic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575320" start="13330" end="13354" title="spectrum of a C*-algebra" label="spectrum of a C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970172" start="13387" end="13406" title="Von Neumann algebra" label="Von Neumann algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277121" start="13520" end="13542" title="weak operator topology" label="weak operator topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495288" start="13589" end="13611" title="Sherman–Takeda theorem" label="Sherman–Takeda theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019511" start="14201" end="14217" title="group C^*-algebra" label="group C*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q370116" start="14306" end="14317" title="James Glimm" label="James Glimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="14535" end="14552" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q602011" start="15231" end="15257" title="local quantum field theory" label="local quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="15283" end="15302" title="Minkowski spacetime" label="Minkowski spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q806066" start="15354" end="15368" title="Banach algebra" label="Banach algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q806066" start="15371" end="15387" title="Banach *-algebra" label="Banach *-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836000" start="15390" end="15399" title="Star-algebra" label="*-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761182" start="15402" end="15419" title="Hilbert C*-module" label="Hilbert C*-module"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097836" start="15422" end="15439" title="Operator K-theory" label="Operator K-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097842" start="15442" end="15457" title="Operator system" label="Operator system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530428" start="15513" end="15547" title="Gelfand–Naimark–Segal construction" label="Gelfand–Naimark–Segal construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098325" start="15549" end="15572" title="Jordan operator algebra" label="Jordan operator algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="15695" end="15714" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7185" wikidata="Q26888" url="?curid=7185" title="London Borough of Croydon">
<text>The London Borough of Croydon () is a borough in South London, part of Outer London. It covers an area of and has a population of 390,719, making it the most populous London borough. It is the southernmost borough of London. At its centre is the town of Croydon, from which the borough takes its name, while other urban centres include Thornton Heath, Coulsdon, Purley, South Norwood, Norbury, New Addington, and Selsdon. Croydon is mentioned in the Domesday Book, and developed from a small market town into one of the most populous towns on the outskirts of London. The borough is now a significant business and cultural centre outside central London. Its influence in entertainment and the arts contributes to its status as a metropolitan centre.
The borough was formed in 1965 from the merger of the County Borough of Croydon with Coulsdon and Purley Urban District, both of which had been within Surrey. The local authority, Croydon London Borough Council, is now part of London Councils, the local government association for Greater London. The economic strength of Croydon dates back to Croydon Airport, which was a major factor in the development of Croydon as a business centre. Once London&#x27;s main airport for all international flights to and from the capital, it was closed on 30 September 1959 due to the lack of expansion space needed for an airport to serve the growing city. It is now a Grade II listed building and tourist attraction. Croydon Council and its predecessor Croydon Corporation unsuccessfully applied for city status in 1954, 2000, 2002 and 2012. The area is currently going through a large regeneration project called Croydon Vision 2020, which is predicted to attract more businesses and tourists to the area, as well as backing Croydon&#x27;s bid to become &quot;London&#x27;s Third City&quot; (after the City of London and Westminster). Croydon is mostly urban, though there are large suburban and rural uplands towards the south of the borough. Since 2003, Croydon has been certified as a Fairtrade borough by the Fairtrade Foundation. It was the first London borough to be awarded Fairtrade status.
The area has a notable cultural presence in London and the South East of England, and is home to institutions such as the major arts and entertainment centre Fairfield Halls. However, its famous fringe theatre, the Warehouse Theatre, went into administration in 2012 when the council withdrew funding, and the building was demolished in 2013. The Croydon Clocktower was opened by Queen Elizabeth II in 1994 as an arts venue featuring a library, the independent David Lean Cinema (closed by the council in 2011, but now partially reopened on a part-time and volunteer basis) and museum. From 2000 to 2010, Croydon staged an annual summer festival celebrating the area&#x27;s black and Indian cultural diversity, with audiences reaching over 50,000 people.

Premier League football club Crystal Palace F.C. have played at Selhurst Park in Selhurst since 1924. Other landmarks in the borough include what remains of Croydon Palace, an important residence of the Archbishops of Canterbury since around the 9th century CE, and known as &#x27;The Old Palace&#x27; during its time as a school. It served as the Manor House of the manor of Croydon since it had been held as a manor by the Archbishops since the Anglo-Saxon period. Its local successor is Addington Palace, an eighteenth-century mansion which became the official second residence of six Archbishops of Canterbury, Shirley Windmill, one of the few surviving large windmills in Greater London built in the 1850s, and the BRIT School, a creative arts institute run by the BRIT Trust which has produced artists such as Adele, Amy Winehouse and Leona Lewis.

==History==
: &quot; For the history of the original town see History of Croydon&quot;
The name Croydon comes from Crogdene or Croindone, named by the Saxons in the 8th century when they settled there, although the area had been inhabited since prehistoric times. It is thought to derive from the Anglo-Saxon &quot;croeas deanas&quot;, meaning &quot;the valley of the crocuses,&quot; indicating that, like Saffron Walden in Essex, it was a centre for the collection of saffron.

At the time of the Norman invasion, Croydon had a church, a mill, and around 365 inhabitants, as recorded in the Domesday Book. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop Lanfranc lived at Croydon Palace. Visitors included Thomas Becket (another Archbishop), and royal figures such as Henry VIII of England and Elizabeth I. The royal charter for Surrey Street Market dates back to 1276.

Croydon continued as a market town, producing charcoal, tanned leather, and beer. Croydon was served by the Surrey Iron Railway, the first public railway (horse-drawn) in the world, in 1803, and by the London to Brighton rail link in the mid-19th century, helping it to become the largest town in what was then Surrey.

In the 20th century, Croydon became known for industries such as metal working, car manufacturing, and its aerodrome, Croydon Airport. Starting out during World War I as an airfield for protection against Zeppelins, it was merged with an adjacent airfield, and the new aerodrome opened on 29 March 1920. It developed into one of the busiest airports in the world during the 1920s and 1930s and welcomed the world&#x27;s aviators in its heyday. British Airways Ltd used the airport for a short period after redirecting from Northolt Aerodrome, and Croydon was the operating base for Imperial Airways. It was partly due to the airport that Croydon suffered heavy bomb damage during World War II. As aviation technology progressed, and aircraft became larger and more numerous, it was recognised in 1952 that the airport would be too small to cope with the increasing volume of air traffic. The last scheduled flight departed on 30 September 1959. It was superseded as the main airport by both London Heathrow and London Gatwick Airport (see below). The air terminal, now known as Airport House, has been restored and has a hotel and museum in it.

In the late 1950s and through the 1960s, the council commercialised the centre of Croydon with massive development of office blocks and the Whitgift Centre, which was formerly the largest in-town shopping centre in Europe. The centre was officially opened in October 1970 by the Duchess of Kent. The original Whitgift School there had moved to Haling Park, South Croydon in the 1930s; the replacement school on the site, Whitgift Middle School, now the Trinity School of John Whitgift, moved to Shirley Park in the 1960s, when the buildings were demolished.

Croydon was hit by extensive rioting in August 2011 during the 2011 England riots. Reeves, a historic furniture store established in 1867, that gave its name to a junction and tram stop in the town centre, was destroyed by arson.

Croydon is currently the subject of a series of £3.5 billion development projects, called Croydon Vision 2020. This aims to change the urban planning of central Croydon. It aims to make Croydon &quot;London&#x27;s Third City&quot; and the hub of retail, business, culture, and living in south London and South East England. The plan was showcased in a series of events called Croydon Expo.

===Administrative history===
The area of the modern borough broadly corresponds to the four ancient parishes of Croydon, Addington, Coulsdon and Sanderstead.

The parish of Croydon was governed by improvement commissioners from 1829 until 1849 when it was made a local board district. Croydon was incorporated as a municipal borough in 1883. When elected county councils were established in 1889, Croydon was considered large enough to provide its own county-level services. It was therefore made a county borough, independent from the new Surrey County Council, whilst remaining part of Surrey for judicial and lieutenancy purposes. The borough was enlarged in 1928 to absorb the neighbouring parish of Addington.

Coulsdon and Sanderstead were governed as rural parishes within the Croydon Rural District until 1915 when the Coulsdon and Purley Urban District was created covering the two parishes. Purley itself was not a civil parish, being in the parish of Coulsdon, but its name was included in the urban district&#x27;s name on account of it being one of the main built-up settlements in the district. There were subsequent adjustments to the boundaries with neighbouring areas, notably including in 1933 when the urban district absorbed the parish of Farleigh, after which there were three urban parishes in the district, being Cousldon, Farleigh and Sanderstead.

The London Borough of Croydon was created on 1 April 1965 under the London Government Act 1963, covering the combined area of the former Coulsdon and Purley Urban District and the County Borough of Croydon, both of which were abolished at the same time. The area was transferred from Surrey to Greater London to become one of the 32 London boroughs. The Farleigh area was removed from the borough in 1969 and transferred back to Surrey, becoming part of the parish of Chelsham and Farleigh.

The borough council has unsuccessfully applied for city status on several occasions: in 1965, 1977, 1992, 2000, 2002, and 2012. At present, the London Borough of Croydon is the second most populous local government district of England without city status. Croydon&#x27;s applications were refused as it was felt not to have an identity separate from the rest of Greater London. In 1965 it was described as &quot;...now just part of the London conurbation and almost indistinguishable from many of the other Greater London boroughs&quot; and in 2000 as having &quot;no particular identity of its own&quot;.

==Governance==

Croydon Council is the local authority for the borough of Croydon. The council holds its meetings at Croydon Town Hall, which is situated on Katherine Street in the centre of Croydon. The council&#x27;s main administrative offices are located in the adjoining building, Bernard Weatherill House. Since 2022 the council has been led by the directly elected Mayor of Croydon.

===Greater London representation===
Since 2000, for elections to the London Assembly, the borough forms part of the Croydon and Sutton constituency.

===Westminster representation===

The borough is covered by three parliamentary constituencies: these are Croydon North, Croydon Central and Croydon South. Sarah Jones (politician) won the Croydon Central seat for Labour in 2017. Croydon North has a Labour MP, Steve Reed (politician), and Croydon South has a Conservative MP, Chris Philp.

===Government buildings===

Croydon Town Hall on Katharine Street in central Croydon houses the committee rooms, the mayor&#x27;s and other councillors&#x27; offices, electoral services and the arts and heritage services.
The present Town Hall is Croydon&#x27;s third. The first town hall is thought to have been built in either 1566 or 1609. The second was built in 1808 to serve the growing town but was demolished after the present town hall was erected in 1895.

The 1808 building cost £8,000, which was regarded as an enormous sum for those days and was perhaps as controversial as the administrative building Bernard Weatherill House opened for occupation in 2013 and reputed to have cost £220,000,000. The early 19th century building was known initially as &quot;Courthouse&quot; as, like its predecessor and successor, the local court met there. The building stood on the western side of a High Street near to the junction with Surrey Street, the location of the town&#x27;s market. The building became inadequate for the growing local administrative responsibilities and stood at a narrow point of a High Street in need of widening.

The present town hall was designed by local architect Charles Henman and was officially opened by the Prince and Princess of Wales on 19 May 1896. It was constructed in red brick, sourced from Wrotham in Kent, with Portland stone dressings and green Westmoreland slates for the roof. It also housed the court and most central council employees.

The Borough&#x27;s incorporation in 1883 and a desire to improve central Croydon with improvements to traffic flows and the removal of social deprivation in Middle Row prompted the move to a new configuration of town hall provision. The second closure of the Central Railway Station provided the corporation with the opportunity to buy the station land from the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway Company for £11,500 to provide the site for the new town hall. Indeed, the council hoped to be able to sell on some of the land purchased with enough for municipal needs and still &quot;leave a considerable margin of land which might be disposed of&quot;. The purchase of the failed railway station came despite local leaders having successfully urged the re-opening of the poorly patronised railway station. The railway station re-opening had failed to be a success so freeing up the land for alternative use.

Parts, including the former court rooms, have been converted into the Museum of Croydon and exhibition galleries. The original public library was converted into the David Lean Cinema, part of the Croydon Clocktower. The Braithwaite Hall is used for events and performances. The town hall was renovated in the mid-1990s and the imposing central staircase, long closed to the public and kept for councillors only, was re-opened in 1994. The civic complex, meanwhile, was added to, with buildings across Mint Walk and the 19-floor Taberner House to house the rapidly expanding corporation&#x27;s employees.
Ruskin House is the headquarters of Croydon&#x27;s Labour, Trade Union and Co-operative movements and is itself a co-operative with shareholders from organisations across the three movements. In the 19th century, Croydon was a bustling commercial centre of London. It was said that, at the turn of the 20th century, approximately £10,000 was spent in Croydon&#x27;s taverns and inns every week. For the early labour movement, then, it was natural to meet in the town&#x27;s public houses, in this environment. However, the temperance movement was equally strong, and Georgina King Lewis, a keen member of the Croydon United Temperance Council, took it upon herself to establish a dry centre for the labour movement. The first Ruskin House was highly successful, and there have been two more since. The current house was officially opened in 1967 by the then Labour Prime Minister, Harold Wilson. Today, Ruskin House continues to serve as the headquarters of the Trade Union, Labour and Co-operative movements in Croydon, hosting a range of meetings and being the base for several labour movement groups. Office tenants include the headquarters of the Communist Party of Britain and Croydon Labour Party. Geraint Davies, the MP for Croydon Central, had offices in the building, until he was defeated by Andrew Pelling and is now the Labour representative standing for Swansea West in Wales.
Taberner House was built between 1964 and 1967, designed by architect H. Thornley, with Allan Holt and Hugh Lea as borough engineers. Although the council had needed extra space since the 1920s, it was only with the imminent creation of the London Borough of Croydon that action was taken. The building, which was demolished in 2014, was in classic 1960s style, praised at the time but subsequently much derided. It has its elegant upper slab block narrowing towards both ends, a formal device which has been compared to the famous Pirelli Tower in Milan. It was named after Ernest Taberner OBE, Town Clerk from 1937 to 1963. Until September 2013, Taberner House housed most of the council&#x27;s central employees and was the main location for the public to access information and services, particularly with respect to housing.

In September 2013, Council staff moved into Bernard Weatherill House in Fell Road, (named after the former Speaker of the House and Member of Parliament for Croydon North-East). Staff from the Met Police, NHS, Jobcentre Plus, Croydon Credit Union, Citizens Advice Bureau as well as 75 services from the council all moved to the new building.

==Geography and climate==
The borough is in the far south of London, with the M25 orbital motorway stretching to the south of it, between Croydon and Tandridge. To the north and east, the borough mainly borders the London Borough of Bromley, and in the north west the boroughs of Lambeth and Southwark. The boroughs of Sutton and Merton are located directly to the west. Croydon is at the head of the River Wandle, just to the north of a significant gap in the North Downs. It lies south of Central London, and the earliest settlement may have been a Roman staging post on the London-Portslade road, although conclusive evidence has not yet been found. The main town centre houses a great variety of well-known stores on North End and two shopping centres. It was pedestrianised in 1989 to attract people back to the town centre. Another shopping centre called Park Place was due to open in 2012 but has since been scrapped.

===Townscape description===

The CR postcode area covers most of the south and centre of the borough while the SE and SW postcodes cover the northern parts, including Crystal Palace, Upper Norwood, South Norwood, Selhurst (part), Thornton Heath (part), Norbury and Pollards Hill (part).

Districts in the London Borough of Croydon include Addington, a village to the east of Croydon which until 2000 was poorly linked to the rest of the borough as it was without any railway or light rail stations, with only a few patchy bus services. Addiscombe is a district just northeast of the centre of Croydon, and is popular with commuters to central London as it is close to the busy East Croydon station. Ashburton, to the northeast of Croydon, is mostly home to residential houses and flats, being named after Ashburton House, one of the three big houses in the Addiscombe area. Broad Green is a small district, centred on a large green with many homes and local shops in West Croydon. Coombe is an area, just east of Croydon, which has barely been urbanised and has retained its collection of large houses fairly intact. Coulsdon, south west of Central Croydon, has retained a good mix of traditional high street shops as well as a large number of restaurants for its size. Croydon is the principal area of the borough, Crystal Palace is an area north of Croydon, which is shared with the London Boroughs of Lambeth, Southwark, Lewisham and Bromley. Fairfield, just northeast of Croydon, holds the Fairfield Halls and the village of Forestdale, to the east of Croydon&#x27;s main area, commenced work in the late 1960s and completed in the mid-70s to create a larger town on what was previously open ground. Hamsey Green is a place on the plateau of the North Downs, south of Croydon. Kenley, again south of the centre, lies within the London Green Belt and features a landscape dominated by green space. New Addington, to the east, is a large local council estate surrounded by open countryside and golf courses. Norbury, to the northwest, is a suburb with a large ethnic population. Norwood New Town is a part of the Norwood triangle, to the north of Croydon. Monks Orchard is a small district made up of large houses and open space in the northeast of the borough. Pollards Hill is a residential district with houses on roads, which are lined with pollarded lime trees, stretching to Norbury. Purley, to the south, is a main town whose name derives from &quot;pirlea&quot;, which means &#x27;Peartree lea&#x27;. Sanderstead, to the south, is a village mainly on high ground at the edge of suburban development in Greater London. Selhurst is a town, to the north of Croydon, which holds the nationally known school, The BRIT School. Selsdon is a suburb which was developed during the inter-war period in the 1920s and 1930s, and is notable for its many Art Deco houses, to the southeast of Croydon Centre. Shirley, is to the east of Croydon, and holds Shirley Windmill. South Croydon, to the south of Croydon, is a locality which holds local landmarks such as The Swan and Sugarloaf public house and independent Whitgift School part of the Whitgift Foundation. South Norwood, to the north, is in common with West Norwood and Upper Norwood, named after a contraction of Great North Wood and has a population of around 14,590. Thornton Heath is a town, to the northwest of Croydon, which holds Croydon&#x27;s principal hospital Mayday. Upper Norwood is north of Croydon, on a mainly elevated area of the borough. Waddon is a residential area, mainly based on the Purley Way retail area, to the west of the borough. Woodside is located to the northeast of the borough, with streets based on Woodside Green, a small area of green land. And finally Whyteleafe is a town, right to the edge of Croydon with some areas in the Surrey district of Tandridge.

Croydon is a gateway to the south from central London, with some major roads running through it. Purley Way, part of the A23, was built to by-pass Croydon town centre. It is one of the busiest roads in the borough, and is the site of several major retail developments including one of only 18 IKEA stores in the country, built on the site of the former power station. The A23 continues southward as Brighton Road, which is the main route running towards the south from Croydon to Purley. The centre of Croydon is very congested, and the urban planning has since become out of date and quite inadequate, due to the expansion of Croydon&#x27;s main shopping area and office blocks. Wellesley Road is a north–south dual carriageway that cuts through the centre of the town, and makes it hard to walk between the town centre&#x27;s two railway stations. Croydon Vision 2020 includes a plan for a more pedestrian-friendly replacement. It has also been named as one of the worst roads for cyclists in the area. Construction of the Croydon Underpass beneath the junction of George Street and Wellesley Road/Park Lane started in the early 1960s, mainly to alleviate traffic congestion on Park Lane, above the underpass. The Croydon Flyover is also near the underpass, and next to Taberner House. It mainly leads traffic on to Duppas Hill, towards Purley Way with links to Sutton and Kingston upon Thames.

===Topography and climate===
Croydon covers an area of 86.52 km2. Croydon&#x27;s physical features consist of many hills and rivers spread out across the borough and into the North Downs, Surrey, and the rest of south London. Addington Hills is a major hilly area to the south of London and is recognised as a significant obstacle to the growth of London from its origins as a port on the north side of the river, to a large circular city. The Great North Wood is a former natural oak forest that covered the Sydenham Ridge and the southern reaches of the River Effra and its tributaries.

The most notable tree, called Vicar&#x27;s Oak, marked the boundary of four ancient parishes: Lambeth, Camberwell, Croydon and Bromley. John Aubrey referred to this &quot;ancient remarkable tree&quot; in the past tense as early as 1718, but according to JB Wilson, the Vicar&#x27;s Oak survived until 1825. The River Wandle, a chalk stream, is also a major tributary of the River Thames, flowing to Wandsworth and Putney for from its main source in Waddon.

Croydon has a temperate climate in common with most areas of Great Britain: its Köppen climate classification is &quot;Cfb&quot;. Its mean annual temperature of 9.6 °C is similar to that experienced throughout the Weald, and slightly cooler than nearby areas such as the Sussex coast and central London. Rainfall is considerably below England&#x27;s average (1971–2000) level of 838 mm, and every month is drier overall than the England average.

===Architecture===

The skyline of Croydon has significantly changed over the past 50 years. High-rise buildings, mainly office blocks, now dominate the skyline. The most notable of these buildings include Croydon Council&#x27;s former headquarters Taberner House, which has been compared to the famous Pirelli Tower of Milan, and the Nestlé Tower, the former UK headquarters of Nestlé.

In recent years, the development of tall buildings, such as the approved Croydon Vocational Tower and Wellesley Square, has been encouraged in the London Plan, and will lead to the erection of new skyscrapers in the coming years as part of London&#x27;s high-rise boom.

No. 1 Croydon, formerly the NLA Tower, Britain&#x27;s 88th tallest tower, close to East Croydon station, is an example of 1970s architecture. The tower was originally nicknamed the &quot;Threepenny bit building&quot;, as it resembles a stack of pre-decimalisation Threepence coins, which were 12-sided. It is now most commonly called The Octagon, being 8-sided.

Lunar House is another high-rise building. Like other government office buildings on Wellesley Road, such as Apollo House, the name of the building was inspired by the US Moon landings (In the Croydon suburb of New Addington there is a public house, built during the same period, called &quot;The Man on the Moon&quot;). Lunar House houses the Home Office building for Visas and Immigration. Apollo House is home to The Border Patrol Agency.

A new generation of buildings is being considered by the council as part of Croydon Vision 2020, so that the borough does not lose its title of having the &quot;largest office space in the south east,&quot; excluding central London. Projects such as Wellesley Square, which will be a mix of residential and retail with an eye-catching colour design, and 100 George Street — a proposed modern office block — are included in this vision.

Notable events that have happened to Croydon&#x27;s skyline include the Millennium project to create the largest single urban lighting project ever. It was created for the buildings of Croydon to illuminate them for the third millennium. The project provided new lighting for the buildings and offered an opportunity to project images and words onto them, mixing art and poetry with coloured light, and also displaying public information after dark. Apart from increasing night-time activity in Croydon and thereby reducing the fear of crime, it helped to promote the sustainable use of older buildings by displaying them in a more positive way.

===Landmarks===
There are a large number of attractions and places of interest all across the borough of Croydon, ranging from historic sites in the north and south to modern towers in the centre.
Croydon Airport was once London&#x27;s main airport, but closed on 30 September 1959 due to the expansion of London and because it did not have room to grow. Heathrow International Airport took over as London&#x27;s main airport. It has now been mostly converted to offices, although some important elements of the airport remain. It is a tourist attraction.

The Croydon Clocktower arts venue was opened by Elizabeth II in 1994. It includes the Braithwaite Hall (the former reference library – named after the Rev. Braithwaite who donated it to the town) for live events, the David Lean Cinema (built in memory of David Lean), the Museum of Croydon and Croydon Central Library. The Museum of Croydon (formerly known as Croydon Lifetimes Museum) highlights Croydon in the past and the present and currently features high-profile exhibitions including the Riesco Collection, The Art of Dr Seuss and the Whatever the Weather gallery. Shirley Windmill is a working windmill and one of the few surviving large windmills in Surrey, built in 1854. It is Grade II listed and received a £218,100 grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund. Addington Palace is an 18th-century mansion in Addington that was originally built as Addington Place in the 16th century. The palace became the official second residence of six archbishops, five of whom are buried in St Mary&#x27;s Church and churchyard nearby.

North End is the main pedestrianised shopping road in Croydon, having Centrale to one side and the Whitgift Centre to the other. The Warehouse Theatre is a popular theatre for mostly young performers and was due to get a face-lift on the Croydon Gateway site.

The Nestlé Tower was the UK headquarters of Nestlé and is one of the tallest towers in England, which is due to be re-fitted during the Park Place development. The Fairfield Halls is a well-known concert hall and exhibition centre, opened in 1962. It is frequently used for BBC recordings and was formerly the home of ITV&#x27;s World of Sport. It includes the Ashcroft Theatre and the Arnhem Gallery.

Croydon Palace was the summer residence of the Archbishop of Canterbury for over 500 years and included regular visitors such as Henry III and Queen Elizabeth I. It is thought to have been built around 960. Croydon Cemetery is a large cemetery and crematorium west of Croydon and is most famous for the gravestone of Derek Bentley, who was wrongly hanged in 1953. Mitcham Common is an area of common land partly shared with the boroughs of Sutton and Merton. Almost 500,000 years ago, Mitcham Common formed part of the river bed of the River Thames.

The BRIT School is a performing Arts &amp; Technology school, owned by the BRIT Trust (known for the BRIT Awards Music Ceremony). Famous former students include Kellie Shirley, Amy Winehouse, Leona Lewis, Adele, Kate Nash, Dane Bowers, Katie Melua and Lyndon David-Hall. Grants is an entertainment venue in the centre of Croydon which includes a Vue cinema.

Surrey Street Market has roots in the 13th century, or earlier, and was chartered by the Archbishop of Canterbury in 1276. The market is regularly used as a location for TV, film and advertising. Croydon Minster, formerly the parish church, was established in the Anglo-Saxon period, and parts of the surviving building (notably the tower) date from the 14th and 15th centuries. However, the church was largely destroyed by fire in 1867, so the present structure is a rebuild of 1867–69 to the designs of George Gilbert Scott. It still contains several important monuments and fittings saved from the old church.

==Demography==
===Population change===
The table shows population change since 1801, including the percentage change since previous census. Although the London Borough of Croydon has existed only since 1965, earlier figures have been generated by combining data from the towns, villages, and civil parishes that would later be absorbed into the authority.

===Ethnicity===
According to the 2011 census, Croydon had a population of 363,378, making Croydon the most populated borough in Greater London. The estimated population in 2017 was around 384,800. 186,900 were males, with 197,900 females. The density was 4,448 inhabitants per km2. 248,200 residents of Croydon were between the age of 16 and 64.

In 2011, white was the majority ethnicity with 55.1%. Black was the second-largest ethnicity with 20.2%; 16.4% were Asian and 8.3% stated to be something other.

The most common householder type was owner occupied with only a small percentage rented. Many new housing schemes and developments are currently taking place in Croydon, such as The Exchange and Bridge House, IYLO, Wellesley Square (now known as Saffron Square) and Altitude 25. In 2006, The Metropolitan Police recorded a 10% fall in the number of crimes committed in Croydon, better than the rate at which crime in London as a whole is falling. Croydon has had the highest fall in the number of cases of violence against the person in south London, and is one of the top 10 safest local authorities in London. According to &quot;Your Croydon&quot; (a local community magazine) this is due to a stronger partnership struck between Croydon Council and the police. In 2007, overall crime figures across the borough saw a decrease of 5%, with the number of incidents dropping from 32,506 in 2006 to 30,862 in 2007. However, in the year ending April 2012, The Metropolitan Police recorded the highest rates for murder and rape throughout London in Croydon, accounting for almost 10% of all murders, and 7% of all rapes. Croydon has five police stations. Croydon police station is on Park Lane in the centre of the town near the Fairfield Halls; South Norwood police station is a newly refurbished building just off the High Street; Norbury police station is on London Road; Kenley station is on Godstone Road; and New Addington police station is on Addington Village road.

===Religion===
The predominant religion of the borough is Christianity. According to the 2021 United Kingdom census, the borough has over 190,880 Christians, mainly Protestants. This is the largest religious following in the borough, followed by Islam with 40,717 Muslims resident.

101,119 Croydon residents stated that they are atheist or non-religious in the 2021 Census.

Croydon Minster is the most notable of the borough&#x27;s 35 churches. This church was founded in Saxon times, since there is a record of &quot;a priest of Croydon&quot; in 960, although the first record of a church building is in the Domesday Book (1086). In its final medieval form, the church was mainly a Perpendicular-style structure, but this was severely damaged by fire in 1867, following which only the tower, south porch and outer walls remained. Under the direction of Sir George Gilbert Scott the church was rebuilt, incorporating the remains and essentially following the design of the medieval building, and was reconsecrated in 1870. It still contains several important monuments and fittings saved from the old church.

The Area Bishop of Croydon is a position as a suffragan Bishop in the Anglican Diocese of Southwark. The present bishop is the Right Reverend Rosemarie Mallett.

==Economy==


The main employment sectors of the Borough are retail and enterprise, which are mainly based in Central Croydon. Major employers are well-known companies, which have stores or offices in the town. The Purley Way shopping district is a major employer of people. IKEA Croydon, when it was built in 1992, brought many non-skilled jobs to Croydon. The store, which is a total size of 23,000 m2, took over the former site of Croydon Power station, which had led to the unemployment of many skilled workers. In May 2006, the expansion of IKEA made it the fifth biggest employer in Croydon.

Croydon town centre is also a major retail centre, and home to many high street and department stores as well as designer boutiques. The main town centre shopping areas are on the North End precinct, in the Whitgift Centre, Centrale and St George&#x27;s Walk. Croydon&#x27;s main market is Surrey Street Market, which has a royal charter dating back to 1276. Shopping areas outside the town centre include the Valley Park retail complex, Croydon Colonnades, Croydon Fiveways, and the Waddon Goods Park.

In research from 2010 on retail footprint, Croydon ranked 29th in Britain in terms of retail expenditure at £770 million, sixth in the Greater London area. The 2010 results were a decline from the 2005 figures, when Croydon was 21st in Britain and second in London, with £909 million in expenditures.

In 2007, Croydon leapt up the annual business growth league table, with a 14% rise in new firms trading in the borough after 125 new companies started up, increasing the number from 900 to 1,025, enabling the town, which has also won the Enterprising Britain Award and &quot;the most enterprising borough in London&quot; award, to jump from 31 to 14 in the table.
Tramlink created many jobs when it opened in 2000, not only for drivers but for engineers as well. Many of the people involved came from Croydon, which was the original hub of the system. Retail stores inside both Centrale and the Whitgift Centre as well as on North End employ people regularly and create many jobs, especially at Christmas. As well as the new building of Park Place, which will create yet more jobs, so will the regeneration of Croydon, called Croydon Vision 2020, highlighted in the Croydon Expo which includes the Croydon Gateway, Wellesley Square, Central One plus much more.

Croydon is a major office area in the south east of England, being the largest outside of central London. Many large companies based in Europe and worldwide have European or British headquarters in the town. American International Group (AIG) has offices in No. 1 Croydon, formerly the NLA Tower, shared with Liberata, Pegasus and the Institute of Public Finance. AIG is the sixth-largest company in the world according to the 2007 Forbes Global 2000 list. The Swiss company Nestlé has its UK headquarters in the Nestlé Tower, on the site of the formerly proposed Park Place shopping centre. Real Digital International has developed a purpose-built factory on Purley Way equipped with &quot;the most sophisticated production equipment and technical solutions&quot;. ntl:Telewest, now Virgin Media, has offices at Communications House, from the Telewest side when it was known as Croydon Cable.

The Home Office UK Visas and Immigration department has its headquarters in Lunar House in Central Croydon. In 1981, Superdrug opened a distribution centre and office complex at Beddington Lane. The head office of international engineering and management consultant Mott MacDonald is located in Mott MacDonald House on Sydenham Road, one of four offices they occupy in the town centre. BT has large offices in Prospect East in Central Croydon. The Royal Bank of Scotland also has large offices in Purley, south of Croydon. Direct Line also has an office opposite Taberner House. Other companies with offices in Croydon include Lloyds TSB, Merrill Lynch and Balfour Beatty. Ann Summers used to have its headquarters in the borough but has moved to the Wapses Lodge Roundabout in Tandridge.

The Council declared bankruptcy via a section 114 notice in December 2020.

==Transport==
===Rail===

East Croydon and West Croydon are the main stations in the borough.
South Croydon railway station is also a railway station in Croydon, but it is less prominent.

East Croydon is served by Govia Thameslink Railway, operating under the Southern and Thameslink brands. Services travel via the Brighton Main Line north to London Victoria, London Bridge, London St Pancras, Luton Airport, Bedford, Cambridge and Peterborough and south to Gatwick Airport, Ore, Brighton, Littlehampton, Bognor Regis, Southampton and Portsmouth. East Croydon is the largest and busiest station in Croydon and the third busiest in London, excluding Travelcard Zone 1.

East Croydon was served by long-distance Arriva CrossCountry services to Birmingham and the North of England until they were withdrawn in December 2008.

West Croydon is served by London Overground and Southern services north to Highbury &amp; Islington, London Bridge and London Victoria, and south to Sutton and Epsom Downs.

South Croydon is mainly served by Network Rail services operated by Southern for suburban lines to and from London Bridge, London Victoria and the eastern part of Surrey.

Croydon is one of only five London Boroughs not to have at least one London Underground station within its boundaries, with the closest tube station being Morden.

===Bus===

A sizeable bus infrastructure which is part of the London Buses network operates from a hub at West Croydon bus station. The original bus station opened in May 1985, closing in October 2014. A new bus station opened in October 2016.

Addington Village Interchange is a regional bus terminal in Addington Village which has an interchange between Tramlink and bus services in the remote area. Services are operated under contract by Arriva London, London Central, Metrobus, Quality Line, Selkent and Transport UK London Bus.

===Tram===

The Tramlink light rail system opened in 2000, serving the borough and surrounding areas. Its network consists of three lines, from Elmers End to West Croydon, from Beckenham to West Croydon, and from New Addington to Wimbledon, with all three lines running via the Croydon loop on which it is centred. It is also the only tram system in London, but there is another light rail system, the Docklands Light Railway. It serves Mitcham, Woodside, Addiscombe and the Purley Way retail and industrial area amongst others.

===Road===
Croydon is linked into the national motorway network via the M23 and M25 orbital motorway. The M25 skirts the south of the borough, linking Croydon with other parts of London and the surrounding counties; the M23 branches from the M25 close to Coulsdon, linking the town with the south coast, Crawley, Reigate, and Gatwick Airport. The A23 connects the borough with the motorways. The A23 is the major trunk road through Croydon, linking it with central London, East Sussex, Horsham, and Littlehaven. The old London to Brighton road passes through the west of the borough on Purley Way, bypassing the commercial centre of Croydon which it once did.

The A22 and A23 are the major trunk roads through Croydon. These both run north–south, connecting to each other in Purley. The A22 connects Croydon, its starting point, to East Grinstead, Tunbridge Wells, Uckfield, and Eastbourne. Other major roads generally radiate spoke-like from the town centre. The A23 road cuts right through Croydon, and it starts from London and links to Brighton and Gatwick Airport. Wellesley Road is an urban dual carriageway which cuts through the middle of the central business district. It was constructed in the 1960s as part of a planned ring road for Croydon and includes an underpass, which allows traffic to avoid going into the town centre.

===Air===
The closest international airport to Croydon is Gatwick Airport, which is located from the town centre. Gatwick Airport opened in August 1930 as an aerodrome and is a major international operational base for British Airways, EasyJet and Virgin Atlantic. It currently handles around 35 million passengers a year, making it London&#x27;s second largest airport, and the second busiest airport in the United Kingdom after Heathrow. Heathrow, London City and Luton airports all lie within a two-hour drive of Croydon. Gatwick and Luton Airports are connected to Croydon by frequent direct trains, while Heathrow is accessible by the route SL7 bus.

===Cycling===
Although hilly, Croydon is compact and has few major trunk roads running through it. It is on one of the Connect2 schemes which are part of the National Cycle Network route running around Croydon. The North Downs, an area of outstanding natural beauty popular with both on- and off-road cyclists, is so close to Croydon that part of the park lies within the borough boundary, and there are routes into the park almost from the civic centre.

===Travel to work===
Below is a table listing transport methods as used by residents aged 16 to 74 according to a 2011 survey.
==Public services==

Home Office policing in Croydon is provided by the Metropolitan Police. The force&#x27;s Croydon arm has its head offices for policing on Park Lane next to the Fairfield Halls and Croydon College in central Croydon. Public transport is co-ordinated by Transport for London. Statutory emergency fire and rescue service is provided by the London Fire Brigade, which has five stations in Croydon.

===Health services===
NHS South West London Clinical Commissioning Group (a merger of the previous NHS Croydon CCG and others in South West London) is the body responsible for public health and for planning and funding health services in the borough. Croydon has 227 GPs in 64 practices, 156 dentists in 51 practices, 166 pharmacists and 70 optometrists in 28 practices.

Croydon University Hospital, formerly known as Mayday Hospital, built on a site in Thornton Heath at the west of Croydon&#x27;s boundaries with Merton, is a large NHS hospital administered by Croydon Health Services NHS Trust. Former names of the hospital include the Croydon Union Infirmary from 1885 to 1923 and the Mayday Road Hospital from 1923 to around 1930. It is a District General Hospital with a 24-hour accident and emergency department. NHS Direct has a regional centre based at the hospital. The NHS Trust also provides services at Purley War Memorial Hospital, in Purley. Croydon General Hospital was on London Road but services transferred to Mayday, as the size of this hospital was insufficient to cope with the growing population of the borough. Sickle Cell and Thalassaemia Centre and the Emergency Minor Treatment Centre are other smaller hospitals operated by the Mayday in the borough. Cane Hill was a psychiatric hospital in Coulsdon.

===Waste management===
Waste management is co-ordinated by the local authority. Unlike other waste disposal authorities in Greater London, Croydon&#x27;s rubbish is collected independently and is not part of a shared waste authority unit. Locally produced inert waste for disposal is sent to landfill in the south of Croydon. There have recently been calls by the ODPM to bring waste management powers to the Greater London Authority, giving it a waste function. The Mayor of London has made repeated attempts to bring the different waste authorities together, to form a single waste authority in London. This has faced significant opposition from existing authorities. However, it has had significant support from all other sectors and the surrounding regions managing most of London&#x27;s waste. Croydon has the joint best recycling rate in London, at 36%, but the refuse collectors have been criticised for their rushed performance lacking quality. Croydon&#x27;s distribution network operator for electricity is EDF Energy Networks; there are no power stations in the borough. Thames Water manages Croydon&#x27;s drinking and waste water; water supplies are sourced from several local reservoirs, including Beckton and King George VI. Before 1971, Croydon Corporation was responsible for water treatment in the borough.

===London Fire Brigade===
The borough of Croydon is 86.52 km2, populating approximately 340,000 people. There are five fire stations within the borough; Addington (two pumping appliances), Croydon (two pumping appliances, incident response unit, fire rescue unit and a USAR appliance), Norbury (two pumping appliances), Purley (one pumping appliance) and Woodside (one pumping appliance). Purley has the largest station ground, but dealt with the fewest incidents during 2006/07.

The fire stations, as part of the Community Fire Safety scheme, visited 49 schools in 2006/2007.

===Education===
The borough, compared with other London boroughs, has the highest number of schools in it, with 26% of its population under 20 years old. They include primary schools (95), secondary schools (21) and four further education establishments. Croydon College has its main building in Central Croydon, and it is a high-rise building. John Ruskin College is one of the other colleges in the borough, located in Addington, and Coulsdon College in Coulsdon. South Norwood has been the home of Spurgeon&#x27;s College, a world-famous Baptist theological college, since 1923; Spurgeon&#x27;s is located on South Norwood Hill and currently has 1,000 students. The London Borough of Croydon is the local education authority for the borough.

Overall, Croydon was ranked 77th out of all the local education authorities in the UK, up from 92nd in 2007. In 2007, the Croydon LEA was ranked 81st out of 149 in the country – and 21st in Greater London – based on the percentage of pupils attaining at least 5 A* – C grades at GCSE including maths and English (37.8% compared with the national average of 46.7%). The most successful public sector schools in 2010 were Harris City Academy Crystal Palace and Coloma Convent Girls&#x27; School. The percentage of pupils achieving 5 A* – C GCSEs including maths and English was above the national average in 2010.

===Libraries===
The borough of Croydon has 14 libraries, a joint library and a mobile library. Many of the libraries were built a long time ago and therefore have become outdated, so the council started updating a few, including Ashburton Library, which moved from its former spot into the state-of-the-art Ashburton Learning Village complex (on the former site of the old &#x27;A Block&#x27; of Ashburton Community School). The library is now on one floor. This format was planned to be rolled out across all of the council&#x27;s libraries but was deemed too costly to implement everywhere.

South Norwood Library, New Addington Library, Shirley Library, Selsdon Library, Sanderstead Library, Broad Green, Purley Library, Coulsdon Library and Bradmore Green Library are examples of older council libraries. The main library is Croydon Central Library, which holds many references, newspaper archives and a tourist information point (one of three in southeast London). Upper Norwood Library is a joint library with the London Borough of Lambeth. This means that both councils fund the library and its resources, but even though Lambeth has nearly doubled its funding for the library in the past several years, Croydon has kept its contribution the same, leading to concerns about the library&#x27;s future.

==Sport and leisure==

The borough has been criticised in the past for not having enough leisure facilities, which contributed to Croydon being rated a three-star borough. Thornton Heath&#x27;s ageing sports centre was demolished and replaced by a newer, more modern leisure centre. South Norwood Leisure Centre was closed down in 2006 so that it could be demolished and re-designed from scratch like Thornton Heath, at an estimated cost of around £10 million.

South Norwood Forum had called for the new centre to be built on the site of the old one, but the Conservative council decided a refurbishment would be more economical than a full rebuild, causing some controversy.

Sport Croydon, is the commercial arm for leisure in the borough. Fusion currently provides leisure services for the council, a contract previously held by Parkwood Leisure.

Football teams include Crystal Palace F.C., which play at Selhurst Park, and in the Premier League. AFC Croydon Athletic, whose nickname is The Rams, is a football club who play at Croydon Sports Arena along with Croydon F.C., both in the Combined Counties League and Holmesdale, who were founded in South Norwood but currently play on Oakley Road in Bromley, and compete in the Southern Counties East Football League.

Non-football teams that play in Croydon are Streatham-Croydon RFC, a rugby union club in Thornton Heath who play at Frant Road, as well as South London Storm Rugby League Club, based at Streatham&#x27;s ground, which compete in the Rugby League Conference. The London Olympians are an American Football team that play in Division 1 South in the British American Football League. The Croydon Pirates are one of the most successful teams in the British Baseball Federation, though their ground is actually located just outside the borough in Sutton.

There are a number of field hockey clubs based in and around Croydon that are part of the South East Hockey and the London Hockey league structures. Current hockey clubs in and around the area are Addiscombe, Croydon Trinity Whitgiftian, Kenley, Purley, Purley Walcountians and Sanderstead.

Croydon Amphibians SC plays in the Division 2 British Water Polo League. The team won the National League Division 2 in 2008.

Croydon has over 120 parks and open spaces, ranging from the Selsdon Wood Nature Reserve to many recreation grounds and sports fields scattered throughout the Borough. This provides many places for rambling. The Wandle Trail links central London to Croydon and then The Vanguard Way links East Croydon to the South Coast, intersecting The London Loop, the North Downs Way and the Pilgrims&#x27; Way.

==Culture==

Croydon has cut funding to the Warehouse Theatre.

In 2005, Croydon Council drew up a &quot;Public Art Strategy&quot;, with a vision intended to be accessible and to enhance people&#x27;s enjoyment of their surroundings. The public art strategy delivered a new event called &quot;Croydon&#x27;s Summer Festival&quot; hosted in Lloyd Park. The festival consists of two days of events. The first is called &quot;Croydon&#x27;s World Party&quot; which is a free one-day event with three stages featuring world, jazz and dance music from the UK and internationally. The final day&#x27;s event is the &quot;Croydon Mela&quot;, a day of music with a mix of traditional Asian culture and east-meets-western club beats across four stages, as well as dozens of food stalls and a funfair. It has attracted crowds of over 50,000 people. The strategy also created a creative industries hub in Old Town, ensured that public art is included in developments such as College Green and Ruskin Square and investigated the possibility of gallery space in the Cultural Quarter.

Fairfield Halls, Arnhem Gallery and the Ashcroft Theatre show productions that are held throughout the year such as drama, ballet, opera and pantomimes, and can be converted to show films. It also contains the Arnhem Gallery civic hall and an art gallery. Other cultural activities, including shopping and exhibitions, are Surrey Street Market which is mainly a meat and vegetables market near the main shopping environment of Croydon. The market has a Royal Charter dating back to 1276. Airport House is a newly refurbished conference and exhibition centre inside part of Croydon Airport. The Whitgift Centre is the current main shopping centre in the borough. Centrale is a new shopping centre that houses many more familiar names, as well as Croydon&#x27;s House of Fraser.

==Media==
There are three local newspapers which operate within the borough. The Croydon Advertiser began life in 1869, and was in 2005 the third-best selling paid-for weekly newspaper in London. The Advertiser is Croydon&#x27;s major paid-for weekly paper and is on sale every Friday in five geographical editions: Croydon; Sutton &amp; Epsom; Coulsdon &amp; Purley; New Addington; and Caterham. The paper converted from a broadsheet to a compact (tabloid) format on 31 March 2006. It was bought by Northcliffe Media which is part of the Daily Mail and General Trust group on 6 July 2007. The Croydon Post is a free newspaper available across the borough and is operated by the Advertiser group. The circulation of the newspaper was in 2008 more than the main title published by the Advertiser Group.

The Croydon Guardian is another local weekly paper, which is paid for at newsagents but free at Croydon Council libraries and via deliveries. It is one of the best-circulated local newspapers in London and once had the highest circulation in Croydon with around one thousand more copies distributed than The Post.

The borough is served by the London regional versions of BBC and ITV coverage, from either the Crystal Palace or Croydon transmitters.

Croydon Television is owned by Croydon broadcasting corporation. Broadcasting from studios in Croydon, the CBC is fully independent. It does not receive any government or local council grants or funding and is supported by donations, sponsorship and by commercial advertising.

Capital Radio and Gold serve the borough. Local BBC radio is provided by BBC London 94.9. Other stations include Kiss 100, Absolute Radio and Magic 105.4 FM from Bauer Radio and Capital Xtra, Heart 106.2 and Smooth Radio from Global Radio. In 2012, Croydon Radio, an online and FM radio station, and the first official FM radio station for the London Borough of Croydon, began serving the area. The borough is also home to its own local TV station, &quot;Croydon TV&quot;.

==Twinning==
The London Borough of Croydon is twinned with the municipality of Arnhem which is located in the east of the Netherlands. The city of Arnhem is one of the 20 largest cities in the Netherlands. They have been twinned since 1946 after both towns had suffered extensive bomb damage during the recently ended war. There is also a Guyanese link supported by the council.

==Investment in the tobacco industry==
In September 2009 it was revealed that Croydon Council had around £5.66 million of its pension fund for employees invested in shares in British American Tobacco. Members of the opposition Labour group on the council, who had banned such shareholdings when in control, described this as &quot;dealing in death&quot; and inconsistent with the council&#x27;s tobacco control strategy.

In 2014, it was reported that the Croydown Council had divested its pension funds from tobacco-related holdings, in addition to nuclear power and weapons.

==Freedom of the Borough==
The following people and military units have received the Freedom of the Borough of Croydon.

===Individuals===
* Michael Owuo Jr.: 19 May 2023.
* Merah Louise Smith: 19 May 2023.
===Military units===
* 41 (Princess Louise&#x27;s Kensington) Signal Squadron Royal Corps of Signals (Volunteers): 1993. 
* 151 Regiment RLC (Volunteers): 1993. 
* 2 Company 10th Battalion The Parachute Regiment (Volunteers): 1993.
* &quot;C&quot; Squadron Kent and Sharpshooters Yeomanry The Royal Yeomanry: 1993.
* 2nd Battalion The Rifles: 2010.
==See also==
* List of people from Croydon
* UK postcodes – a note of why and how postcodes CR0 and CR9 differ from the others

==References==
==External links==

* London Borough of Croydon
* Croydon Television 
* Visit Croydon
* map of croydon districts superimposed on google</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26888" start="4" end="29" title="London Borough of Croydon" label="London Borough of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211690" start="38" end="45" title="London borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394500" start="49" end="61" title="South London" label="South London"/>
<link wikidata="Q144298" start="71" end="83" title="Outer London" label="Outer London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="254" end="261" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123194" start="336" end="350" title="Thornton Heath" label="Thornton Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463831" start="352" end="360" title="Coulsdon" label="Coulsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118905" start="362" end="368" title="Purley, London" label="Purley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265962" start="370" end="383" title="South Norwood" label="South Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q389071" start="385" end="392" title="Norbury" label="Norbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005189" start="394" end="407" title="New Addington" label="New Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q669505" start="413" end="420" title="Selsdon" label="Selsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="450" end="463" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="560" end="566" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="729" end="741" title="Metropolitan area" label="metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177612" start="804" end="829" title="County Borough of Croydon" label="County Borough of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176168" start="835" end="869" title="Coulsdon and Purley Urban District" label="Coulsdon and Purley Urban District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="901" end="907" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189676" start="930" end="960" title="Croydon London Borough Council" label="Croydon London Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670287" start="977" end="992" title="London Councils" label="London Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333661" start="1051" end="1068" title="Economy of Croydon" label="economic strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="1094" end="1109" title="Croydon Airport" label="Croydon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1415" end="1430" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177612" start="1491" end="1510" title="County Borough of Croydon" label="Croydon Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="1538" end="1549" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="1652" end="1671" title="Croydon Vision 2020" label="Croydon Vision 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="1841" end="1855" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="1860" end="1871" title="City of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570652" start="2027" end="2044" title="List of Fairtrade settlements" label="Fairtrade borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733119" start="2052" end="2072" title="Fairtrade Foundation" label="Fairtrade Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44136" start="2120" end="2136" title="Fairtrade Town" label="Fairtrade status"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="2197" end="2218" title="South East of England" label="South East of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430286" start="2296" end="2311" title="Fairfield Halls" label="Fairfield Halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969295" start="2353" end="2370" title="Warehouse Theatre" label="Warehouse Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189651" start="2485" end="2503" title="Croydon Clocktower" label="Croydon Clocktower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="2524" end="2536" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236404" start="2599" end="2616" title="David Lean Cinema" label="David Lean Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940827" start="2716" end="2722" title="Museum of Croydon" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="2894" end="2908" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="2923" end="2942" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1066373" start="2958" end="2971" title="Selhurst Park" label="Selhurst Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268251" start="2975" end="2983" title="Selhurst" label="Selhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657356" start="3051" end="3065" title="Croydon Palace" label="Croydon Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681183" start="3384" end="3400" title="Addington Palace" label="Addington Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="3482" end="3507" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishops of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498884" start="3509" end="3525" title="Shirley Windmill" label="Shirley Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="3571" end="3585" title="Greater London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q796940" start="3614" end="3625" title="BRIT School" label="BRIT School"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="3664" end="3674" title="Brit Awards" label="BRIT Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="3710" end="3715" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q15897" start="3717" end="3730" title="Amy Winehouse" label="Amy Winehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q183519" start="3735" end="3746" title="Leona Lewis" label="Leona Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3811" end="3829" title="Croydon#History" label="History of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="3900" end="3906" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="4046" end="4057" title="Old English" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157806" start="4117" end="4123" title="crocus" label="crocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183329" start="4155" end="4169" title="Saffron Walden" label="Saffron Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="4218" end="4225" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="4360" end="4384" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q317098" start="4386" end="4405" title="Archbishop Lanfranc" label="Archbishop Lanfranc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657356" start="4415" end="4429" title="Croydon Palace" label="Croydon Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="4449" end="4462" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="4511" end="4521" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="4537" end="4548" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646849" start="4572" end="4592" title="Surrey Street Market" label="Surrey Street Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q694233" start="4722" end="4741" title="Surrey Iron Railway" label="Surrey Iron Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663638" start="4816" end="4834" title="Brighton Main Line" label="London to Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="4925" end="4931" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="5052" end="5067" title="Croydon Airport" label="Croydon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="5139" end="5147" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8252257" start="5378" end="5397" title="British Airways Ltd" label="British Airways Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q106119" start="5457" end="5475" title="RAF Northolt" label="Northolt Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="5516" end="5532" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="5925" end="5940" title="London Heathrow Airport" label="London Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="5945" end="5967" title="London Gatwick Airport" label="London Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996484" start="6220" end="6235" title="Whitgift Centre" label="Whitgift Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q236678" start="6359" end="6374" title="Katharine, Duchess of Kent" label="Duchess of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567148" start="6389" end="6404" title="Whitgift School" label="Whitgift School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842970" start="6533" end="6564" title="Trinity School of John Whitgift" label="Trinity School of John Whitgift"/>
<link wikidata="Q29065" start="6702" end="6720" title="2011 England riots" label="2011 England riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915286" start="6722" end="6728" title="House of Reeves" label="Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307059" start="6815" end="6824" title="Reeves Corner tram stop" label="tram stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="6960" end="6979" title="Croydon Vision 2020" label="Croydon Vision 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="7005" end="7019" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189666" start="7246" end="7258" title="Croydon Expo" label="Croydon Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="7353" end="7367" title="ancient parish" label="ancient parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="7373" end="7380" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788898" start="7382" end="7391" title="Addington, London" label="Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463831" start="7393" end="7401" title="Coulsdon" label="Coulsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416166" start="7406" end="7417" title="Sanderstead" label="Sanderstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007851" start="7458" end="7483" title="improvement commissioners" label="improvement commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664281" start="7524" end="7544" title="Local board of health" label="local board district"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="7576" end="7593" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="7760" end="7774" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386325" start="7801" end="7822" title="Surrey County Council" label="Surrey County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="7849" end="7855" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q914752" start="7873" end="7884" title="Lord-lieutenant" label="lieutenancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="8019" end="8031" title="rural parish" label="rural parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189696" start="8045" end="8067" title="Croydon Rural District" label="Croydon Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176168" start="8088" end="8122" title="Coulsdon and Purley Urban District" label="Coulsdon and Purley Urban District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118905" start="8162" end="8168" title="Purley, London" label="Purley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610502" start="8520" end="8528" title="Farleigh, Surrey" label="Farleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="8559" end="8571" title="urban parish" label="urban parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670449" start="8702" end="8728" title="London Government Act 1963" label="London Government Act 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177612" start="8814" end="8839" title="County Borough of Croydon" label="County Borough of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090165" start="9102" end="9123" title="Chelsham and Farleigh" label="Chelsham and Farleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="9177" end="9188" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q349084" start="9324" end="9349" title="local authority district" label="local government district"/>
<link wikidata="Q26483913" start="9850" end="9867" title="Croydon Town Hall" label="Croydon Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373438" start="10019" end="10043" title="Bernard Weatherill House" label="Bernard Weatherill House"/>
<link wikidata="Q109058286" start="10105" end="10121" title="Mayor of Croydon" label="Mayor of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="10193" end="10208" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005479" start="10240" end="10258" title="Croydon and Sutton (London Assembly constituency)" label="Croydon and Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077455" start="10380" end="10393" title="Croydon North (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Croydon North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335881" start="10395" end="10410" title="Croydon Central (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Croydon Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231676" start="10415" end="10428" title="Croydon South (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Croydon South"/>
<link wikidata="Q30179052" start="10430" end="10454" title="Sarah Jones (politician)" label="Sarah Jones (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613711" start="10535" end="10558" title="Steve Reed (politician)" label="Steve Reed (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972528" start="10601" end="10612" title="Chris Philp" label="Chris Philp"/>
<link wikidata="Q26483913" start="10643" end="10660" title="Croydon Town Hall" label="Croydon Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="11871" end="11888" title="Queen Alexandra" label="Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740296" start="11951" end="11958" title="Wrotham" label="Wrotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q82337" start="11973" end="11987" title="Portland stone" label="Portland stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="12008" end="12020" title="Westmorland" label="Westmoreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="12021" end="12026" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940827" start="13089" end="13106" title="Museum of Croydon" label="Museum of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236404" start="13184" end="13201" title="David Lean Cinema" label="David Lean Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189651" start="13215" end="13233" title="Croydon Clocktower" label="Croydon Clocktower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380957" start="13623" end="13635" title="Ruskin House" label="Ruskin House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="13674" end="13680" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q211931" start="13698" end="13710" title="Co-operative Party" label="Co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548262" start="14190" end="14209" title="Georgina King Lewis" label="Georgina King Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768326" start="14232" end="14265" title="Croydon United Temperance Council" label="Croydon United Temperance Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="14504" end="14517" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120576" start="14774" end="14800" title="Communist Party of Britain" label="Communist Party of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q296866" start="14827" end="14841" title="Geraint Davies (Labour politician)" label="Geraint Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335881" start="14854" end="14869" title="Croydon Central (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Croydon Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758237" start="14925" end="14939" title="Andrew Pelling" label="Andrew Pelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q988068" start="14990" end="15002" title="Swansea West (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Swansea West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673044" start="15013" end="15027" title="Taberner House" label="Taberner House"/>
<link wikidata="Q920809" start="15545" end="15558" title="Pirelli Tower" label="Pirelli Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872" start="16265" end="16285" title="M25 motorway" label="M25 orbital motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301760" start="16337" end="16346" title="Tandridge (district)" label="Tandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q208201" start="16402" end="16427" title="London Borough of Bromley" label="London Borough of Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="16467" end="16474" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="16479" end="16488" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q320378" start="16506" end="16512" title="London Borough of Sutton" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q32504" start="16517" end="16523" title="London Borough of Merton" label="Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187" start="16588" end="16600" title="River Wandle" label="River Wandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="16648" end="16659" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055298" start="16908" end="16917" title="North End, Croydon" label="North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137923" start="17048" end="17058" title="Park Place (Croydon)" label="Park Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014002" start="17146" end="17162" title="CR postcode area" label="CR postcode area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389916" start="17224" end="17226" title="SE postcode area" label="SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259075" start="17231" end="17233" title="SW postcode area" label="SW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788898" start="17452" end="17461" title="Addington, London" label="Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824155" start="17649" end="17659" title="Addiscombe" label="Addiscombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q800699" start="17790" end="17810" title="East Croydon station" label="East Croydon station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817234" start="17812" end="17821" title="Ashburton, London" label="Ashburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307425" start="17987" end="17998" title="Broad Green, Croydon" label="Broad Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167573" start="18094" end="18100" title="Coombe, Croydon" label="Coombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463831" start="18230" end="18238" title="Coulsdon" label="Coulsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="18383" end="18390" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122909" start="18429" end="18443" title="Crystal Palace, London" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="18498" end="18524" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="London Boroughs of Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="18526" end="18535" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q215030" start="18537" end="18545" title="London Borough of Lewisham" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q208201" start="18550" end="18557" title="London Borough of Bromley" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430232" start="18559" end="18568" title="Fairfield, Croydon" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430286" start="18607" end="18622" title="Fairfield Halls" label="Fairfield Halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469222" start="18642" end="18652" title="Forestdale, London" label="Forestdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646404" start="18817" end="18829" title="Hamsey Green" label="Hamsey Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="18863" end="18874" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389431" start="18894" end="18900" title="Kenley" label="Kenley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552255" start="18952" end="18962" title="Green Belt" label="Green Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005189" start="19014" end="19027" title="New Addington" label="New Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q389071" start="19123" end="19130" title="Norbury" label="Norbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262607" start="19194" end="19210" title="Norwood New Town" label="Norwood New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900946" start="19271" end="19284" title="Monks Orchard" label="Monks Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225586" start="19377" end="19390" title="Pollards Hill" label="Pollards Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118905" start="19505" end="19511" title="Purley, London" label="Purley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416166" start="19624" end="19635" title="Sanderstead" label="Sanderstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="19725" end="19739" title="Greater London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268251" start="19741" end="19749" title="Selhurst" label="Selhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q796940" start="19831" end="19842" title="BRIT School" label="BRIT School"/>
<link wikidata="Q669505" start="19844" end="19851" title="Selsdon" label="Selsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498666" start="20017" end="20024" title="Shirley, London" label="Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498884" start="20063" end="20079" title="Shirley Windmill" label="Shirley Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566929" start="20081" end="20094" title="South Croydon" label="South Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567148" start="20223" end="20238" title="Whitgift School" label="Whitgift School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996486" start="20251" end="20270" title="Whitgift Foundation" label="Whitgift Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265962" start="20272" end="20285" title="South Norwood" label="South Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123194" start="20436" end="20450" title="Thornton Heath" label="Thornton Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189706" start="20537" end="20543" title="Mayday University Hospital" label="Mayday"/>
<link wikidata="Q123292" start="20545" end="20558" title="Upper Norwood" label="Upper Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996918" start="20622" end="20628" title="Waddon" label="Waddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261318" start="20672" end="20682" title="Purley Way" label="Purley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817234" start="20724" end="20732" title="Woodside, London" label="Woodside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817234" start="20799" end="20813" title="Woodside Green" label="Woodside Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610387" start="20855" end="20865" title="Whyteleafe" label="Whyteleafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261318" start="21057" end="21067" title="Purley Way" label="Purley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337479" start="21081" end="21084" title="A23 road" label="A23"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="21253" end="21257" title="IKEA" label="IKEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566929" start="21429" end="21436" title="South Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118905" start="21440" end="21446" title="Purley, London" label="Purley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="21640" end="21654" title="Wellesley Road" label="Wellesley Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="21672" end="21688" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="21810" end="21829" title="Croydon Vision 2020" label="Croydon Vision 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189707" start="21985" end="22002" title="Croydon Underpass" label="Croydon Underpass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="22045" end="22059" title="Wellesley Road" label="Wellesley Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189669" start="22176" end="22191" title="Croydon Flyover" label="Croydon Flyover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673044" start="22232" end="22246" title="Taberner House" label="Taberner House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316056" start="22278" end="22289" title="Duppas Hill" label="Duppas Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139238" start="22324" end="22330" title="Sutton, London" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321706" start="22335" end="22355" title="Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="22533" end="22544" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785211" start="22584" end="22599" title="Addington Hills" label="Addington Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231487" start="22802" end="22818" title="Great North Wood" label="Great North Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104233" start="22867" end="22881" title="Sydenham, London" label="Sydenham Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893684" start="22914" end="22925" title="River Effra" label="River Effra"/>
<link wikidata="Q148349" start="23042" end="23049" title="Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q385060" start="23051" end="23061" title="Camberwell" label="Camberwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q122892" start="23075" end="23082" title="Bromley" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187" start="23259" end="23271" title="River Wandle" label="River Wandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068817" start="23275" end="23287" title="chalk stream" label="chalk stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="23322" end="23334" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166359" start="23347" end="23357" title="Wandsworth" label="Wandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465220" start="23362" end="23368" title="Putney" label="Putney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996918" start="23397" end="23403" title="Waddon" label="Waddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="23420" end="23429" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q64589543" start="23486" end="23515" title="Humid temperate climate" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673044" start="24102" end="24116" title="Taberner House" label="Taberner House"/>
<link wikidata="Q920809" start="24156" end="24169" title="Pirelli Tower" label="Pirelli Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="24173" end="24178" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261800" start="24188" end="24200" title="Nestlé Tower" label="Nestlé Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="24232" end="24238" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393050" start="24277" end="24291" title="Tall buildings in London" label="tall buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398730" start="24343" end="24359" title="Wellesley Square" label="Wellesley Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571368" start="24388" end="24399" title="London Plan" label="London Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043088" start="24512" end="24525" title="No. 1 Croydon" label="No. 1 Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q800699" start="24595" end="24615" title="East Croydon station" label="East Croydon station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798042" start="24776" end="24786" title="Threepence (British coin)" label="Threepence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243103" start="24875" end="24886" title="Lunar House" label="Lunar House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780318" start="24984" end="24996" title="Apollo House (Croydon)" label="Apollo House"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="25043" end="25059" title="Project Apollo" label="US Moon landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="25111" end="25123" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="25394" end="25413" title="Croydon Vision 2020" label="Croydon Vision 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398730" start="25568" end="25584" title="Wellesley Square" label="Wellesley Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="25672" end="25689" title="100 George Street" label="100 George Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="26599" end="26614" title="Croydon Airport" label="Croydon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="26757" end="26787" title="Heathrow International Airport" label="Heathrow International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189651" start="26963" end="26981" title="Croydon Clocktower" label="Croydon Clocktower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="27007" end="27019" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236404" start="27176" end="27193" title="David Lean Cinema" label="David Lean Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q55260" start="27214" end="27224" title="David Lean" label="David Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940827" start="27231" end="27248" title="Museum of Croydon" label="Museum of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189648" start="27253" end="27276" title="Croydon Central Library" label="Croydon Central Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498884" start="27531" end="27547" title="Shirley Windmill" label="Shirley Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="27618" end="27624" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="27647" end="27662" title="Listed building" label="Grade II listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742662" start="27702" end="27723" title="Heritage Lottery Fund" label="Heritage Lottery Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681183" start="27725" end="27741" title="Addington Palace" label="Addington Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788898" start="27772" end="27781" title="Addington, London" label="Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055298" start="27989" end="27998" title="North End, Croydon" label="North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062164" start="28059" end="28067" title="Centrale (shopping centre)" label="Centrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996484" start="28088" end="28103" title="Whitgift Centre" label="Whitgift Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969295" start="28122" end="28139" title="Warehouse Theatre" label="Warehouse Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380964" start="28227" end="28242" title="Croydon Gateway" label="Croydon Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261800" start="28254" end="28266" title="Nestlé Tower" label="Nestlé Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="28294" end="28300" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430286" start="28414" end="28429" title="Fairfield Halls" label="Fairfield Halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="28524" end="28527" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="28568" end="28571" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036633" start="28579" end="28593" title="World of Sport (UK TV series)" label="World of Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804758" start="28611" end="28627" title="Ashcroft Theatre" label="Ashcroft Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310" start="28636" end="28650" title="Arnhem" label="Arnhem Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657356" start="28653" end="28667" title="Croydon Palace" label="Croydon Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="28700" end="28724" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="28782" end="28791" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="28802" end="28813" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189647" start="28860" end="28876" title="Croydon Cemetery" label="Croydon Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200002" start="28970" end="28983" title="Derek Bentley" label="Derek Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881036" start="29017" end="29031" title="Mitcham Common" label="Mitcham Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="29046" end="29057" title="common land" label="common land"/>
<link wikidata="Q320378" start="29093" end="29099" title="London Borough of Sutton" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q32504" start="29104" end="29110" title="London Borough of Merton" label="Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q796940" start="29208" end="29219" title="BRIT School" label="BRIT School"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="29305" end="29331" title="BRIT Awards" label="BRIT Awards Music Ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385803" start="29365" end="29379" title="Kellie Shirley" label="Kellie Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15897" start="29381" end="29394" title="Amy Winehouse" label="Amy Winehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q183519" start="29396" end="29407" title="Leona Lewis" label="Leona Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="29409" end="29414" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q237548" start="29416" end="29425" title="Kate Nash" label="Kate Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q352518" start="29427" end="29438" title="Dane Bowers" label="Dane Bowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q156322" start="29440" end="29451" title="Katie Melua" label="Katie Melua"/>
<link wikidata="Q325357" start="29456" end="29473" title="Lyndon David-Hall" label="Lyndon David-Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596684" start="29475" end="29481" title="Croydon Grants" label="Grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535134" start="29550" end="29560" title="Vue (cinema)" label="Vue cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646849" start="29563" end="29583" title="Surrey Street Market" label="Surrey Street Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="29652" end="29676" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189677" start="29759" end="29774" title="Croydon Minster" label="Croydon Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="29827" end="29838" title="Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="30068" end="30088" title="George Gilbert Scott" label="George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="30469" end="30481" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="30567" end="30578" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="30662" end="30676" title="Greater London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q98108964" start="31080" end="31094" title="owner occupied" label="owner occupied"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31221" end="31233" title="The Exchange (Croydon)" label="The Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31238" end="31250" title="Bridge House (Croydon)" label="Bridge House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975746" start="31252" end="31256" title="IYLO" label="IYLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398730" start="31258" end="31274" title="Wellesley Square" label="Wellesley Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736731" start="31309" end="31320" title="Altitude 25" label="Altitude 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="31335" end="31354" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430286" start="32268" end="32283" title="Fairfield Halls" label="Fairfield Halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="32603" end="32629" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 United Kingdom census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="32844" end="32851" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="32855" end="32868" title="irreligious" label="non-religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189677" start="32890" end="32905" title="Croydon Minster" label="Croydon Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="33125" end="33138" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917817" start="33635" end="33652" title="Bishop of Croydon" label="Bishop of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33672" end="33681" title="Bishop#Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Lutheran and Anglican churches" label="suffragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028195" start="33696" end="33725" title="Anglican Diocese of Southwark" label="Anglican Diocese of Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q88328282" start="33768" end="33785" title="Rosemarie Mallett" label="Rosemarie Mallett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261318" start="34003" end="34013" title="Purley Way" label="Purley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="34063" end="34067" title="IKEA" label="IKEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189718" start="34222" end="34243" title="Croydon power stations" label="Croydon Power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308100" start="34455" end="34466" title="high street" label="high street"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="34471" end="34487" title="department store" label="department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055298" start="34567" end="34576" title="North End, Croydon" label="North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996484" start="34594" end="34609" title="Whitgift Centre" label="Whitgift Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062164" start="34611" end="34619" title="Centrale (shopping centre)" label="Centrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593200" start="34624" end="34645" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Walk" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="34667" end="34673" title="market (place)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646849" start="34677" end="34697" title="Surrey Street Market" label="Surrey Street Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912163" start="34797" end="34808" title="Valley Park Retail Area" label="Valley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148464" start="34825" end="34843" title="Colonnades Leisure Park" label="Croydon Colonnades"/>
<link wikidata="Q786032" start="35557" end="35565" title="Tramlink" label="Tramlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062164" start="35771" end="35779" title="Centrale (shopping centre)" label="Centrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996484" start="35788" end="35803" title="Whitgift Centre" label="Whitgift Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055298" start="35818" end="35827" title="North End, Croydon" label="North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137923" start="35930" end="35940" title="Park Place (Croydon)" label="Park Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="36019" end="36038" title="Croydon Vision 2020" label="Croydon Vision 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189666" start="36059" end="36071" title="Croydon Expo" label="Croydon Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380964" start="36091" end="36106" title="Croydon Gateway" label="Croydon Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398730" start="36108" end="36124" title="Wellesley Square" label="Wellesley Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043088" start="36126" end="36137" title="Central One" label="Central One"/>
<link wikidata="Q212235" start="36363" end="36391" title="American International Group" label="American International Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043088" start="36413" end="36426" title="No. 1 Croydon" label="No. 1 Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826359" start="36490" end="36517" title="Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy" label="Institute of Public Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134743" start="36587" end="36605" title="Forbes Global 2000" label="Forbes Global 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="36630" end="36636" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261800" start="36668" end="36680" title="Nestlé Tower" label="Nestlé Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137923" start="36719" end="36729" title="Park Place (Croydon)" label="Park Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697173" start="36921" end="36933" title="Telewest" label="ntl:Telewest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199764" start="36939" end="36951" title="Virgin Media" label="Virgin Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="37054" end="37065" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212028" start="37066" end="37090" title="UK Visas and Immigration" label="UK Visas and Immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243103" start="37126" end="37137" title="Lunar House" label="Lunar House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325340" start="37316" end="37330" title="Mott MacDonald" label="Mott MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="37436" end="37438" title="BT Group" label="BT"/>
<link wikidata="Q160126" start="37498" end="37520" title="Royal Bank of Scotland" label="Royal Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q325156" start="37573" end="37584" title="Direct Line" label="Direct Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673044" start="37613" end="37627" title="Taberner House" label="Taberner House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152847" start="37677" end="37687" title="Lloyds TSB" label="Lloyds TSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q334122" start="37689" end="37702" title="Merrill Lynch" label="Merrill Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q804920" start="37707" end="37721" title="Balfour Beatty" label="Balfour Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q579524" start="37723" end="37734" title="Ann Summers" label="Ann Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301760" start="37828" end="37837" title="Tandridge (district)" label="Tandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q122292587" start="37878" end="37896" title="section 114 notice" label="section 114 notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q800699" start="37942" end="37954" title="East Croydon railway station" label="East Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q801592" start="37959" end="37971" title="West Croydon railway station" label="West Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566932" start="38010" end="38039" title="South Croydon railway station" label="South Croydon railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="38069" end="38076" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18737011" start="38131" end="38155" title="Govia Thameslink Railway" label="Govia Thameslink Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258373" start="38177" end="38185" title="Southern (train operating company)" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663638" start="38233" end="38251" title="Brighton Main Line" label="Brighton Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="38261" end="38276" title="London Victoria railway station" label="London Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q801125" start="38278" end="38291" title="London Bridge railway station" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q720102" start="38293" end="38310" title="St Pancras railway station" label="London St Pancras"/>
<link wikidata="Q801135" start="38312" end="38325" title="Luton Airport Parkway railway station" label="Luton Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290621" start="38327" end="38334" title="Bedford railway station" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088356" start="38336" end="38345" title="Cambridge railway station" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206677" start="38350" end="38362" title="Peterborough railway station" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495884" start="38376" end="38391" title="Gatwick Airport railway station" label="Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818015" start="38393" end="38396" title="Ore railway station" label="Ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q800573" start="38398" end="38406" title="Brighton railway station" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780143" start="38408" end="38421" title="Littlehampton railway station" label="Littlehampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278205" start="38423" end="38435" title="Bognor Regis railway station" label="Bognor Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396008" start="38437" end="38448" title="Southampton Central railway station" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228512" start="38453" end="38463" title="Portsmouth Harbour railway station" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171881" start="38567" end="38584" title="List of stations in London fare zone 1" label="Travelcard Zone 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141120" start="38628" end="38647" title="Arriva CrossCountry" label="Arriva CrossCountry"/>
<link wikidata="Q683063" start="38660" end="38670" title="Birmingham New Street railway station" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="38767" end="38784" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q800922" start="38816" end="38840" title="Highbury &amp;amp; Islington railway station" label="Highbury &amp;amp; Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437087" start="38890" end="38896" title="Sutton railway station, London" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576134" start="38901" end="38912" title="Epsom Downs railway station" label="Epsom Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="38949" end="38961" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258373" start="38983" end="38991" title="Southern (Govia Thameslink Railway)" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="39078" end="39084" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="39156" end="39174" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947443" start="39242" end="39248" title="Morden tube station" label="Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="39313" end="39325" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q801592" start="39357" end="39381" title="West Croydon bus station" label="West Croydon bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681193" start="39496" end="39525" title="Addington Village Interchange" label="Addington Village Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788898" start="39556" end="39573" title="Addington, London" label="Addington Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796013" start="39693" end="39706" title="Arriva London" label="Arriva London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670209" start="39708" end="39722" title="London Central" label="London Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824806" start="39724" end="39732" title="Metrobus (South East England)" label="Metrobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268746" start="39734" end="39746" title="Quality Line" label="Quality Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448530" start="39748" end="39755" title="Selkent" label="Selkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666716" start="39760" end="39783" title="Transport UK London Bus" label="Transport UK London Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q786032" start="39802" end="39810" title="Tramlink" label="Tramlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420368" start="39930" end="39940" title="Elmers End tram stop" label="Elmers End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189753" start="39963" end="39972" title="Beckenham Junction tram stop" label="Beckenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005193" start="39999" end="40012" title="New Addington tram stop" label="New Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q801616" start="40016" end="40025" title="Wimbledon tram stop" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="40188" end="40211" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q687798" start="40223" end="40230" title="Mitcham" label="Mitcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817234" start="40232" end="40240" title="Woodside, London" label="Woodside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824155" start="40242" end="40252" title="Addiscombe" label="Addiscombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261318" start="40261" end="40271" title="Purley Way" label="Purley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516534" start="40388" end="40391" title="M23 motorway" label="M23"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872" start="40396" end="40399" title="M25 motorway" label="M25"/>
<link wikidata="Q844908" start="40620" end="40627" title="Crawley" label="Crawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018418" start="40629" end="40636" title="Reigate" label="Reigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="40642" end="40657" title="Gatwick Airport" label="Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337479" start="40663" end="40666" title="A23 road" label="A23"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261318" start="40902" end="40912" title="Purley Way" label="Purley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175829" start="40981" end="40984" title="A22 road" label="A22"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118905" start="41092" end="41098" title="Purley, London" label="Purley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277887" start="41149" end="41163" title="East Grinstead" label="East Grinstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q665489" start="41165" end="41180" title="Tunbridge Wells" label="Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018490" start="41182" end="41190" title="Uckfield" label="Uckfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q208262" start="41196" end="41206" title="Eastbourne" label="Eastbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337479" start="41281" end="41289" title="A23 road" label="A23 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="41337" end="41343" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="41357" end="41365" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="41370" end="41385" title="Gatwick Airport" label="Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="41387" end="41401" title="Wellesley Road" label="Wellesley Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="41414" end="41430" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189707" start="41586" end="41595" title="Croydon Underpass" label="underpass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="41714" end="41729" title="Gatwick Airport" label="Gatwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="41874" end="41889" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="41891" end="41898" title="EasyJet" label="EasyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q32277" start="41903" end="41918" title="Virgin Atlantic" label="Virgin Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="42085" end="42093" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8982" start="42105" end="42116" title="London City Airport" label="London City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8712" start="42121" end="42126" title="Luton Airport" label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18737011" start="42235" end="42257" title="Govia Thameslink Railway" label="frequent direct trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q122089826" start="42295" end="42304" title="London Buses route SL7" label="route SL7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161363" start="42430" end="42438" title="Connect2" label="Connect2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248471" start="42469" end="42491" title="National Cycle Network" label="National Cycle Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="42526" end="42537" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="42915" end="42926" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="42966" end="42985" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q378991" start="43053" end="43062" title="Park Lane (road)" label="Park Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430286" start="43075" end="43090" title="Fairfield Halls" label="Fairfield Halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189653" start="43095" end="43110" title="Croydon College" label="Croydon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="43167" end="43187" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090847" start="43189" end="43232" title="Fire service in the United Kingdom" label="Statutory emergency fire and rescue service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091309" start="43252" end="43271" title="London Fire Brigade" label="London Fire Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="43486" end="43499" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189706" start="43682" end="43709" title="Croydon University Hospital" label="Croydon University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q32504" start="43826" end="43832" title="London Borough of Merton" label="Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251481" start="43845" end="43848" title="National Health Service (England)" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q19596564" start="43874" end="43907" title="Croydon Health Services NHS Trust" label="Croydon Health Services NHS Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="44096" end="44118" title="Emergency department" label="accident and emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954125" start="44131" end="44141" title="NHS Direct" label="NHS Direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954197" start="44191" end="44200" title="NHS Trust" label="NHS Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118905" start="44260" end="44266" title="Purley, London" label="Purley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032193" start="44590" end="44599" title="Cane Hill" label="Cane Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="44606" end="44626" title="psychiatric hospital" label="psychiatric hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="44664" end="44680" title="Waste management" label="Waste management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972815" start="44734" end="44778" title="waste disposal authorities in Greater London" label="waste disposal authorities in Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042602" start="44897" end="44908" title="inert waste" label="inert waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="44933" end="44941" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135166" start="45050" end="45074" title="Greater London Authority" label="Greater London Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q472093" start="45609" end="45638" title="distribution network operator" label="distribution network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045865" start="45658" end="45677" title="EDF Energy" label="EDF Energy Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="45692" end="45705" title="power station" label="power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408951" start="45723" end="45735" title="Thames Water" label="Thames Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="45759" end="45767" title="drinking water" label="drinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q336191" start="45772" end="45783" title="waste water" label="waste water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417728" start="45853" end="45860" title="Beckton" label="Beckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411639" start="45865" end="45879" title="King George VI Reservoir" label="King George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189653" start="46801" end="46816" title="Croydon College" label="Croydon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255947" start="46891" end="46910" title="John Ruskin College" label="John Ruskin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306258" start="47047" end="47070" title="Spurgeon&amp;#x27;s College" label="Spurgeon&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664350" start="47248" end="47273" title="local education authority" label="local education authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804673" start="48134" end="48151" title="Ashburton Library" label="Ashburton Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804673" start="48212" end="48238" title="Ashburton Learning Village" label="Ashburton Learning Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074415" start="48301" end="48327" title="Oasis Academy Shirley Park" label="Ashburton Community School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568046" start="48499" end="48520" title="South Norwood Library" label="South Norwood Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261952" start="48522" end="48543" title="New Addington Library" label="New Addington Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189648" start="48734" end="48757" title="Croydon Central Library" label="Croydon Central Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898831" start="48875" end="48896" title="Upper Norwood Library" label="Upper Norwood Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q202059" start="48925" end="48950" title="London Borough of Lambeth" label="London Borough of Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568044" start="49497" end="49525" title="South Norwood Leisure Centre" label="South Norwood Leisure Centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49676" end="49695" title="South Norwood Forum" label="South Norwood Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="50089" end="50108" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1066373" start="50124" end="50137" title="Selhurst Park" label="Selhurst Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="50150" end="50164" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651444" start="50166" end="50186" title="AFC Croydon Athletic" label="AFC Croydon Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265962" start="50247" end="50267" title="Croydon Sports Arena" label="Croydon Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189667" start="50279" end="50291" title="Croydon F.C." label="Croydon F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1411650" start="50305" end="50329" title="Combined Counties Football League" label="Combined Counties League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291080" start="50334" end="50344" title="Holmesdale F.C." label="Holmesdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265962" start="50366" end="50379" title="South Norwood" label="South Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q122892" start="50417" end="50424" title="Bromley" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411299" start="50445" end="50483" title="Southern Counties East Football League" label="Southern Counties East Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622727" start="50530" end="50551" title="Streatham-Croydon RFC" label="Streatham-Croydon RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="50555" end="50566" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123194" start="50575" end="50589" title="Thornton Heath" label="Thornton Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567848" start="50625" end="50661" title="South London Storm Rugby League Club" label="South London Storm Rugby League Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622727" start="50672" end="50688" title="Streatham-Croydon RFC" label="Streatham&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378199" start="50718" end="50741" title="Rugby League Conference" label="Rugby League Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258973" start="50747" end="50763" title="London Olympians" label="London Olympians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="50771" end="50788" title="American Football" label="American Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2953680" start="50831" end="50863" title="British American Football League" label="British American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005477" start="50869" end="50884" title="Croydon Pirates" label="Croydon Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969557" start="50929" end="50956" title="British Baseball Federation" label="British Baseball Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q320378" start="51026" end="51032" title="London Borough of Sutton" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="51057" end="51069" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18392232" start="51125" end="51142" title="Southern_Counties_Hockey_Association" label="South East Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713620" start="51151" end="51164" title="London_Hockey_League" label="London Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275967" start="51515" end="51542" title="Selsdon Wood" label="Selsdon Wood Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11347618" start="51652" end="51660" title="Walking in the United Kingdom" label="rambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967269" start="51666" end="51678" title="Wandle Trail" label="Wandle Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914850" start="51724" end="51736" title="Vanguard Way" label="Vanguard Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670641" start="51793" end="51804" title="London Outer Orbital Path" label="London Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000593" start="51810" end="51825" title="North Downs Way" label="North Downs Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095007" start="51834" end="51852" title="Pilgrims&amp;#x27; Way" label="Pilgrims&amp;#x27; Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969295" start="51899" end="51916" title="Warehouse Theatre" label="Warehouse Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189717" start="52195" end="52205" title="Croydon parks and open spaces" label="Lloyd Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q48698718" start="52749" end="52757" title="Old Town, Croydon" label="Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189653" start="52819" end="52832" title="Croydon College" label="College Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380964" start="52837" end="52850" title="Ruskin Square" label="Ruskin Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430286" start="52927" end="52942" title="Fairfield Halls" label="Fairfield Halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804758" start="52967" end="52983" title="Ashcroft Theatre" label="Ashcroft Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007870" start="53170" end="53181" title="art gallery" label="art gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646849" start="53250" end="53270" title="Surrey Street Market" label="Surrey Street Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="53415" end="53428" title="Croydon Airport" label="Airport House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431914" start="53500" end="53515" title="Croydon Airport" label="Croydon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996484" start="53521" end="53536" title="Whitgift Centre" label="Whitgift Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062164" start="53589" end="53597" title="Centrale (shopping centre)" label="Centrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928422" start="53687" end="53702" title="House of Fraser" label="House of Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728236" start="53786" end="53804" title="Croydon Advertiser" label="Croydon Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q993164" start="54043" end="54048" title="Epsom" label="Epsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996975" start="54092" end="54100" title="Caterham" label="Caterham"/>
<link wikidata="Q22101952" start="54205" end="54222" title="Northcliffe Media" label="Northcliffe Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q667613" start="54244" end="54272" title="Daily Mail and General Trust" label="Daily Mail and General Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q15911270" start="54299" end="54311" title="Croydon Post" label="Croydon Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189670" start="54512" end="54528" title="Croydon Guardian" label="Croydon Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q902373" start="54880" end="54883" title="BBC London" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043061" start="54888" end="54891" title="Carlton Television" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270193" start="54918" end="54932" title="Crystal Palace transmitting station" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270190" start="54936" end="54956" title="Croydon transmitting station" label="Croydon transmitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035608" start="55237" end="55250" title="Capital London" label="Capital Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578576" start="55255" end="55259" title="Gold (British radio network)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834838" start="55310" end="55325" title="BBC London 94.9" label="BBC London 94.9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416895" start="55350" end="55358" title="Kiss (UK radio station)" label="Kiss 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590187" start="55360" end="55374" title="Absolute Radio" label="Absolute Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12496071" start="55379" end="55393" title="Magic 105.4 FM" label="Magic 105.4 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873460" start="55399" end="55410" title="Bauer Radio" label="Bauer Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104020" start="55415" end="55427" title="Capital Xtra" label="Capital Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934045" start="55429" end="55440" title="Heart London" label="Heart 106.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q106764357" start="55445" end="55457" title="Smooth Radio (2014)" label="Smooth Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570585" start="55463" end="55475" title="Global Group" label="Global Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310" start="55790" end="55796" title="Arnhem" label="Arnhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039348" start="55879" end="55915" title="Municipalities of the Netherlands" label="20 largest cities in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="56050" end="56058" title="Guyana" label="Guyanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q856411" start="56266" end="56290" title="British American Tobacco" label="British American Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="56754" end="56776" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055659" start="56810" end="56826" title="Stormzy" label="Michael Owuo Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q25182608" start="56899" end="56953" title="Kensington Regiment (Princess Louise&amp;#x27;s)" label="41 (Princess Louise&amp;#x27;s Kensington) Signal Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322747" start="56954" end="56976" title="Royal Corps of Signals" label="Royal Corps of Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="56978" end="56988" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550251" start="57000" end="57012" title="151 Regiment RLC" label="151 Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747823" start="57013" end="57016" title="Royal Logistic Corps" label="RLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="57018" end="57028" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547128" start="57050" end="57064" title="10th Parachute Battalion (United Kingdom)" label="10th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q197217" start="57069" end="57087" title="Parachute Regiment (United Kingdom)" label="Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="57089" end="57099" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391966" start="57133" end="57164" title="Kent and Sharpshooters Yeomanry" label="Kent and Sharpshooters Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375037" start="57169" end="57183" title="Royal Yeomanry" label="Royal Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920229" start="57207" end="57217" title="The Rifles" label="The Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632362" start="57240" end="57267" title="List of people from Croydon" label="List of people from Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57270" end="57282" title="Postcodes in the United Kingdom#Development" label="UK postcodes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7188" wikidata="Q17111" url="?curid=7188" title="Carme (moon)">
<text>Carme is a retrograde irregular satellite of Jupiter. It was discovered by Seth Barnes Nicholson at Mount Wilson Observatory in California in July 1938. It is named after the mythological Carme, mother by Zeus of Britomartis, a Cretan goddess.

==History==

Carme did not receive its present name until 1975; before then, it was simply known as . It was sometimes called &quot;Pan&quot; between 1955 and 1975 (Pan is now the name of a satellite of Saturn).

It gives its name to the Carme group, made up of irregular retrograde moons orbiting Jupiter at a distance ranging between 23 and 24 Gm and at an inclination of about 165°. Its orbital elements are as of 17 December 2020. They are continuously changing due to solar and planetary perturbations.

==Properties==
With a diameter of , it is the largest member of the Carme group and the fourth largest irregular moon of Jupiter. It is light red in color (B−V=0.76, V−R=0.47), similar to D-type asteroids and consistent with Taygete, but not Kalyke.

==See also==
*Irregular satellites
*Jupiter&#x27;s moons in fiction

==References==
==External links==
*Carme Profile by NASA&#x27;s Solar System Exploration
*David Jewitt pages
*Jupiter&#x27;s Known Satellites (by Scott S. Sheppard)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17111" start="0" end="5" title="Carme (moon)" label="Carme"/>
<link wikidata="Q312021" start="11" end="21" title="retrograde motion" label="retrograde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632885" start="22" end="41" title="irregular satellite" label="irregular satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="45" end="52" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q436047" start="75" end="96" title="Seth Barnes Nicholson" label="Seth Barnes Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="100" end="124" title="Mount Wilson Observatory" label="Mount Wilson Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="128" end="138" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734053" start="188" end="193" title="Carme (mythology)" label="Carme"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="205" end="209" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q831577" start="213" end="224" title="Britomartis" label="Britomartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="228" end="234" title="Crete" label="Cretan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132582" start="377" end="380" title="Pan (mythology)" label="Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17705" start="433" end="454" title="Pan (moon)" label="a satellite of Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q468991" start="483" end="494" title="Carme group" label="Carme group"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="718" end="723" title="Sun" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814074" start="942" end="957" title="D-type asteroid" label="D-type asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011" start="979" end="986" title="Taygete (moon)" label="Taygete"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109" start="996" end="1002" title="Kalyke" label="Kalyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632885" start="1019" end="1038" title="Irregular satellite" label="Irregular satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q686904" start="1041" end="1072" title="Jupiter&amp;#x27;s moons in fiction" label="Jupiter&amp;#x27;s moons in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q310490" start="1220" end="1237" title="Scott S. Sheppard" label="Scott S. Sheppard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7193" wikidata="Q2989763" url="?curid=7193" title="Commutator">
<text>In mathematics, the commutator gives an indication of the extent to which a certain binary operation fails to be commutative. There are different definitions used in group theory and ring theory.

== Group theory ==
The commutator of two elements, and , of a group , is the element

This element is equal to the group&#x27;s identity if and only if and commute (that is, if and only if ).

The set of all commutators of a group is not in general closed under the group operation, but the subgroup of &quot;G&quot; generated by all commutators is closed and is called the &quot;derived group&quot; or the &quot;commutator subgroup&quot; of &quot;G&quot;. Commutators are used to define nilpotent and solvable groups and the largest abelian quotient group.

The definition of the commutator above is used throughout this article, but many group theorists define the commutator as
Using the first definition, this can be expressed as .

=== Identities (group theory) ===
Commutator identities are an important tool in group theory. The expression denotes the conjugate of by , defined as .
# formula_1
# formula_2
# formula_3 and formula_4
# formula_5 and formula_6
# formula_7 and formula_8

Identity (5) is also known as the &quot;Hall–Witt identity&quot;, after Philip Hall and Ernst Witt. It is a group-theoretic analogue of the Jacobi identity for the ring-theoretic commutator (see next section).

N.B., the above definition of the conjugate of by is used by some group theorists. Many other group theorists define the conjugate of by as . This is often written formula_9. Similar identities hold for these conventions.

Many identities that are true modulo certain subgroups are also used. These can be particularly useful in the study of solvable groups and nilpotent groups. For instance, in any group, second powers behave well:
: formula_10

If the derived subgroup is central, then
: formula_11

== Ring theory ==

Rings often do not support division. Thus, the commutator of two elements &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; of a ring (or any associative algebra) is defined differently by
: formula_12

The commutator is zero if and only if &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; commute. In linear algebra, if two endomorphisms of a space are represented by commuting matrices in terms of one basis, then they are so represented in terms of every basis. By using the commutator as a Lie bracket, every associative algebra can be turned into a Lie algebra.

The anticommutator of two elements and of a ring or associative algebra is defined by
: formula_13

Sometimes formula_14 is used to denote anticommutator, while formula_15 is then used for commutator. The anticommutator is used less often, but can be used to define Clifford algebras and Jordan algebras and in the derivation of the Dirac equation in particle physics.

The commutator of two operators acting on a Hilbert space is a central concept in quantum mechanics, since it quantifies how well the two observables described by these operators can be measured simultaneously. The uncertainty principle is ultimately a theorem about such commutators, by virtue of the Robertson–Schrödinger relation. In phase space, equivalent commutators of function star-products are called Moyal brackets and are completely isomorphic to the Hilbert space commutator structures mentioned.

=== Identities (ring theory) ===
The commutator has the following properties:

==== Lie-algebra identities ====
# formula_16
# formula_17
# formula_18
# formula_19

Relation (3) is called anticommutativity, while (4) is the Jacobi identity.

==== Additional identities ====
# formula_20
# formula_21
# formula_22
# formula_23
# formula_24
# formula_25
# formula_26
# formula_27
# formula_28
# formula_29

If is a fixed element of a ring &quot;R&quot;, identity (1) can be interpreted as a Leibniz rule for the map formula_30 given by formula_31. In other words, the map ad&quot;A&quot; defines a derivation on the ring &quot;R&quot;. Identities (2), (3) represent Leibniz rules for more than two factors, and are valid for any derivation. Identities (4)–(6) can also be interpreted as Leibniz rules. Identities (7), (8) express Z-bilinearity.

From identity (9), one finds that the commutator of integer powers of ring elements is:
: formula_32

Some of the above identities can be extended to the anticommutator using the above ± subscript notation.
For example:
# formula_33
# formula_34
# formula_35
# formula_36
# formula_37
# formula_38

==== Exponential identities ====
Consider a ring or algebra in which the exponential formula_39 can be meaningfully defined, such as a Banach algebra or a ring of formal power series.

In such a ring, Hadamard&#x27;s lemma applied to nested commutators gives: formula_40 (For the last expression, see &quot;Adjoint derivation&quot; below.) This formula underlies the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff expansion of log(exp(&quot;A&quot;) exp(&quot;B&quot;)).

A similar expansion expresses the group commutator of expressions formula_41 (analogous to elements of a Lie group) in terms of a series of nested commutators (Lie brackets),
formula_42

== Graded rings and algebras ==
When dealing with graded algebras, the commutator is usually replaced by the graded commutator, defined in homogeneous components as 
: formula_43

== Adjoint derivation ==
Especially if one deals with multiple commutators in a ring &quot;R&quot;, another notation turns out to be useful. For an element formula_44, we define the adjoint mapping formula_45 by:
: formula_46

This mapping is a derivation on the ring &quot;R&quot;: 
: formula_47
By the Jacobi identity, it is also a derivation over the commutation operation: 
: formula_48

Composing such mappings, we get for example formula_49 and formula_50 We may consider formula_51 itself as a mapping, formula_52, where formula_53 is the ring of mappings from &quot;R&quot; to itself with composition as the multiplication operation. Then formula_51 is a Lie algebra homomorphism, preserving the commutator:
: formula_55

By contrast, it is not always a ring homomorphism: usually formula_56.

=== General Leibniz rule ===
The general Leibniz rule, expanding repeated derivatives of a product, can be written abstractly using the adjoint representation:
: formula_57

Replacing formula_58 by the differentiation operator formula_59, and formula_60 by the multiplication operator formula_61, we get formula_62, and applying both sides to a function &quot;g&quot;, the identity becomes the usual Leibniz rule for the &quot;n&quot;th derivative formula_63.

== See also ==
* Anticommutativity
* Associator
* Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula
* Canonical commutation relation
* Centralizer a.k.a. commutant
* Derivation (abstract algebra)
* Moyal bracket
* Pincherle derivative
* Poisson bracket
* Ternary commutator
* Three subgroups lemma

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989763" start="20" end="30" title="Commutator" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q164307" start="84" end="100" title="binary operation" label="binary operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="113" end="124" title="commutative" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="166" end="178" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208658" start="183" end="194" title="ring theory" label="ring theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="259" end="264" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="488" end="496" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q734209" start="514" end="523" title="Generating set of a group" label="generated"/>
<link wikidata="Q522216" start="610" end="629" title="commutator subgroup" label="commutator subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755242" start="685" end="694" title="nilpotent group" label="nilpotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q759832" start="699" end="707" title="solvable group" label="solvable"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="731" end="738" title="Abelian group" label="abelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138961" start="739" end="753" title="quotient group" label="quotient group"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="1015" end="1027" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1056" end="1065" title="conjugate (group theory)#Definition" label="conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q948396" start="1262" end="1273" title="Philip Hall" label="Philip Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q68559" start="1278" end="1288" title="Ernst Witt" label="Ernst Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151539" start="1330" end="1345" title="Jacobi identity" label="Jacobi identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q759832" start="1743" end="1757" title="solvable group" label="solvable group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755242" start="1763" end="1778" title="nilpotent group" label="nilpotent group"/>
<link wikidata="Q522216" start="1857" end="1873" title="derived subgroup" label="derived subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="1924" end="1929" title="ring (algebra)" label="Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q744960" start="2048" end="2067" title="associative algebra" label="associative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q82571" start="2191" end="2205" title="linear algebra" label="linear algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340800" start="2214" end="2226" title="endomorphism" label="endomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="2383" end="2394" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="2443" end="2454" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="2723" end="2739" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q649977" start="2745" end="2759" title="Jordan algebra" label="Jordan algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="2790" end="2804" title="Dirac equation" label="Dirac equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="2808" end="2824" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="2871" end="2884" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="2909" end="2926" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q845789" start="2965" end="2975" title="observable" label="observable"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="3042" end="3063" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="3129" end="3159" title="Uncertainty relation" label="Robertson–Schrödinger relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="3164" end="3175" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927583" start="3212" end="3225" title="Moyal product" label="star-products"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927585" start="3237" end="3250" title="Moyal bracket" label="Moyal bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q639608" start="3525" end="3542" title="anticommutativity" label="anticommutativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151539" start="3561" end="3576" title="Jacobi identity" label="Jacobi identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q466720" start="3826" end="3838" title="product rule" label="Leibniz rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q451323" start="3933" end="3943" title="derivation (abstract algebra)" label="derivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086961" start="4167" end="4178" title="Bilinear map" label="bilinearity"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="4553" end="4564" title="exponential function" label="exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q806066" start="4615" end="4629" title="Banach algebra" label="Banach algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003025" start="4643" end="4662" title="formal power series" label="formal power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074239" start="4681" end="4702" title="Hadamard&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Hadamard&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4847" end="4881" title="Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula#An important lemma" label="Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="5035" end="5044" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15534632" start="5167" end="5181" title="graded algebra" label="graded algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017106" start="5479" end="5486" title="adjoint representation of a Lie algebra" label="adjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q451323" start="5542" end="5552" title="Derivation (differential algebra)" label="derivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151539" start="5601" end="5616" title="Jacobi identity" label="Jacobi identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="5960" end="5971" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586745" start="6132" end="6152" title="general Leibniz rule" label="general Leibniz rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q639608" start="6577" end="6594" title="Anticommutativity" label="Anticommutativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405805" start="6597" end="6607" title="Associator" label="Associator"/>
<link wikidata="Q804316" start="6610" end="6642" title="Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula" label="Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q473322" start="6645" end="6675" title="Canonical commutation relation" label="Canonical commutation relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190629" start="6678" end="6689" title="Centralizer" label="Centralizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q451323" start="6709" end="6738" title="Derivation (abstract algebra)" label="Derivation (abstract algebra)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927585" start="6741" end="6754" title="Moyal bracket" label="Moyal bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194927" start="6757" end="6777" title="Pincherle derivative" label="Pincherle derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052775" start="6780" end="6795" title="Poisson bracket" label="Poisson bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702929" start="6798" end="6816" title="Ternary commutator" label="Ternary commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798010" start="6819" end="6840" title="Three subgroups lemma" label="Three subgroups lemma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7196" wikidata="Q7321974" url="?curid=7196" title="Cairn">
<text>A cairn is a human-made pile (or stack) of stones raised for a purpose, usually as a marker or as a burial mound. The word &quot;cairn&quot; comes from the (plural ).

Cairns have been and are used for a broad variety of purposes. In prehistory, they were raised as markers, as memorials and as burial monuments (some of which contained chambers). 

In the modern era, cairns are often raised as landmarks, especially to mark the summits of mountains, and as trail markers. They vary in size from small piles of stones to entire artificial hills, and in complexity from loose conical rock piles to elaborate megalithic structures. Cairns may be painted or otherwise decorated, whether for increased visibility or for religious reasons.

==History==
===Europe===

The building of cairns for various purposes goes back into prehistory in Eurasia, ranging in size from small rock sculptures to substantial human-made hills of stone (some built on top of larger, natural hills). The latter are often relatively massive Bronze Age or earlier structures which, like kistvaens and dolmens, frequently contain burials; they are comparable to tumuli (kurgans), but of stone construction instead of earthworks. &quot;Cairn&quot; originally could more broadly refer to various types of hills and natural stone piles, but today is used exclusively of artificial ones.
==== Ireland and Britain ====

The word &quot;cairn&quot; derives from Scots (with the same meaning), in turn from Scottish Gaelic , which is essentially the same as the corresponding words in other native Celtic languages of Britain, Ireland and Brittany, including Welsh (and ), Breton , Irish , and Cornish or . Cornwall () itself may actually be named after the cairns that dot its landscape, such as Cornwall&#x27;s highest point, Brown Willy Summit Cairn, a 5 m (16 ft) high and 24 m (79 ft) diameter mound atop Brown Willy hill in Bodmin Moor, an area with many ancient cairns. Burial cairns and other megaliths are the subject of a variety of legends and folklore throughout Britain and Ireland. In Scotland, it is traditional to carry a stone up from the bottom of a hill to place on a cairn at its top. In such a fashion, cairns would grow ever larger. An old Scottish Gaelic blessing is , &quot;I&#x27;ll put a stone on your cairn&quot;. In Highland folklore it is recounted that before Highland clans fought in a battle, each man would place a stone in a pile. Those who survived the battle returned and removed a stone from the pile. The stones that remained were built into a cairn to honour the dead. Cairns in the region were also put to vital practical use. For example, Dún Aonghasa, an all-stone Iron Age Irish hill fort on Inishmore in the Aran Islands, is still surrounded by small cairns and strategically placed jutting rocks, used collectively as an alternative to defensive earthworks because of the karst landscape&#x27;s lack of soil. In February 2020, ancient cairns dated back to 4,500 year-old used to bury the leaders or chieftains of neolithic tribes people were revealed in the Cwmcelyn in Blaenau Gwent by the Aberystruth Archaeological Society.

==== Scandinavia and Iceland ====
In Scandinavia, cairns have been used for centuries as trail and sea marks, among other purposes, the most notable being the Three-Country Cairn. In Iceland, cairns were often used as markers along the numerous single-file roads or paths that crisscrossed the island; many of these ancient cairns are still standing, although the paths have disappeared. In Norse Greenland, cairns were used as a hunting implement, a game-driving &quot;lane&quot;, used to direct reindeer towards a game jump.

==== Greece and the Balkans ====
In the mythology of ancient Greece, cairns were associated with Hermes, the god of overland travel. According to one legend, Hermes was put on trial by Hera for slaying her favorite servant, the monster Argus. All of the other gods acted as a jury, and as a way of declaring their verdict they were given pebbles, and told to throw them at whichever person they deemed to be in the right, Hermes or Hera. Hermes argued so skillfully that he ended up buried under a heap of pebbles, and this was the first cairn.
In Croatia, in areas of ancient Dalmatia, such as Herzegovina and the Krajina, they are known as &quot;gromila&quot;.

==== Portugal ====
In Portugal, a cairn is called a . In a legend the are enchanted soldiers, and if one stone is taken from the pile and put under a pillow, in the morning a soldier will appear for a brief moment, then will change back to a stone and magically return to the pile. The cairns that mark the place where someone died or cover the graves alongside the roads where in the past people were buried are called . The same name given to the stones was given to the dead whose identity was unknown.

===North and northeast Africa===

Cairns (&quot;taalo&quot;) are a common feature at El Ayo, Haylan, Qa&#x27;ableh, Qombo&#x27;ul, Heis, Salweyn and Gelweita, among other places. Somaliland in general is home to a lot of such historical settlements and archaeological sites wherein are found numerous ancient ruins and buildings, many of obscure origins. However, many of these old structures have yet to be properly explored, a process which would help shed further light on local history and facilitate their preservation for posterity.

Since Neolithic times, the climate of North Africa has become drier. A reminder of the desertification of the area is provided by megalithic remains, which occur in a great variety of forms and in vast numbers in presently arid and uninhabitable wastelands: cairns (&quot;kerkour&quot;), dolmens and circles like Stonehenge, underground cells excavated in rock, barrows topped with huge slabs, and step pyramid-like mounds.

===Middle East===

The Biblical place name Gilead (mentioned in the Old Testament books of Genesis, Numbers, Judges and elsewhere) means literally &#x27;a heap of testimony (or evidence)&#x27; as does its Aramaic translation &quot; &quot;. In modern Hebrew, &quot;gal-&#x27;ed&quot; (גל-עד) is the actual word for &quot;cairn&quot;. In the cairn of Gilead was set up as a border demarcation between Jacob and his father-in-law Laban at their last meeting.

===Asia and the Pacific===
Starting in the Bronze Age, burial cists were sometimes interred into cairns, which would be situated in conspicuous positions, often on the skyline above the village of the deceased. Though most often found in the British Isles, evidence of Bronze Age cists have been found in Mongolia. The stones may have been thought to deter grave robbers and scavengers. Another explanation is that they were to stop the dead from rising. There remains a Jewish tradition of placing small stones on a person&#x27;s grave as a token of respect, known as visitation stones, though this is generally to relate the longevity of stone to the eternal nature of the soul and is not usually done in a cairn fashion. Stupas in India and Tibet probably started out in a similar fashion, although they now generally contain the ashes of a Buddhist saint or lama.

A traditional and often decorated, heap-formed cairn called an &quot;ovoo&quot; is made in Mongolia. It primarily serves religious purposes, and finds use in both Tengriist and Buddhist ceremonies. Ovoos were also often used as landmarks and meeting points in traditional nomadic Mongolian culture. Traditional ceremonies still take place at ovoos today, and in a survey conducted, 75 participants out of 144 participants stated that they believe in ovoo ceremonies. However, mining and other industrial operations today threaten the ovoos

In Hawaii, cairns, called by the Hawaiian word , are still being built today. Though in other cultures, the cairns were typically used as trail markers and sometimes funerary sites, the ancient Hawaiians also used them as altars or security towers. The Hawaiian people are still building these cairns today, using them as the focal points for ceremonies honoring their ancestors and spirituality.

In South Korea, cairns are quite prevalent, often found along roadsides and trails, up on mountain peaks, and adjacent to Buddhist temples. Hikers frequently add stones to existing cairns trying to get just one more on top of the pile, to bring good luck. This tradition has its roots in the worship of San-shin, or Mountain Spirit, so often still revered in Korean culture.

===The Americas===
Throughout what today are the continental United States and Canada, some Indigenous peoples of the Americas have built structures similar to cairns. In some cases, these are general trail markers, and in other cases they mark game-driving &quot;lanes&quot;, such as those leading to buffalo jumps.

==== Religious Practices (North America)   ====

* Stacked rock features have been noted to have religious significance to the Klamath and Modoc Tribes of indigenous people of the Western United States, the respective tribes prohibiting photography of or touching the stone formations. These cairn-like structures are noted to be constructed for ritual and prayer purposes. Indigenous tribes practiced piling rocks (forming a rock cairn) as a step in a series of physically demanding tasks in part of a ritual to receive what they call spirit dreams. This practice is part of the vision quest ritual within the puberty rite the boys of the tribe undergo.
* Cairns were often used to mark the cremation sights for burial practices. When the Klamath tribe traveled within their territory, a person may pass away during this period. If the death occurs away from their village, the passed person would be buried near where they passed and a cairn would be constructed to mark this site. Burial cairns constructed by indigenous people, taking the shape of stone mounds, have been found throughout the Midwest and South of the United States. These mounds are typically made in large piles and mark the burial site, also protecting it from wildlife.

Peoples from some of the Indigenous cultures of arctic North America (i.e. northern Canada, Alaska and Greenland) have built carefully constructed stone sculptures called and, which serve as landmarks and directional markers. The oldest of these structures are very old and pre-date contact with Europeans. They are iconic of the region (an even features on the flag of the Canadian far-northeastern territory, Nunavut).

Cairns have been used throughout what is now Latin America, since pre-Columbian times, to mark trails. Even today, in the Andes of South America, the Quechuan peoples build cairns as part of their spiritual and religious traditions.

==Today==
Cairns can be used to mark hiking trails, especially in mountain regions at or above the tree line. Placed at regular intervals, a series of cairns can be used to indicate a path across stony or barren terrain.

===Sea cairns===

Coastal cairns called sea marks are also common in the northern latitudes, especially in the island-strewn waters of Scandinavia and eastern Canada. They are placed along shores and on islands and islets. Usually painted white for improved offshore visibility, they serve as navigation aids. In Sweden, they are called , in Finland , in Norway , and are indicated in navigation charts and maintained as part of the nautical marking system.

==Other types==
* Chambered cairn
* Clava cairn
* Clearance cairn
* Court cairn
* Pyramid
* Ring cairn
* Tumulus
* Unchambered long cairn

== Concerns ==
Concerns have been raised over the construction of needless cairns.

The Hawaiian Volcano Observatory asks visitors to say “no” to rock piles after a surge in the creation of cairns by visitors. The construction of these rock formations comes at the cost of important geological features that visitors pry rocks off of. The practice is viewed as an act of graffiti on the landscape of the park.

The US National Park Service has a set of rules regarding public interaction with cairns found within the boundaries of the park. Falling within the rules set by the Leave No Trace rule, the Park Service has three rules:

* Do not tamper with cairns
* Do not build unauthorized cairns
* Do not add to existing cairns

This guideline is made with the intent of preventing needless cairns created by visitors and preventing the destruction of important trail-marking cairns.

==See also==

* Boundary marker
* Cairn terrier
* Crossroads (mythology)
* Dry stone
* 
* Inuksuk
* Kerb (archaeology)
* Rock balancing
* 
* Stele
==References==

==External links==

*Notes on Building a Cairn (PDF), by Dave Goulder for the DSWA, Dry Stone Walling Association of Great Britain. Practical notes to help those embarking on a cairn-building project.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7321974" start="2" end="7" title="Cairn" label="cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="100" end="112" title="burial mound" label="burial mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="234" end="244" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q585490" start="327" end="345" title="Chambered cairn" label="contained chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="357" end="367" title="modern era" label="modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042490" start="459" end="472" title="Trail blazing" label="trail markers"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="608" end="616" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="822" end="832" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="836" end="843" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1015" end="1025" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="1074" end="1080" title="dolmen" label="dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="1134" end="1140" title="tumuli" label="tumuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737" start="1142" end="1148" title="kurgan" label="kurgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880367" start="1189" end="1199" title="Earthworks (engineering)" label="earthworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="1427" end="1432" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1471" end="1486" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="1562" end="1577" title="Celtic language" label="Celtic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="1582" end="1589" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1591" end="1598" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="1603" end="1611" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="1623" end="1628" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="1637" end="1643" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="1646" end="1651" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="1658" end="1665" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q335390" start="1792" end="1816" title="Brown Willy Cairns" label="Brown Willy Summit Cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q335390" start="1874" end="1885" title="Brown Willy" label="Brown Willy"/>
<link wikidata="Q889885" start="1894" end="1905" title="Bodmin Moor" label="Bodmin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="1965" end="1973" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2063" end="2071" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265205" start="2644" end="2656" title="Dún Aonghasa" label="Dún Aonghasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2671" end="2679" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="2686" end="2695" title="hill fort" label="hill fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q369318" start="2699" end="2708" title="Inishmore" label="Inishmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212893" start="2716" end="2728" title="Aran Islands" label="Aran Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="2845" end="2865" title="Defensive wall" label="defensive earthworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="2881" end="2886" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q596885" start="3079" end="3092" title="Blaenau Gwent" label="Blaenau Gwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="3174" end="3185" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139153" start="3296" end="3315" title="Three-Country Cairn" label="Three-Country Cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="3320" end="3327" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16488964" start="3528" end="3543" title="Norse Greenland" label="Norse Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q605981" start="3653" end="3662" title="game jump" label="game jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="3762" end="3768" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="3850" end="3854" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q189821" start="3901" end="3906" title="Argus Panoptes" label="Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="4213" end="4220" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="4242" end="4250" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="4260" end="4271" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786352" start="4280" end="4287" title="Krajina" label="Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069793" start="4921" end="4927" title="El Ayo" label="El Ayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686774" start="4929" end="4935" title="Haylan" label="Haylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267343" start="4937" end="4950" title="Qa&amp;#x27;ableh" label="Qa&amp;#x27;ableh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268074" start="4952" end="4965" title="Qombo&amp;#x27;ul" label="Qombo&amp;#x27;ul"/>
<link wikidata="Q946211" start="4967" end="4971" title="Heis (town)" label="Heis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353869" start="4973" end="4980" title="Salweyn" label="Salweyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q105393628" start="4985" end="4993" title="Gelweita" label="Gelweita"/>
<link wikidata="Q34754" start="5015" end="5025" title="Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="5089" end="5108" title="archaeological site" label="archaeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="5382" end="5391" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="5414" end="5426" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="5463" end="5478" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="5506" end="5514" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="5664" end="5670" title="dolmen" label="dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="5689" end="5699" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652352" start="5738" end="5745" title="Long barrow" label="barrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q12516" start="5779" end="5786" title="pyramid" label="pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q922498" start="5844" end="5850" title="Gilead" label="Gilead"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="5892" end="5899" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43099" start="5901" end="5908" title="Numbers 32" label="Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81240" start="5910" end="5916" title="Book of Judges" label="Judges"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6085" end="6090" title=":he: גל-עד" label="גל-עד"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="6200" end="6205" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q840401" start="6228" end="6233" title="Laban (Bible)" label="Laban"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="6301" end="6311" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399576" start="6320" end="6324" title="cist" label="cist"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="6563" end="6571" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097794" start="6686" end="6711" title="Revenant (folklore)" label="stop the dead from rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="6729" end="6735" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q96414051" start="6827" end="6844" title="visitation stones" label="visitation stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="6982" end="6987" title="Stupa" label="Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="7002" end="7007" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="7102" end="7110" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191421" start="7120" end="7124" title="lama" label="lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744120" start="7196" end="7200" title="ovoo" label="ovoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="7218" end="7226" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837605" start="7290" end="7299" title="Tengriism" label="Tengriist"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="7304" end="7312" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371831" start="7407" end="7424" title="Culture of Mongolia" label="Mongolian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="7671" end="7677" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="7701" end="7709" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="8069" end="8080" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="8491" end="8516" title="continental United States" label="continental United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="8534" end="8568" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q605981" start="8744" end="8756" title="buffalo jump" label="buffalo jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q498844" start="8887" end="8894" title="Klamath people" label="Klamath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515972" start="8899" end="8904" title="Modoc people" label="Modoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="8940" end="8961" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528354" start="9340" end="9352" title="vision quest" label="vision quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="9371" end="9383" title="Rite of passage" label="puberty rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q498844" start="9500" end="9507" title="Klamath people" label="Klamath"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="10097" end="10103" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="10108" end="10117" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048711" start="10176" end="10179" title="Inuksuk" label="and"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="10288" end="10310" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="contact with Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="10416" end="10423" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="10472" end="10485" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="10493" end="10506" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="10549" end="10554" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="10558" end="10571" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="10577" end="10585" title="Quechuan" label="Quechuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="10760" end="10769" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q98272210" start="10923" end="10931" title="sea mark" label="sea mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="11018" end="11029" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565782" start="11176" end="11190" title="Navigational aid" label="navigation aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q585490" start="11360" end="11375" title="Chambered cairn" label="Chambered cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q457879" start="11378" end="11389" title="Clava cairn" label="Clava cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820704" start="11392" end="11407" title="Clearance cairn" label="Clearance cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q284279" start="11410" end="11421" title="Court cairn" label="Court cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12516" start="11424" end="11431" title="Pyramid" label="Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330749" start="11434" end="11444" title="Ring cairn" label="Ring cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="11447" end="11454" title="Tumulus" label="Tumulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390480" start="11457" end="11479" title="Unchambered long cairn" label="Unchambered long cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424454" start="11569" end="11597" title="Hawaiian Volcano Observatory" label="Hawaiian Volcano Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="11896" end="11920" title="National Park Service" label="US National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q559348" start="12058" end="12072" title="Leave No Trace" label="Leave No Trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="12083" end="12095" title="National Park Service" label="Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q921099" start="12382" end="12397" title="Boundary marker" label="Boundary marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q37888" start="12400" end="12413" title="Cairn terrier" label="Cairn terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055677" start="12416" end="12438" title="Crossroads (mythology)" label="Crossroads (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608878" start="12441" end="12450" title="Dry stone" label="Dry stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048711" start="12456" end="12463" title="Inuksuk" label="Inuksuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415199" start="12466" end="12484" title="Kerb (archaeology)" label="Kerb (archaeology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323158" start="12487" end="12501" title="Rock balancing" label="Rock balancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="12507" end="12512" title="Stele" label="Stele"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7198" wikidata="Q747027" url="?curid=7198" title="Characteristic subgroup">
<text>In mathematics, particularly in the area of abstract algebra known as group theory, a characteristic subgroup is a subgroup that is mapped to itself by every automorphism of the parent group. Because every conjugation map is an inner automorphism, every characteristic subgroup is normal; though the converse is not guaranteed. Examples of characteristic subgroups include the commutator subgroup and the center of a group.

== Definition ==
A subgroup of a group is called a characteristic subgroup if for every automorphism of , one has ; then write .

It would be equivalent to require the stronger condition = for every automorphism of , because implies the reverse inclusion .

== Basic properties ==

Given , every automorphism of induces an automorphism of the quotient group , which yields a homomorphism .

If has a unique subgroup of a given index, then is characteristic in .

== Related concepts ==

=== Normal subgroup ===

A subgroup of that is invariant under all inner automorphisms is called normal; also, an invariant subgroup.

Since and a characteristic subgroup is invariant under all automorphisms, every characteristic subgroup is normal. However, not every normal subgroup is characteristic. Here are several examples:
* Let be a nontrivial group, and let be the direct product, . Then the subgroups, and , are both normal, but neither is characteristic. In particular, neither of these subgroups is invariant under the automorphism, , that switches the two factors.
* For a concrete example of this, let be the Klein four-group (which is isomorphic to the direct product, formula_1). Since this group is abelian, every subgroup is normal; but every permutation of the 3 non-identity elements is an automorphism of , so the 3 subgroups of order 2 are not characteristic. Here . Consider and consider the automorphism, ; then is not contained in .
* In the quaternion group of order 8, each of the cyclic subgroups of order 4 is normal, but none of these are characteristic. However, the subgroup, , is characteristic, since it is the only subgroup of order 2.
* If &gt; 2 is even, the dihedral group of order has 3 subgroups of index 2, all of which are normal. One of these is the cyclic subgroup, which is characteristic. The other two subgroups are dihedral; these are permuted by an outer automorphism of the parent group, and are therefore not characteristic.

=== Strictly characteristic subgroup ===
A &#x27;, or a &#x27;, is one which is invariant under surjective endomorphisms. For finite groups, surjectivity of an endomorphism implies injectivity, so a surjective endomorphism is an automorphism; thus being &quot;strictly characteristic&quot; is equivalent to &quot;characteristic&quot;. This is not the case anymore for infinite groups.

=== Fully characteristic subgroup ===
For an even stronger constraint, a &quot;fully characteristic subgroup&quot; (also, &quot;fully invariant subgroup&quot;) of a group &quot;G&quot;, is a subgroup &quot;H&quot; ≤ &quot;G&quot; that is invariant under every endomorphism of (and not just every automorphism):

Every group has itself (the improper subgroup) and the trivial subgroup as two of its fully characteristic subgroups. The commutator subgroup of a group is always a fully characteristic subgroup.

Every endomorphism of induces an endomorphism of , which yields a map .

=== Verbal subgroup ===
An even stronger constraint is verbal subgroup, which is the image of a fully invariant subgroup of a free group under a homomorphism. More generally, any verbal subgroup is always fully characteristic. For any reduced free group, and, in particular, for any free group, the converse also holds: every fully characteristic subgroup is verbal.

== Transitivity ==
The property of being characteristic or fully characteristic is transitive; if is a (fully) characteristic subgroup of , and is a (fully) characteristic subgroup of , then is a (fully) characteristic subgroup of .

Moreover, while normality is not transitive, it is true that every characteristic subgroup of a normal subgroup is normal.

Similarly, while being strictly characteristic (distinguished) is not transitive, it is true that every fully characteristic subgroup of a strictly characteristic subgroup is strictly characteristic.

However, unlike normality, if and is a subgroup of containing , then in general is not necessarily characteristic in .

== Containments ==
Every subgroup that is fully characteristic is certainly strictly characteristic and characteristic; but a characteristic or even strictly characteristic subgroup need not be fully characteristic.

The center of a group is always a strictly characteristic subgroup, but it is not always fully characteristic. For example, the finite group of order 12, , has a homomorphism taking to , which takes the center, formula_2, into a subgroup of , which meets the center only in the identity.

The relationship amongst these subgroup properties can be expressed as:
:Subgroup ⇐ Normal subgroup ⇐ Characteristic subgroup ⇐ Strictly characteristic subgroup ⇐ Fully characteristic subgroup ⇐ Verbal subgroup

==Examples==

=== Finite example ===
Consider the group (the group of order 12 that is the direct product of the symmetric group of order 6 and a cyclic group of order 2). The center of is isomorphic to its second factor formula_3. Note that the first factor, , contains subgroups isomorphic to formula_3, for instance ; let formula_5 be the morphism mapping formula_3 onto the indicated subgroup. Then the composition of the projection of onto its second factor formula_3, followed by , followed by the inclusion of into as its first factor, provides an endomorphism of under which the image of the center, formula_3, is not contained in the center, so here the center is not a fully characteristic subgroup of .

=== Cyclic groups ===
Every subgroup of a cyclic group is characteristic.

=== Subgroup functors ===
The derived subgroup (or commutator subgroup) of a group is a verbal subgroup. The torsion subgroup of an abelian group is a fully invariant subgroup.

=== Topological groups ===
The identity component of a topological group is always a characteristic subgroup.

==See also==
* Characteristically simple group

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="44" end="60" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="70" end="82" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q747027" start="86" end="109" title="Characteristic subgroup" label="characteristic subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="115" end="123" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q782566" start="158" end="170" title="automorphism" label="automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="185" end="190" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="206" end="221" title="Conjugacy class#Properties" label="conjugation map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139583" start="228" end="246" title="inner automorphism" label="inner automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="281" end="287" title="normal subgroup" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q522216" start="377" end="396" title="commutator subgroup" label="commutator subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195852" start="405" end="422" title="center of a group" label="center of a group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138961" start="768" end="782" title="quotient group" label="quotient group"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="1009" end="1015" title="normal subgroup" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725924" start="1287" end="1301" title="direct product of groups" label="direct product"/>
<link wikidata="Q550593" start="1536" end="1552" title="Klein four-group" label="Klein four-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q742064" start="1563" end="1573" title="group isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="1629" end="1636" title="abelian group" label="abelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335680" start="1880" end="1896" title="quaternion group" label="quaternion group"/>
<link wikidata="Q558339" start="2109" end="2123" title="dihedral group" label="dihedral group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464168" start="2152" end="2157" title="index of a subgroup" label="index"/>
<link wikidata="Q77980689" start="2311" end="2329" title="outer automorphism group" label="outer automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="2486" end="2496" title="surjective" label="surjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340800" start="2497" end="2509" title="endomorphism" label="endomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057968" start="2516" end="2528" title="finite group" label="finite group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3036" end="3048" title="group homomorphism#Types" label="endomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q522216" start="3210" end="3229" title="commutator subgroup" label="commutator subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920943" start="3413" end="3428" title="verbal subgroup" label="verbal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q431078" start="3484" end="3494" title="free group" label="free group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920943" start="3537" end="3552" title="verbal subgroup" label="verbal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3593" end="3611" title="reduced free group" label="reduced free group"/>
<link wikidata="Q431078" start="3641" end="3651" title="free group" label="free group"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861" start="3809" end="3819" title="transitive relation" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195852" start="4626" end="4643" title="center of a group" label="center of a group"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="4984" end="4992" title="Subgroup" label="Subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="4995" end="5010" title="Normal subgroup" label="Normal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q747027" start="5074" end="5103" title="Fully characteristic subgroup" label="Fully characteristic subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920943" start="5106" end="5121" title="Verbal subgroup" label="Verbal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q849512" start="5236" end="5251" title="symmetric group" label="symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="5269" end="5281" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q522216" start="5943" end="5959" title="derived subgroup" label="derived subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293759" start="6022" end="6038" title="torsion subgroup" label="torsion subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="6045" end="6058" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988368" start="6122" end="6140" title="identity component" label="identity component"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="6146" end="6163" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117616" start="6217" end="6248" title="Characteristically simple group" label="Characteristically simple group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7199" wikidata="Q42707" url="?curid=7199" title="List of cat breeds">
<text>Domestic cats have been diversified by humans into breeds and domestic and wild hybrids. Many such breeds recognized by various cat registries. Additionally, there are new and experimental breeds, landraces being established as standardized breeds, distinct domestic populations not being actively developed and lapsed (extinct) breeds.

As of 2023, The International Cat Association (TICA) recognizes 73 standardized breeds, the Cat Fanciers&#x27; Association (CFA) recognizes 45, the Fédération Internationale Féline (FIFe) recognizes 50, the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy (GCCF) recognizes 45, and the World Cat Federation (WCF) recognizes 69.

Inconsistency in a breed&#x27;s classification and naming among registries means that an individual animal may be considered different breeds by different registries (though not necessarily eligible for registry in them all, depending on its exact ancestry). For example, TICA&#x27;s Himalayan is considered a colorpoint variety of the Persian by the CFA, while the Javanese (or Colorpoint Longhair) is a color variation of the Balinese in both the TICA and the CFA; both breeds are merged (along with the Colorpoint Shorthair) into a single &quot;mega-breed&quot;, the Colourpoint, by the World Cat Federation (WCF), who have repurposed the name &quot;Javanese&quot; for the Oriental Longhair. Also, &quot;Colourpoint Longhair&quot; refers to different breeds in other registries. There are many examples of nomenclatural overlap and differences of this sort. Furthermore, many geographical and cultural names for cat breeds are fanciful selections made by Western breeders to be exotic sounding and bear no relationship to the actual origin of the breeds; the Balinese, Javanese, and Himalayan are all examples of this trend.

The domestic short-haired and domestic long-haired cat types are not breeds, but terms used (with various spellings) in the cat fancy to describe &quot;mongrel&quot; or &quot;bicolor&quot; cats by coat length, ones that do not belong to a particular breed. Some registries such as the Cat Fanciers&#x27; Association allow for domestic short hairs and domestic long hairs to be registered for the purpose of outcrossing. They should not be confused with standardized breeds with similar names, such as the British Shorthair and Oriental Longhair.

== Breeds ==
== See also ==
* Animal show
* Animals in sport
* Felidae – the entire cat family
* Felinae – the subfamily of all smaller cat species
* Lists of breeds
* List of experimental cat breeds
* List of cat registries
* List of individual cats
* Selective breeding
* Wildcat – the ancestor of the domestic cat

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="0" end="12" title="Cat" label="Domestic cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q38829" start="51" end="56" title="breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q845320" start="62" end="87" title="Felid hybrid" label="domestic and wild hybrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051107" start="128" end="142" title="Cat registry" label="cat registries"/>
<link wikidata="Q174030" start="197" end="205" title="landrace" label="landrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q42709" start="350" end="383" title="The International Cat Association" label="The International Cat Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050099" start="430" end="460" title="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q42584" start="486" end="518" title="Fédération Internationale Féline" label="Fédération Internationale Féline"/>
<link wikidata="Q42543" start="545" end="579" title="Governing Council of the Cat Fancy" label="Governing Council of the Cat Fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42713" start="610" end="630" title="World Cat Federation" label="World Cat Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42643" start="963" end="973" title="Point coloration" label="colorpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q42713" start="1243" end="1263" title="World Cat Federation" label="World Cat Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099338" start="1329" end="1346" title="Oriental Longhair" label="Oriental Longhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q126478118" start="1786" end="1807" title="domestic short-haired" label="domestic short-haired"/>
<link wikidata="Q126478118" start="1812" end="1832" title="domestic long-haired" label="domestic long-haired"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793147" start="1906" end="1915" title="cat fancy" label="cat fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38945" start="1934" end="1941" title="mongrel" label="mongrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901647" start="1957" end="1964" title="bicolor cat" label="bicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050099" start="2067" end="2097" title="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Cat Fanciers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q29273" start="2287" end="2304" title="British Shorthair" label="British Shorthair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099338" start="2309" end="2326" title="Oriental Longhair" label="Oriental Longhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502926" start="2359" end="2370" title="Animal show" label="Animal show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060018" start="2373" end="2389" title="Animals in sport" label="Animals in sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q25265" start="2392" end="2399" title="Felidae" label="Felidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q42602" start="2426" end="2433" title="Felinae" label="Felinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23014130" start="2479" end="2494" title="Lists of breeds" label="Lists of breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000183" start="2497" end="2528" title="List of experimental cat breeds" label="List of experimental cat breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q109236487" start="2531" end="2553" title="List of cat registries" label="List of cat registries"/>
<link wikidata="Q587529" start="2556" end="2579" title="List of individual cats" label="List of individual cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="2582" end="2600" title="Selective breeding" label="Selective breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q20980826" start="2603" end="2610" title="Wildcat" label="Wildcat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7200" wikidata="Q2783852" url="?curid=7200" title="Class action">
<text>A class action, also known as a class action lawsuit, class suit, or representative action, is a type of lawsuit where one of the parties is a group of people who are represented collectively by a member or members of that group. The class action originated in the United States and is still predominantly an American phenomenon, but Canada, as well as several European countries with civil law, have made changes in recent years to allow consumer organizations to bring claims on behalf of consumers.
==Description==
In a typical class action, a plaintiff sues a defendant or a number of defendants on behalf of a group, or class, of absent parties. This differs from a traditional lawsuit, in which the plaintiffs sue one or more defendants, and all of the parties are present in court. For example, a group in a class action lawsuit could be any person who ever bought a specific dangerous product; in a traditional lawsuit, the plaintiff is a single individual person or business that bought the dangerous product.

Although standards differ between states and countries, class actions are most common where the allegations usually involve at least 40 people who the same defendant has injured in the same way. Instead of each individual person bringing their own lawsuits separately, the class action allows all the claims of all class members—whether they know they have been damaged or not—to be resolved in a single proceeding through the efforts of the representative plaintiff(s) and appointed class counsel.

==History==

===England and the United Kingdom===
The antecedent of the class action was what modern observers call &quot;group litigation,&quot; which appears to have been quite common in medieval England from about 1200 onward. These lawsuits involved groups of people either suing or being sued in actions at common law. These groups were usually based on existing societal structures like villages, towns, parishes, and guilds. Unlike modern courts, the medieval English courts did not question the right of the actual plaintiffs to sue on behalf of a group or a few representatives to defend an entire group.
From 1400 to 1700, group litigation gradually switched from being the norm in England to the exception. The development of the concept of the corporation led to the wealthy supporters of the corporate form becoming suspicious of all unincorporated legal entities, which in turn led to the modern concept of the unincorporated or voluntary association. The tumultuous history of the Wars of the Roses and then the Star Chamber resulted in periods during which the common law courts were frequently paralyzed, and out of the confusion the Court of Chancery emerged with exclusive jurisdiction over group litigation.

By 1850, Parliament had enacted several statutes on a case-by-case basis to deal with issues regularly faced by certain types of organizations, like joint-stock companies, and with the impetus for most types of group litigation removed, it went into a steep decline in English jurisprudence from which it never recovered. It was further weakened by the fact that equity pleading, in general, was falling into disfavor, which culminated in the Judicature Acts of 1874 and 1875. Group litigation was essentially dead in the United Kingdom after 1850.

===United States===
Class actions survived in the United States thanks to the influence of Supreme Court Associate Justice Joseph Story, who imported it into US law through summary discussions in his two equity treatises as well as his opinion in &quot;West v. Randall&quot; (1820). However, Story did not necessarily endorse class actions, because he &quot;could not conceive of a modern function or a coherent theory for representative litigation.&quot;

The oldest predecessor to the class-action rule in the United States was in the Federal Equity Rules, specifically Equity Rule 48, promulgated in 1842.

Where the parties on either side are very numerous, and cannot, without manifest inconvenience and oppressive delays in the suit, be all brought before it, the court in its discretion may dispense with making all of them parties, and may proceed in the suit, having sufficient parties before it to represent all the adverse interests of the plaintiffs and the defendants in the suit properly before it. But in such cases, the decree shall be without prejudice to the rights and claims of all the absent parties.

This allowed for representative suits in situations where there were too many individual parties (which now forms the first requirement for class-action litigation – numerosity). However, this rule did not allow such suits to bind similarly situated absent parties, which rendered the rule ineffective. Within ten years, the Supreme Court interpreted Rule 48 in such a way so that it could apply to absent parties under certain circumstances, but only by ignoring the plain meaning of the rule. In the rules published in 1912, Equity Rule 48 was replaced with Equity Rule 38 as part of a major restructuring of the Equity Rules, and when federal courts merged their legal and equitable procedural systems in 1938, Equity Rule 38 became Rule 23 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

====Modern developments====
A major revision of the FRCP in 1966 radically transformed Rule 23, made the opt-out class action the standard option, and gave birth to the modern class action. Entire treatises have been written since to summarize the huge mass of law that sprang up from the 1966 revision of Rule 23. Just as medieval group litigation bound all members of the group regardless of whether they all actually appeared in court, the modern class action binds &quot;all&quot; members of the class, except for those who choose to opt out (if the rules permit them to do so).

The Advisory Committee that drafted the new Rule 23 in the mid-1960s was influenced by two major developments. First was the suggestion of Harry Kalven Jr. and Maurice Rosenfield in 1941 that class-action litigation by individual shareholders on behalf of all shareholders of a company could effectively supplement direct government regulation of securities markets and other similar markets. The second development was the rise of the civil rights movement, environmentalism and consumerism. The groups behind these movements, as well as many others in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, all turned to class actions as a means for achieving their goals. For example, a 1978 environmental law treatise reprinted the &quot;entire&quot; text of Rule 23 and mentioned &quot;class actions&quot; 14 times in its index.

Businesses targeted by class actions for inflicting massive aggregate harm have sought ways to avoid class actions altogether. In the 1990s, the US Supreme Court issued several decisions that strengthened the &quot;federal policy favoring arbitration&quot;. In response, lawyers have added provisions to consumer contracts of adhesion called &quot;collective action waivers&quot;, which prohibit those signing the contracts from bringing class-action suits. In 2011, the US Supreme Court ruled in a 5–4 decision in &quot;AT&amp;T Mobility v. Concepcion&quot; that the Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 preempts state laws that prohibit contracts from disallowing class-action lawsuits, which will make it more difficult for consumers to file class-action lawsuits. The dissent pointed to a saving clause in the federal act which allowed states to determine how a contract or its clauses may be revoked.

In two major 21st-century cases, the Supreme Court ruled 5–4 against certification of class actions due to differences in each individual members&#x27; circumstances: first in &quot;Wal-Mart v. Dukes&quot; (2011) and later in &quot;Comcast Corp. v. Behrend&quot; (2013).

Companies may insert the phrase &quot;may elect to resolve any claim by individual arbitration&quot; into their consumer and employment contracts to use arbitration and prevent class-action lawsuits.

Rejecting arguments that they violated employees&#x27; rights to collective bargaining, and that modestly-valued consumer claims would be more efficiently litigated within the parameters of one lawsuit, the U.S. Supreme Court, in &quot;Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis&quot; (2018), enabled the use of class action waivers. Citing its deference to freedom to contract principles, the Epic Systems opinion opened the door dramatically to the use of these waivers as a condition of employment, consumer purchases and the like. Some commentators in opposition to the ruling see it as a &quot;death knell&quot; to many employment and consumer class actions, and have increasingly pushed for legislation to circumvent it in hopes of reviving otherwise-underrepresented parties&#x27; ability to litigate on a group basis. Supporters (mostly pro-business) of the high court&#x27;s ruling argue its holding is consistent with private contract principles. Many of those supporters had long-since argued that class action procedures were generally inconsistent with due process mandates and unnecessarily promoted litigation of otherwise small claims—thus heralding the ruling&#x27;s anti-litigation effect.

In 2017, the US Supreme Court issued its opinion in Bristol-Meyer Squibb Co. v. Superior Court of California, 137 S. Ct. 1773 (2017), holding that over five hundred plaintiffs from other states cannot bring a consolidated mass action against the pharmaceutical giant in the State of California. This opinion may arguably render nationwide mass action and class action impossible in any single state besides the defendant&#x27;s home state.

In 2020, the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals found incentive awards are impermissible. Incentive awards are a relatively modest payment made to class representatives as part of a class settlement. The ruling was a response to an objector who claimed Rule 23 required that the fee petition be filed &quot;before&quot; the time frame for class member objections to be filed; and payments to the class representative violates doctrine from two US Supreme Court cases from the 1800s.

=== Statistics ===
As of 2010, there was no publicly maintained list of nonsecurities class-action settlements, although a securities class-action database exists in the Stanford Law School Securities Class Action Clearinghouse and several for-profit companies maintain lists of the securities settlements. One study of federal settlements required the researcher to manually search databases of lawsuits for the relevant records, although state class actions were not included due to the difficulty in gathering the information. Another source of data is US Bureau of Justice Statistics &quot;Civil Justice Survey of State Courts&quot;, which offers statistics for the year 2005.

==Advantages==
Proponents of class actions state that they offer a number of advantages because they aggregate many individualized claims into one representational lawsuit.

First, aggregation can increase the efficiency of the legal process, and lower the costs of litigation. In cases with common questions of law and fact, aggregation of claims into a class action may avoid the necessity of repeating &quot;days of the same witnesses, and issues from trial to trial&quot;. &quot;Jenkins v. Raymark Indus. Inc.&quot;, 782 F.2d 468, 473 (5th Cir. 1986) (granting certification of a class action involving asbestos).

Second, a class action may overcome &quot;the problem that small recoveries do not provide the incentive for any individual to bring a solo action prosecuting his or her rights&quot;. &quot;Amchem Prods., Inc. v. Windsor&quot;, 521 U.S. 591, 617 (1997) (quoting &quot;Mace v. Van Ru Credit Corp.&quot;, 109 F.3d 388, 344 (7th Cir. 1997)). &quot;A class action solves this problem by aggregating the relatively paltry potential recoveries into something worth someone&#x27;s (usually an attorney&#x27;s) labor.&quot; &quot;Amchem Prods., Inc.&quot;, 521 U.S. at 617 (quoting &quot;Mace&quot;, 109 F.3d at 344). In other words, a class action ensures that a defendant who engages in widespread harmbut does so minimally against each individual plaintiffmust compensate those individuals for their injuries. For example, thousands of shareholders of a public company may have losses too small to justify separate lawsuits, but a class action can be brought efficiently on behalf of all shareholders. Perhaps even more important than compensation is that class treatment of claims may be the only way to impose the costs of wrongdoing on the wrongdoer, thus deterring future wrongdoing.

Third, class-action cases may be brought to purposely change behavior of a class of which the defendant is a member. &quot;Landeros v. Flood&quot; (1976) was a landmark case decided by the California Supreme Court that aimed at purposefully changing the behavior of doctors, encouraging them to report suspected child abuse. Otherwise, they would face the threat of civil action for damages in tort proximately flowing from the failure to report the suspected injuries. Previously, many physicians had remained reluctant to report cases of apparent child abuse, despite existing law that required it.

Fourth, in &quot;limited fund&quot; cases, a class action ensures that all plaintiffs receive relief and that early-filing plaintiffs do not raid the fund (i.e., the defendant) of all its assets before other plaintiffs may be compensated. See &quot;Ortiz v. Fibreboard Corp.&quot;, 527 U.S. 815 (1999). A class action in such a situation centralizes all claims into one venue where a court can equitably divide the assets amongst all the plaintiffs if they win the case.

Finally, a class action avoids the situation where different court rulings could create &quot;incompatible standards&quot; of conduct for the defendant to follow. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(b)(1)(A). For example, a court might certify a case for class treatment where a number of individual bond-holders sue to determine whether they may convert their bonds to common stock. Refusing to litigate the case in one trial could result in different outcomes and inconsistent standards of conduct for the defendant corporation. Thus, courts will generally allow a class action in such a situation. See, e.g., &quot;Van Gemert v. Boeing Co.&quot;, 259 F. Supp. 125 (S.D.N.Y. 1966).

Whether a class action is superior to individual litigation depends on the case and is determined by the judge&#x27;s ruling on a motion for class certification. The Advisory Committee Note to Rule 23, for example, states that mass torts are ordinarily &quot;not appropriate&quot; for class treatment. Class treatment may not improve the efficiency of a mass tort because the claims frequently involve individualized issues of law and fact that will have to be re-tried on an individual basis. See &quot;Castano v. Am. Tobacco Co.&quot;, 84 F.3d 734 (5th Cir. 1996) (rejecting nationwide class action against tobacco companies). Mass torts also involve high individual damage awards; thus, the absence of class treatment will not impede the ability of individual claimants to seek justice. Other cases, however, may be more conducive to class treatment.

The preamble to the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005, passed by the United States Congress, found:
Class-action lawsuits are an important and valuable part of the legal system when they permit the fair and efficient resolution of legitimate claims of numerous parties by allowing the claims to be aggregated into a single action against a defendant that has allegedly caused harm. 

==Criticisms==
There are several criticisms of class actions. The preamble to the Class Action Fairness Act stated that some abusive class actions have harmed class members possessing legitimate claims and defendants acting responsibly; have adversely affected interstate commerce; and have undermined public respect for the country&#x27;s judicial system.

Class members often receive little or no benefit from class actions. Examples cited for this include large fees for the attorneys, while leaving class members with coupons or other awards of little or no value; unjustified awards are made to certain plaintiffs at the expense of other class members; and confusing notices are published that prevent class members from being able to fully understand and effectively exercise their rights.

For example, in the United States, class lawsuits sometimes bind all class members with a low settlement. These &quot;coupon settlements&quot; (which usually allow the plaintiffs to receive a small benefit such as a small check or a coupon for future services or products with the defendant company) are a way for a defendant to forestall major liability by precluding many people from litigating their claims separately, to recover reasonable compensation for the damages. However, existing law requires judicial approval of all class-action settlements, and in most cases, class members are given a chance to opt out of class settlement, though class members, despite opt-out notices, may be unaware of their right to opt-out because they did not receive the notice, did not read it or did not understand it.

The Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 addresses these concerns. An independent expert may scrutinize coupon settlements before judicial approval in order to ensure that the settlement will be of value to the class members (28 U.S.C.A. 1712(d)). Further, if the action provides for settlement in coupons, &quot;the portion of any attorney&#x27;s fee award to class counsel that is attributable to the award of the coupons shall be based on the value to class members of the coupons that are redeemed&quot;. 28 U.S.C.A. 1712(a).

A common critique is that class actions are a form of judicially sanctioned extortion. The extortion thesis was first articulated by law professor Milton Handler, who published a famous law review article in 1971 calling the class action a form of &quot;legalized blackmail&quot;. It has garnered the support of a significant minority of the justices of the U.S. Supreme Court, along with prominent judges like Henry Friendly and Richard Posner. However, empirical studies have generally found the extortion thesis to be &quot;overstated&quot;.

==Ethics==
Class action cases present significant ethical challenges. Defendants can hold reverse auctions and any of several parties can engage in collusive settlement discussions. Subclasses may have interests that diverge greatly from the class but may be treated the same. Proposed settlements could offer some groups (such as former customers) much greater benefits than others. In one paper presented at an ABA conference on class actions in 2007, authors commented that &quot;competing cases can also provide opportunities for collusive settlement discussions and reverse auctions by defendants anxious to resolve their new exposure at the most economic cost&quot;.

Advertising or otherwise soliciting to find lead plaintiffs may also be unethical, as the plaintiff may not genuinely be aggrieved.

==Defendant class action==
Although normally plaintiffs are the class, defendant class actions are also possible. For example, in 2005, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Portland in Oregon was sued as part of the Catholic priest sex-abuse scandal. All parishioners of the Archdiocese&#x27;s churches were cited as a defendant class. This was done to include their assets (local churches) in any settlement. Where both the plaintiffs and the defendants have been organized into court-approved classes, the action is called a bilateral class action.

In the United States, only a few hundred defendant class actions have been filed (mostly in securities cases and constitutional challenges), and circuit courts are split as to whether injunctive relief is available against defendant classes at all.

==Mass actions==
In a class action, the plaintiff seeks court approval to litigate on behalf of a group of similarly situated persons. Not every plaintiff looks for or could obtain such approval. As a procedural alternative, plaintiff&#x27;s counsel may attempt to sign up every similarly situated person that counsel can find as a client. Plaintiff&#x27;s counsel can then join the claims of all of these persons in one complaint, a so-called &quot;mass action&quot;, hoping to have the same efficiencies and economic leverage as if a class had been certified.

Because mass actions operate outside the detailed procedures laid out for class actions, they can pose special difficulties for both plaintiffs, defendants, and the court. For example, settlement of class actions follows a predictable path of negotiation with class counsel and representatives, court scrutiny, and notice. There may not be a way to uniformly settle all of the many claims brought via a mass action. Some states permit plaintiff&#x27;s counsel to settle for all the mass action plaintiffs according to a majority vote, for example. Other states, such as New Jersey, require each plaintiff to approve the settlement of that plaintiff&#x27;s own individual claims.

==Class action legislation==

===Argentina===
Class actions were recognized in &quot;Halabi&quot; leading case (Supreme Court, 2009).

=== Australia and New Zealand ===
Class actions became part of the Australian legal landscape only when the Federal Parliament amended the Federal Court of Australia Act in 1992 to introduce &quot;representative proceedings&quot;, the equivalent of the American &quot;class actions&quot;.

Likewise, class actions appeared slowly in the New Zealand legal system. However, a group can bring litigation through the action of a representative under the High Court Rules which provide that one or a multitude of persons may sue on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all persons &quot;with the same interest in the subject matter of a proceeding&quot;. The presence and expansion of litigation funders have been playing a significant role in the emergence of class actions in New Zealand. For example, the &quot;Fair Play on Fees&quot; proceedings in relation to penalty fees charged by banks were funded by Litigation Lending Services (LLS), a company specializing in the funding and management of litigation in Australia and New Zealand. It was the biggest class-action suit in New Zealand history.

===Austria===
The Austrian Code of Civil Procedure ( – ZPO) does not provide for a special proceeding for complex class-action litigation. However, Austrian consumer organizations ( (VKI) and the Federal Chamber of Labour / ) have brought claims on behalf of hundreds or even thousands of consumers. In these cases, the individual consumers assigned their claims to one entity, who has then brought an ordinary (two-party) lawsuit over the assigned claims. The monetary benefits were redistributed among the class. This technique, labeled as &quot;class action Austrian style&quot;, allows for a significant reduction of overall costs. The Austrian Supreme Court, in a judgment, confirmed the legal admissibility of these lawsuits under the condition that all claims are essentially based on the same grounds.

The Austrian Parliament unanimously requested the Austrian Federal Minister for Justice to examine the possibility of new legislation providing for a cost-effective and appropriate way to deal with mass claims. Together with the Austrian Ministry for Social Security, Generations and Consumer Protection, the Justice Ministry opened the discussion with a conference held in Vienna in June 2005. With the aid of a group of experts from many fields, the Justice Ministry began drafting the new law in September 2005. With the individual positions varying greatly, a political consensus could not be reached.

===Canada===
Provincial laws in Canada allow class actions. All provinces permit plaintiff classes and some permit defendant classes. Quebec was the first province to enact class proceedings legislation, in 1978. Ontario was next, with the Class Proceedings Act, 1992. As of 2008, 9 of 10 provinces had enacted comprehensive class actions legislation. In Prince Edward Island, where no comprehensive legislation exists, following the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in &quot;Western Canadian Shopping Centres Inc. v. Dutton&quot;, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 534, class actions may be advanced under a local rule of court. The Federal Court of Canada permits class actions under Part V.1 of the Federal Courts Rules.

Legislation in Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, and Nova Scotia expressly or by judicial opinion has been read to allow for what are informally known as national &quot;opt-out&quot; class actions, whereby residents of other provinces may be included in the class definition and potentially be bound by the court&#x27;s judgment on common issues unless they opt out in a prescribed manner and time. Court rulings have determined that this permits a court in one province to include residents of other provinces in the class action on an &quot;opt-out&quot; basis.

Judicial opinions have indicated that provincial legislative national opt-out powers should not be exercised to interfere with the ability of another province to certify a parallel class action for residents of other provinces. The first court to certify will generally exclude residents of provinces whose courts have certified a parallel class action. However, in the Vioxx litigation, two provincial courts certified overlapping class actions whereby Canadian residents were class members in two class actions in two provinces. Both decisions are under appeal.

Other legislation may provide for representative actions on behalf of a large number of plaintiffs, independent of class action procedures. For instance, under Ontario&#x27;s Condominium Act, a condominium&#x27;s governing corporation may launch a lawsuit on behalf of the owners for damage to the condominium&#x27;s common elements, even though the corporation does not own the common elements.

The largest class action suit in Canada was settled in 2005 after Nora Bernard initiated efforts that led to an estimated 79,000 survivors of Canada&#x27;s residential school system suing the Canadian government. The settlement amounted to upwards of $5 billion.

=== Chile ===
Chile approved class actions in 2004. The Chilean model is technically an opt-out issue class action, followed by a compensatory stage which can be collective or individual. This means that the class action is designed to declare the defendant generally liable with effects if and only if the defendant is found liable, and the declaratory judgment can be used then to pursue damages in the same procedure or in individual ones in different jurisdictions. If the latter is the case, the liability cannot be discussed, but only the damages. There under the Chilean procedural rules, one particular case works as an opt-out class action for damages. This is the case when defendants can identify and compensate consumers directly, i.e. because it is their banking institution. In such cases, the judge can skip the compensatory stage and order redress directly. Since 2005 more than 100 cases have been filed, mostly by [SERNAC], the Chilean consumer protection agency. Salient cases have been &quot;Condecus v. BancoEstado&quot; and &quot;SERNAC v. La Polar&quot;.

===France===
Under French law, an association can represent the collective interests of consumers; however, each claimant must be individually named in the lawsuit. On January 4, 2005, President Chirac urged changes that would provide greater consumer protection. A draft bill was proposed in April 2006 but did not pass.

Following the change of majority in France in 2012, the new government proposed introducing class actions into French law. The project of of May 2013 aimed to limit the class action to consumer and competition disputes. The law was passed on March 1, 2014.

=== Germany ===

Class actions are generally not permitted in Germany, as German law does not recognize the concept of a targeted class being affected by certain actions. This requires each plaintiff to individually prove that they were affected by an action, and present their individual damages, and prove the causality between both parties.

Joint litigation () is a legal act that may permit plaintiffs that are in the same legal community with respect to the dispute, or are entitled by the same factual or legal reason. These are not typically regarded as class action suits, as each individual plaintiff is entitled to compensation for their individual, incurred damages and not as a result of being a member of a class.

The combination of court cases () is another method that permits a judge to combine multiple separate court cases into a single trial with a single verdict. According to § 147 ZPO, this is only permissible if all cases are regarding the same factual and legal event and basis.

==== Mediation procedure ====
A genuine extension of the legal effect of a court decision beyond the parties involved in the proceedings is offered under corporate law. This procedure applies to the review of stock payoffs under the Stock Corporation Act (). Pursuant to Sec. 13 Paragraph 2 of the Mediation Procedure Act (), the court decision concerning the dismissal or direction of a binding arrangement of an adequate compensation is effective for and against all shareholders, including those who have already agreed to a previous settlement in this matter.

==== Investor model case proceedings ====
The Capital Investor Model Case Act () is an attempt to enable model cases to be brought by a large number of potentially affected parties in the event of disputes, limited to the investment market. In contrast to US class actions, each affected party must file a lawsuit in its own name in order to participate in the model proceedings.

==== Model Declaratory Action ====
Effective on November 1, 2018, the Code of Civil Procedure () introduced the Model Declaratory Action (§ 606 ZPO) that created the ability to bundle similar claims by many affected parties efficiently into one proceeding.

Registered Consumer Protection Associations can file – if they represent at least 10 individuals – for a (general) judicial finding whether the factual and legal requirements for of claims or legal relationships are met or not. These individuals have to register in order to inhibit their claims. Since these Adjudications are more of a general nature, each individual must assert their claims in their own court proceedings. The competent court is bound by the Model Declaratory Action decision.

==== Associate Action ====
German law also recognizes the associative action (), which is comparable to the class action and is predominantly used in environmental law. In civil law, the associative action is represented by a foreign body in the matter of asserting and enforcing individual claims and the claimant can no longer control the proceedings.

==== Class action with relation to the United States ====
Class actions can be brought by Germans in the US for events in Germany if the facts of the case relate to the US. For example, in the case of the Eschede train disaster, the lawsuit was allowed because several aggrieved parties came from the US and had purchased rail tickets there.

===India===

Decisions of the Indian Supreme Court in the 1980s loosened strict &quot;locus standi&quot; requirements to permit the filing of suits on behalf of rights of deprived sections of society by public-minded individuals or bodies. Although not strictly &quot;class action litigation&quot; as it is understood in American law, public interest litigation arose out of the wide powers of judicial review granted to the Supreme Court of India and the various High Courts under and Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The sort of remedies sought from courts in public interest litigation go beyond mere award of damages to all affected groups, and have sometimes (controversially) gone on to include Court monitoring of the implementation of legislation and even the framing of guidelines in the absence of Parliamentary legislation.

However, this innovative jurisprudence did not help the victims of the Bhopal gas tragedy, who were unable to fully prosecute a class-action litigation (as understood in the American sense) against Union Carbide due to procedural rules that would make such litigation impossible to conclude and unwieldy to carry out. Instead, the Government of India exercised its right of &quot;parens patriae&quot; to appropriate all the claims of the victims and proceeded to litigate on their behalf, first in the New York courts and later, in the Indian courts. Ultimately, the matter was settled between the Union of India and Union Carbide (in a settlement overseen by the Supreme Court of India) for a sum of as a complete settlement of all claims of all victims for all time to come.

Public interest litigation has now broadened in scope to cover larger and larger groups of citizens who may be affected by government inaction. Examples of this trend include the conversion of all public transport in the city of Delhi from diesel engines to compressed natural gas engines on the basis of the orders of the Delhi High Court; the monitoring of forest use by the High Courts and the Supreme Court to ensure that there is no unjustified loss of forest cover; and the directions mandating the disclosure of assets of electoral candidates for the Houses of Parliament and State Assembly.

The Supreme Court has observed that the PIL has tended to become a means to gain publicity or obtain relief contrary to constitutionally valid legislation and policy. Observers point out that many High Courts and certain Supreme Court judges are reluctant to entertain PILs filed by non-governmental organizations and activists, citing concerns of separation of powers and parliamentary sovereignty.

===Ireland===

In Irish law, there is no such thing as a &quot;class action&quot; per se. Third-party litigation funding (champerty) is prohibited under Irish law. Instead, there is the &#x27;representative action&#x27; () or &#x27;test case&#x27; (). A representative action is &quot;where one claimant or defendant, with the same interest as a group of claimants or defendants in an action, institutes or defends proceedings on behalf of that group of claimants or defendants.&quot;

Some test cases in Ireland have included:
*the CervicalCheck cancer scandal
*financial product misselling
*damages claims brought by Irish hauliers against price-fixing by European truck makers

===Italy===
Italy has class action legislation. Consumer associations can file claims on behalf of groups of consumers to obtain judicial orders against corporations that cause injury or damage to consumers. These types of claims are increasing, and Italian courts have allowed them against banks that continue to apply compound interest on retail clients&#x27; current account overdrafts. Class action is regulated by art. 140 bis of the Italian consumers&#x27; code and has been in force since 1 July 2009. On May 19, 2021, the reform of the Italian legal framework on class actions finally entered into force. The new rules, designed by Law n. 31 and published on April 18, 2019, (Law n. 31/2019), were initially intended to become effective on April 19, 2020, but were delayed twice. The new rules on class actions are now included in the Italian Civil Procedure Code (ICPC). Overall, the new class action appears to be a viable instrument which, through a system of economic incentives, could overcome the rational apathy of small-claims holders and ensure redress.

===Netherlands===
Dutch law allows associations () and foundations () to bring a so-called collective action on behalf of other persons, provided they can represent the interests of such persons according to their by-laws () (section 3:305a Dutch Civil Code). All types of actions are permitted. This includes a claim for monetary damages, provided the event occurred after 15 November 2016 (pursuant to new legislation which entered into force 1 January 2020). Most class actions over the past decade have been in the field of securities fraud and financial services. The acting association or foundation may come to a collective settlement with the defendant. The settlement may also include – and usually primarily consists of – monetary compensation of damages. Such settlement can be declared binding for all injured parties by the Amsterdam Court of Appeal (section 7:907 Dutch Civil Code). The injured parties have an opt-out right during the opt-out period set by the Court, usually 3 to 6 months. Settlements involving injured parties from outside the Netherlands can also be declared binding by the Court. Since US courts are reluctant to take up class actions brought on behalf of injured parties not residing in the US who have suffered damages due to acts or omissions committed outside the US, combinations of US class actions and Dutch collective actions may come to a settlement that covers plaintiffs worldwide. An example of this is the Royal Dutch Shell Oil Reserves Settlement that was declared binding upon both US and non-US plaintiffs.

===Poland===
 or class action has been allowed under Polish law since July 19, 2010. A minimum of 10 persons, suing based on the same law, is required.

===Russia===
Collective litigation has been allowed under Russian law since 2002. Basic criteria are, like in the US, numerosity, commonality, and typicality.

===Spain===

Spanish law allows nominated consumer associations to take action to protect the interests of consumers. A number of groups already have the power to bring collective or class actions: certain consumer associations, bodies legally constituted to defend the &quot;collective interest&quot; and groups of injured parties.

Recent changes to Spanish civil procedure rules include the introduction of a quasi-class action right for certain consumer associations to claim damages on behalf of unidentified classes of consumers. The rules require consumer associations to represent an adequate number of affected parties who have suffered the same harm. Also, any judgment made by the Spanish court will list the individual beneficiaries or, if that is not possible, conditions that need to be fulfilled for a party to benefit from a judgment.

===Switzerland===
Swiss law does not allow for any form of class action. When the government proposed a new federal code of civil procedure in 2006, replacing the cantonal codes of civil procedure, it rejected the introduction of class actions, arguing that

===United Kingdom===

==== England and Wales ====
The Civil Procedure Rules of the courts of England and Wales came into force in 1999 and have provided for group litigation orders in limited circumstances (under Part 19.21–26, supplemented by Practice Direction 19B). HM Courts and Tribunals Service maintains a public list of group litigation orders, and there have been 124 orders granted.

A sectoral mechanism was adopted by the Consumer Rights Act 2015, taking effect on October 1, 2015. Under the provisions therein, opt-in or opt-out collective procedures may be certified for breaches of competition law. This is currently the closest mechanism to a class action in England and Wales.

==== Scotland ====

A similar approach exists in Scotland to bring group proceedings under Part 4 of the Civil Litigation (Expenses and Group Proceedings) (Scotland) Act 2018. The Scottish Courts and Tribunals Service maintain a public list of group proceedings cases.

===United States===
In the United States, the class representative, also called a lead plaintiff, named plaintiff, or representative plaintiff, is the named party in a class-action lawsuit. Although the class representative is named as a party to the litigation, the court must approve the class representative when it certifies the lawsuit as a class action.

The class representative must be able to represent the interests of all the members of the class, by being typical of the class members and not having conflicts with them. He or she is responsible for hiring the attorney, filing the lawsuit, consulting on the case, and agreeing to any settlement. In exchange, the class representative may be entitled to compensation (at the court&#x27;s discretion) out of the recovery amount.

====Standing====

In securities class actions that allege violations of Section 11 of the Securities Act of 1933, &quot;officers and directors are liable together with the corporation for material misrepresentations in the registration statement.&quot;

To have standing to sue under Section 11 of the 1933 Act in a class action, a plaintiff must be able to prove that he can trace his shares to the registration statement in question, as to which there is alleged a material misstatement or omission. In the absence of an ability to actually trace his shares, such as when securities issued at multiple times are held by the depository trust company in a fungible bulk and physical tracing of particular shares may be impossible, the plaintiff may be barred from pursuing his claim for lack of standing.

====Federal courts====
In federal courts, class actions are governed by Federal Rules of Civil Procedure Rule and 28 U.S.C.A. § 1332(d). Cases in federal courts are only allowed to proceed as class actions if the court has jurisdiction to hear the case, and if the case meets the criteria set out in Rule 23. In the vast majority of federal class actions, the class is acting as the plaintiff. However, Rule 23 also provides for defendant class actions.

Typically, federal courts are thought to be more favorable for defendants, and state courts more favorable for plaintiffs. Many class actions are filed initially in state court. The defendant will frequently try to remove the case to federal court. The Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 increases defendants&#x27; ability to remove state cases to federal court by giving federal courts original jurisdiction for all class actions with damages exceeding $5,000,000 exclusive of interest and costs. The Class Action Fairness Act contains carve-outs for, among other things, shareholder class actions covered by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and those concerning internal corporate governance issues (the latter typically being brought as shareholder derivative actions in the state courts of Delaware, the state of incorporation of most large corporations).

=====Jurisdiction=====
Class actions may be brought in federal court if the claim arises under federal law or if the claim falls under 28 U.S.C. § 1332(d). Under § 1332(d)(2) the federal district courts have original jurisdiction over any civil action where the amount in controversy exceeds $5,000,000 and
* any member of a class of plaintiffs is a citizen of a State different from any defendant; or
* any member of a class of plaintiffs is a foreign state or a citizen or subject of a foreign state and any defendant is a citizen of a State; or
* any member of a class of plaintiffs is a citizen of a State and any defendant is a foreign state or a citizen or subject of a foreign state.

Nationwide plaintiff classes are possible, but such suits must have a commonality of issues across state lines. This may be difficult if the civil law in the various states lack significant commonalities. Large class actions brought in federal court frequently are consolidated for pre-trial purposes through the device of multidistrict litigation (MDL). It is also possible to bring class actions under state law, and in some cases the court may extend its jurisdiction to all the members of the class, including out of state (or even internationally) as the key element is the jurisdiction that the court has over the defendant.

=====Class certification under Rule 23=====
For the case to proceed as a class action and bind absent class members, the court must certify the class under Rule 23 on a motion from the party wishing to proceed on a class basis. For a class to be certified, the moving party must meet all of the criteria listed under Rule 23(a), and at least one of the criteria listed under Rule 23(b).

The 23(a) criteria are referred to as numerosity, commonality, typicality, and adequacy. Numerosity refers to the number of people in the class. To be certified, the class has to have enough members that simply adding each of them as a named party to the lawsuit would be impractical. There is no bright-line rule to determine numerosity, but classes with hundreds of members are generally deemed to be sufficiently numerous. To satisfy commonality, there must be a common question of law and fact such that &quot;determination of its truth or falsity will resolve an issue that is central to the validity of each one of the claims in one stroke&quot;. The typicality requirement ensures that the claims or defenses of the named plaintiff are typical of those of everyone else in the class. Finally, adequacy requirement states that the named plaintiff must fairly and adequately represent the interests of the absent class members.

Rule 23(b)(3) allows class certification if &quot;questions of law or fact common to class members &quot;predominate&quot; over any questions affecting only individual members, and that a class action is &quot;superior&quot; to other available methods for fairly and efficiently adjudicating the controversy.&quot;

=====Notice and settlement=====

Due process requires in most cases that notice describing the class action be sent, published, or broadcast to class members. As part of this notice procedure, there may have to be several notices, first a notice allowing class members to opt out of the class, i.e. if individuals wish to proceed with their own litigation they are entitled to do so, only to the extent that they give timely notice to the class counsel or the court that they are opting out. Second, if there is a settlement proposal, the court will usually direct the class counsel to send a settlement notice to all the members of the certified class, informing them of the details of the proposed settlement.

====State courts====
Since 1938, many states have adopted rules similar to the FRCP. However, some states, like California, have civil procedure systems, which deviate significantly from the federal rules; the California Codes provide for four separate types of class actions. As a result, there are two separate treatises devoted solely to the complex topic of California class actions.{ , only Virginia and Massachusetts do not provide for any class actions. Others, such as New York, limit the types of claims that may be brought as class actions.&lt;ref name=&quot;LII / Legal Information Institute 1966 g798&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==See also==
*Arbitration clause, a contract clause that attempts to prevent lawsuits by requiring arbitration in a private forum
*Bill of Peace, an English predecessor to class actions
*&quot;Class Action&quot;, 1991 American legal drama film 
*Class action waiver, a provision in some contracts which prevents one or both parties from filing a class action 
*Collective redress, a similar legal framework under development in the European Union
*&quot;Dukes v. Wal-Mart&quot; (2011), the largest civil rights class-action lawsuit to date
*List of class action lawsuits
*Public Interest Litigation, a similar system adopted in India
*Securities Class Action

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

===United States===
*&quot;Manual for Complex Litigation, Fourth&quot;
*&quot;Stanford Securities Class Action Clearinghouse&quot;
*Class Action Lawsuits: A Legal Overview for the 115th Congress Congressional Research Service
*Class Actions Seven Years After the Class Action Fairness Act: Hearing before the Subcommittee on the Constitution of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, One Hundred Twelfth Congress, Second Session, June 1, 2012

===Europe===
*Collective Redress in Europe</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="2" end="14" title="Class action" label="class action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="32" end="52" title="Class action" label="class action lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="54" end="64" title="Class action" label="class suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="69" end="90" title="Class action" label="representative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="105" end="112" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="385" end="394" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329436" start="439" end="460" title="consumer organization" label="consumer organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="574" end="599" title="Class action#Defendant class action" label="or a number of defendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251971" start="1709" end="1725" title="medieval England" label="medieval England"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="1832" end="1842" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q614305" start="1987" end="2000" title="English court" label="English court"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="2276" end="2287" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867431" start="2445" end="2459" title="Unincorporated associations in English law" label="unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q48204" start="2463" end="2484" title="voluntary association" label="voluntary association"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="2516" end="2533" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329062" start="2547" end="2559" title="Star Chamber" label="Star Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q284804" start="2671" end="2688" title="Court of Chancery" label="Court of Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578557" start="3112" end="3118" title="Equity (law)" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302837" start="3192" end="3207" title="Judicature Acts" label="Judicature Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368374" start="3422" end="3434" title="Joseph Story" label="Joseph Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="3457" end="3463" title="Law of the United States" label="US law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987090" start="3552" end="3567" title="West v. Randall" label="West v. Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972623" start="3836" end="3856" title="Federal Equity Rules" label="Federal Equity Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440427" start="5173" end="5205" title="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure" label="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="6228" end="6249" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="6251" end="6267" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="6272" end="6283" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q328798" start="6460" end="6477" title="environmental law" label="environmental law"/>
<link wikidata="Q207946" start="6839" end="6850" title="arbitration" label="arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995769" start="6913" end="6934" title="standard form contract" label="contracts of adhesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="7071" end="7087" title="US Supreme Court" label="US Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654543" start="7121" end="7152" title="AT&amp;amp;T Mobility v. Concepcion" label="AT&amp;amp;T Mobility v. Concepcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961235" start="7684" end="7701" title="Wal-Mart v. Dukes" label="Wal-Mart v. Dukes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950354" start="7734" end="7758" title="Comcast Corp. v. Behrend" label="Comcast Corp. v. Behrend"/>
<link wikidata="Q42972815" start="8211" end="8238" title="Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis" label="Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q113642005" start="8272" end="8292" title="Class action waiver" label="class action waivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791513" start="10645" end="10676" title="Bureau of Justice Statistics" label="US Bureau of Justice Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="10935" end="10942" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q196939" start="11199" end="11208" title="witnesses" label="witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="11226" end="11231" title="trial (law)" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="11378" end="11386" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="12046" end="12055" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="12132" end="12141" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484431" start="12697" end="12714" title="Landeros v. Flood" label="Landeros v. Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="12763" end="12787" title="California Supreme Court" label="California Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="12968" end="12972" title="tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="13251" end="13260" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="13342" end="13351" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q46737" start="13364" end="13369" title="asset" label="asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="13384" end="13394" title="plaintiffs" label="plaintiffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920475" start="13546" end="13551" title="Venue (law)" label="venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="13614" end="13624" title="plaintiffs" label="plaintiffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="13996" end="14001" title="Bond (finance)" label="bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081659" start="14005" end="14017" title="common stock" label="common stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="14056" end="14061" title="trial (law)" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="14153" end="14164" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="14369" end="14379" title="litigation" label="litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784092" start="14547" end="14556" title="mass tort" label="mass tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127972" start="15195" end="15228" title="Class Action Fairness Act of 2005" label="Class Action Fairness Act of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q167412" start="16450" end="16460" title="settlement (law)" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178050" start="16474" end="16491" title="coupon settlement" label="coupon settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="17772" end="17781" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47005785" start="17843" end="17857" title="Milton Handler" label="Milton Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="18054" end="18072" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721635" start="18107" end="18121" title="Henry Friendly" label="Henry Friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q533583" start="18126" end="18140" title="Richard Posner" label="Richard Posner"/>
<link wikidata="Q45525" start="19189" end="19237" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Portland in Oregon" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Portland in Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458737" start="19262" end="19295" title="Sexual abuse scandal in the Catholic archdiocese of Portland" label="Catholic priest sex-abuse scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242421" start="21203" end="21216" title="Supreme Court of Argentina" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="21334" end="21352" title="Federal Parliament" label="Federal Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q206911" start="22340" end="22372" title="Civil procedure code of Austria" label="Austrian Code of Civil Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q876935" start="22962" end="22984" title="Austrian Supreme Court" label="Austrian Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817650" start="23137" end="23156" title="Austrian Parliament" label="Austrian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q872203" start="23183" end="23220" title="Federal Ministry of Justice (Austria)" label="Austrian Federal Minister for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486194" start="23362" end="23436" title="List of Ministers of Social Affairs (Austria)" label="Austrian Ministry for Social Security, Generations and Consumer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q181756" start="23753" end="23768" title="Law of Canada" label="Provincial laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="23874" end="23880" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="23953" end="23960" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="24095" end="24115" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="24190" end="24213" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440167" start="24363" end="24386" title="Federal Court of Canada" label="Federal Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="24469" end="24481" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="24483" end="24491" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="24493" end="24500" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="24506" end="24517" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q411412" start="25388" end="25393" title="Vioxx" label="Vioxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q161851" start="25777" end="25788" title="condominium" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050063" start="26046" end="26058" title="Nora Bernard" label="Nora Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q945507" start="26136" end="26161" title="Canadian Indian residential school system" label="residential school system"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="26172" end="26191" title="Canadian government" label="Canadian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q648945" start="26586" end="26606" title="declaratory judgment" label="declaratory judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q664183" start="27198" end="27217" title="consumer protection" label="consumer protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="27508" end="27524" title="Jacques Chirac" label="President Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q206893" start="28809" end="28812" title="Civil procedure code of Germany" label="ZPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q180767" start="30390" end="30397" title="Inhibition (law)" label="inhibit"/>
<link wikidata="Q313404" start="31173" end="31195" title="Eschede train disaster" label="Eschede train disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="31341" end="31361" title="Indian Supreme Court" label="Indian Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q683979" start="31397" end="31409" title="locus standi" label="locus standi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345563" start="31646" end="31672" title="public interest litigation" label="public interest litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="31816" end="31837" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="32128" end="32153" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliamentary legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q129029" start="32227" end="32245" title="Bhopal disaster" label="Bhopal gas tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q908553" start="32354" end="32367" title="Union Carbide" label="Union Carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="32487" end="32506" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927682" start="32536" end="32550" title="parens patriae" label="parens patriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="33163" end="33168" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q720050" start="33192" end="33214" title="compressed natural gas" label="compressed natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184183" start="33257" end="33273" title="Delhi High Court" label="Delhi High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="33817" end="33846" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="33882" end="33902" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="33907" end="33932" title="parliamentary sovereignty" label="parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039797" start="33953" end="33962" title="Law of the Republic of Ireland" label="Irish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069944" start="34057" end="34066" title="champerty" label="champerty"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391047" start="34468" end="34496" title="CervicalCheck cancer scandal" label="CervicalCheck cancer scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878225" start="34516" end="34526" title="misselling" label="misselling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4174178" start="34560" end="34567" title="haulier" label="haulier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200230" start="34577" end="34589" title="price-fixing" label="price-fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q959606" start="34936" end="34953" title="compound interest" label="compound interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129100" start="34994" end="35003" title="overdraft" label="overdraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q167412" start="36308" end="36329" title="collective settlement (litigation)" label="collective settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30917" start="38495" end="38505" title="Swiss Federal Council" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055840" start="38726" end="38747" title="Civil Procedure Rules" label="Civil Procedure Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611169" start="38829" end="38851" title="group litigation order" label="group litigation order"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711530" start="39106" end="39130" title="Consumer Rights Act 2015" label="Consumer Rights Act 2015"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40500" end="40510" title="Securities Act of 1933#Civil liability; Sections 11 and 12" label="Section 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q994506" start="40518" end="40540" title="Securities Act of 1933" label="Securities Act of 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q683979" start="40690" end="40698" title="Standing (law)" label="standing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40712" end="40722" title="Securities Act of 1933#Civil liability; Sections 11 and 12" label="Section 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440427" start="41306" end="41338" title="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure" label="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312196" start="41904" end="41910" title="removal jurisdiction" label="remove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127972" start="41942" end="41975" title="Class Action Fairness Act of 2005" label="Class Action Fairness Act of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q864400" start="42075" end="42096" title="original jurisdiction" label="original jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157289" start="42302" end="42342" title="Private Securities Litigation Reform Act" label="Private Securities Litigation Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="42624" end="42637" title="United States district court" label="federal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196092" start="42707" end="42713" title="U.S.C." label="U.S.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q896452" start="42831" end="42852" title="amount in controversy" label="amount in controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q222249" start="43402" end="43411" title="Civil law (private law)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934665" start="43584" end="43608" title="multidistrict litigation" label="multidistrict litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="45564" end="45575" title="Due process" label="Due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020339" start="46454" end="46470" title="California Codes" label="California Codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q511911" start="46894" end="46912" title="Arbitration clause" label="Arbitration clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911505" start="47011" end="47024" title="Bill of Peace" label="Bill of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168375" start="47073" end="47085" title="Class Action (film)" label="Class Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q113642005" start="47126" end="47145" title="Class action waiver" label="Class action waiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146179" start="47241" end="47259" title="Collective redress" label="Collective redress"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="47312" end="47326" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961235" start="47334" end="47351" title="Dukes v. Wal-Mart" label="Dukes v. Wal-Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610121" start="47421" end="47450" title="List of class action lawsuits" label="List of class action lawsuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610538" start="47452" end="47478" title="Public Interest Litigation" label="Public Interest Litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245159" start="47515" end="47538" title="Securities Class Action" label="Securities Class Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="47780" end="47810" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7201" wikidata="Q708562" url="?curid=7201" title="Contempt of court">
<text>Contempt of court, often referred to simply as &quot;contempt&quot;, is the crime of being disobedient to or disrespectful toward a court of law and its officers in the form of behavior that opposes or defies the authority, justice, and dignity of the court. A similar attitude toward a legislative body is termed contempt of Parliament or contempt of Congress. The verb for &quot;to commit contempt&quot; is contemn (as in &quot;to contemn a court order&quot;) and a person guilty of this is a contemnor or contemner.

There are broadly two categories of contempt: being disrespectful to legal authorities in the courtroom, or willfully failing to obey a court order. Contempt proceedings are especially used to enforce equitable remedies, such as injunctions. In some jurisdictions, the refusal to respond to subpoena, to testify, to fulfill the obligations of a juror, or to provide certain information can constitute contempt of the court.

When a court decides that an action constitutes contempt of court, it can issue an order in the context of a court trial or hearing that declares a person or organization to have disobeyed or been disrespectful of the court&#x27;s authority, called &quot;found&quot; or &quot;held&quot; in contempt. That is the judge&#x27;s strongest power to impose sanctions for acts that disrupt the court&#x27;s normal process.

A finding of being in contempt of court may result from a failure to obey a lawful order of a court, showing disrespect for the judge, disruption of the proceedings through poor behavior, or publication of material or non-disclosure of material, which in doing so is deemed likely to jeopardize a fair trial. A judge may impose sanctions such as a fine, jail or social service for someone found guilty of contempt of court, which makes contempt of court a process crime. Judges in common law systems usually have more extensive power to declare someone in contempt than judges in civil law systems.

==In use today==
Contempt of court is essentially seen as a form of disturbance that may impede the functioning of the court. The judge may impose fines and/or jail time upon any person committing contempt of court. The person is usually let out upon an agreement to fulfill the wishes of the court. Civil contempt can involve acts of omission. The judge will make use of warnings in most situations that may lead to a person being charged with contempt if the warnings are ignored. It is relatively rare that a person is charged for contempt without first receiving at least one warning from the judge. Constructive contempt, also called &quot;consequential contempt&quot;, is when a person fails to fulfill the will of the court as it applies to outside obligations of the person. In most cases, constructive contempt is considered to be in the realm of civil contempt due to its passive nature.

Indirect contempt is something that is associated with civil and constructive contempt and involves a failure to follow court orders. Criminal contempt includes anything that could be considered a disturbance, such as repeatedly talking out of turn, bringing forth previously banned evidence, or harassment of any other party in the courtroom, including committing an assault against the defendant in a criminal case. There have been instances during murder trials that grieving family members of murder victims have attacked the defendants in courtrooms in plain view of judges, bailiffs, and jurors, leading to said family members to be charged with contempt. Direct contempt is an unacceptable act in the presence of the judge (&quot;in facie curiae&quot;), and generally begins with a warning; it may be accompanied by the immediate imposition of a punishment.

===Australia===
In Australia, a judge may impose a fine or jail for contempt of court.

===Belgium===
A Belgian correctional or civil judge may immediately try the person for insulting the court.

=== British West Indies ===
In 1888, Louis de Souza, a young barrister in British Guiana was fined $500 and imprisoned for six months for contempt of court for publicly criticising judicial decisions. De Souza applied for special leave to appeal his case to the Privy Council as the decisions that he had criticised were not ongoing or cases in which he appeared and, therefore, broader than disrespect to legal authorities in a courtroom. A few years earlier, in Grenada, a newspaper had also been sanctioned for defaming a judge by printing remarks about a case. 

The Privy Council granted De Souza&#x27;s leave, with the judges apparently remarking that judges in England are subjected to far worse. De Souza, however, contracted tuberculosis while in jail and died 3 months after his release. His imprisonment was reported across the West Indies and his death elicited outrage. Valence Gale, a Barbadian journalist, wrote passionately about the events leading up De Souza&#x27;s death. One of his articles is credited with paving the way for the passage of Barbados&#x27; Contempt of Court Act 1891, the first of many across the West Indies.

===Canada===

====Common law offense====
In Canada, contempt of court is an exception to the general principle that all criminal offences are set out in the federal &quot;Criminal Code&quot;. Contempt of court is the only remaining common law offence in Canada.

Contempt of court includes the following behaviors:
* Failing to maintain a respectful attitude, failing to remain silent or failing to refrain from showing approval or disapproval of the proceeding
* Refusing or neglecting to obey a subpoena
* Willfully disobeying a process or order of the court
* Interfering with the orderly administration of justice or impairing the authority or dignity of the court
* Failing to perform duties as an officer of the court
* A sheriff or bailiff not executing a writ of the court forthwith or not making a return thereof

====Canadian Federal courts====
&quot;This section applies only to the Federal Court of Appeal and Federal Court.&quot;

Under Federal Court Rules, Rules 466, and Rule 467 a person who is accused of Contempt needs to be first served with a contempt order and then appear in court to answer the charges. Convictions can only be made when proof beyond a reasonable doubt is achieved.

If it is a matter of urgency or the contempt was done in front of a judge, that person can be punished immediately. Punishment can range from the person being imprisoned for a period of less than five years or until the person complies with the order or fine.

====Tax Court of Canada====
Under Tax Court of Canada Rules of &quot;Tax Court of Canada Act&quot;, a person who is found to be in contempt may be imprisoned for a period of less than two years or fined. Similar procedures for serving an order first is also used at the Tax Court.

====Provincial courts====
Different procedures exist for different provincial courts. For example, in British Columbia, a justice of the peace can only issue a summons to an offender for contempt, which will be dealt with by a judge, even if the offence was done in the face of the justice.

===Hong Kong===
Judges from the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal, High Court of Hong Kong, District Court along with members from the various tribunals and Coroner&#x27;s Court all have the power to impose immediate punishments for contempt in the face of the court, derived from legislation or through common law:

* Insult a judge or justice, witness or officers of the court
* Interrupts the proceedings of the court
* Interfere with the course of justice
* Misbehaves in court (e.g., use of mobile phone or recording devices without permission)
* Juror who leaves without permission of the court during proceedings
* Disobeying a judgment or court order
* Breach of undertaking
* Breach of a duty imposed upon a solicitor by rules of court

The use of insulting or threatening language in the magistrates&#x27; courts or against a magistrate is in breach of section 99 of the Magistrates Ordinance (Cap 227) which states the magistrate can &#x27;summarily sentence the offender to a fine at level 3 and to imprisonment for 6 months.&#x27;

In addition, certain appeal boards are given the statutory authority for contempt by them (e.g., Residential Care Home, Hotel and Guesthouse Accommodation, Air Pollution Control, etc.). For contempt in front of these boards, the chairperson will certify the act of contempt to the Court of First Instance who will then proceed with a hearing and determine the punishment.

===England and Wales===
In England and Wales (a common law jurisdiction), the law on contempt is partly set out in case law (common law), and partly codified by the Contempt of Court Act 1981. Contempt may be classified as &quot;criminal&quot; or &quot;civil&quot;. The maximum penalty for criminal contempt under the 1981 Act is committal to prison for two years.

Disorderly, contemptuous or insolent behaviour toward the judge or magistrates while holding the court, tending to interrupt the due course of a trial or other judicial proceeding, may be prosecuted as &quot;direct&quot; contempt. The term &quot;direct&quot; means that the court itself cites the person in contempt by describing the behaviour observed on the record. Direct contempt is distinctly different from indirect contempt, wherein another individual may file papers alleging contempt against a person who has willfully violated a lawful court order.

There are limits to the powers of contempt created by rulings of European Court of Human Rights. Reporting on contempt of court, the Law Commission commented that &quot;punishment of an advocate for what he or she says in court, whether a criticism of the judge or a prosecutor, amounts to an interference with his or her rights under article 10 of the ECHR&quot; and that such limits must be &quot;prescribed by law&quot; and be &quot;necessary in a democratic society&quot;, citing Nikula v Finland.

====Criminal contempt====
The Crown Court is a superior court according to the Senior Courts Act 1981, and Crown Courts have the power to punish contempt. The Divisional Court as part of the High Court has ruled that this power can apply in these three circumstances:

# Contempt &quot;in the face of the court&quot; (not to be taken literally; the judge does not need to see it, provided it took place within the court precincts or relates to a case currently before that court);
# Disobedience of a court order; and
# Breaches of undertakings to the court.

Where it is necessary to act quickly, a judge may act to impose committal (to prison) for contempt.

Where it is not necessary to be so urgent, or where indirect contempt has taken place the Attorney General can intervene and the Crown Prosecution Service will institute criminal proceedings on his behalf before a Divisional Court of the King&#x27;s Bench Division of the High Court of Justice of England and Wales. In January 2012, for example, a juror who had researched information on the internet was jailed for contempt of court. Theodora Dallas, initially searching for the meaning of the term &quot;grievous bodily harm&quot;, added search criteria which localised her search and brought to light another charge against the defendant. Because she then shared this information with the other jurors, the judge stated that she had compromised the defendant&#x27;s right to a fair trial and the prosecution was abandoned.

Magistrates&#x27; courts also have powers under the 1981 Act to order to detain any person who &quot;insults the court&quot; or otherwise disrupts its proceedings until the end of the sitting. Upon contempt being admitted or proved the (invariably) District Judge (sitting as a magistrate) may order committal to prison for a maximum of one month, impose a fine of up to £2,500, or both.

It will be contempt to bring an audio recording device or picture-taking device of any sort into an English court without the consent of the court.

It will not be contempt according to section 10 of the Act for a journalist to refuse to disclose his sources, unless the court has considered the evidence available and determined that the information is &quot;necessary in the interests of justice or national security or for the prevention of disorder or crime&quot;.

====Strict liability contempt====
Under the Contempt of Court Act it is criminal contempt to publish anything which creates a real risk that the course of justice in proceedings may be seriously impaired. It only applies where proceedings are active, and the Attorney General has issued guidance as to when he believes this to be the case, and there is also statutory guidance. The clause prevents the newspapers and media from publishing material that is too extreme or sensationalist about a criminal case until the trial or linked trials are over and the juries have given their verdicts.

Section 2 of the Act defines and limits the previous common law definition of contempt (which was previously based upon a presumption that any conduct could be treated as contempt, regardless of intent), to only instances where there can be proved an intent to cause a substantial risk of serious prejudice to the administration of justice (i.e./e.g., the conduct of a trial).

====Civil contempt====
In civil proceedings there are two main ways in which contempt is committed:

# Failure to attend at court despite a summons requiring attendance. In respect of the High Court, historically a writ of latitat would have been issued, but now a bench warrant is issued, authorizing the tipstaff to arrange for the arrest of the individual, and imprisonment until the date and time the court appoints to next sit. In practice a groveling letter of apology to the court is sufficient to ward off this possibility, and in any event the warrant is generally &quot;backed for bail&quot;—i.e., bail will be granted once the arrest has been made and a location where the person can be found in future established.
# Failure to comply with a court order. A copy of the order, with a &quot;penal notice&quot;—i.e., notice informing the recipient that if they do not comply they are subject to imprisonment—is served on the person concerned. If, after that, they breach the order, proceedings can be started and in theory the person involved can be sent to prison. In practice this rarely happens as the cost on the claimant of bringing these proceedings is significant and in practice imprisonment is rarely ordered as an apology or fine are usually considered appropriate.

===India===

In India, contempt of court is of two types:

===Pakistan===
===Singapore===
===United States===
In United States jurisprudence, acts of contempt are generally divided into direct or indirect, and civil or criminal. Direct contempt occurs in the presence of a judge; civil contempt is &quot;coercive and remedial&quot; as opposed to punitive. In the United States, relevant statutes include and Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 42.

# Direct contempt is that which occurs in the presence of the presiding judge (&quot;in facie curiae&quot;) and may be dealt with summarily: the judge notifies the offending party that he or she has acted in a manner which disrupts the tribunal and prejudices the administration of justice. After giving the person the opportunity to respond, the judge may impose the sanction immediately.
# Indirect contempt occurs outside the immediate presence of the court and consists of disobedience of a court&#x27;s prior order. Generally a party will be accused of indirect contempt by the party for whose benefit the order was entered. A person cited for indirect contempt is entitled to notice of the charge and an opportunity for hearing of the evidence of contempt and, since there is no written procedure, may or may not be allowed to present evidence in rebuttal.

Contempt of court in a civil suit is generally not considered to be a criminal offense, with the party benefiting from the order also holding responsibility for the enforcement of the order. However, some cases of civil contempt have been perceived as intending to harm the reputation of the plaintiff, or to a lesser degree, the judge or the court.

Sanctions for contempt may be criminal or civil. If a person is to be punished criminally, then the contempt must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt, but once the charge is proven, then punishment (such as a fine or, in more serious cases, imprisonment) is imposed unconditionally. The civil sanction for contempt (which is typically incarceration in the custody of the sheriff or similar court officer) is limited in its imposition for so long as the disobedience to the court&#x27;s order continues: once the party complies with the court&#x27;s order, the sanction is lifted. The imposed party is said to &quot;hold the keys&quot; to their own cell, thus conventional due process is not required. In federal and most state courts, the burden of proof for civil contempt is clear and convincing evidence, a lower standard than in criminal cases.

In civil contempt cases there is no principle of proportionality. In &quot;Chadwick v. Janecka&quot; (3d Cir. 2002), a U.S. court of appeals held that H. Beatty Chadwick could be held indefinitely for his failure to produce $2.5 million as a state court ordered in a civil trial. Chadwick had been imprisoned for nine years at that time and continued to be held in prison until 2009, when a state court set him free after 14 years, making his imprisonment the longest on a contempt charge to date.

Civil contempt is only appropriate when the imposed party has the power to comply with the underlying order. Controversial contempt rulings have periodically arisen from cases involving asset protection trusts, where the court has ordered a settlor of an asset protection trust to repatriate assets so that the assets may be made available to a creditor. A court cannot maintain an order of contempt where the imposed party does not have the ability to comply with the underlying order. This claim when made by the imposed party is known as the &quot;impossibility defense&quot;.

Contempt of court is considered a prerogative of the court, and &quot;the requirement of a jury does not apply to &#x27;contempts committed in disobedience of any lawful writ, process, order, rule, decree, or command entered in any suit or action brought or prosecuted in the name of, or on behalf of, the United States. This stance is not universally agreed with by other areas of the legal world, and there have been many calls to have contempt cases to be tried by jury, rather than by judge, as a potential conflict of interest rising from a judge both accusing and sentencing the defendant. At least one Supreme Court justice has made calls for jury trials to replace judge trials on contempt cases.

The United States Marshals Service is the agency component that first holds all federal prisoners. It uses the Prisoner Population Management System /Prisoner Tracking System. The only types of records that are disclosed as being in the system are those of &quot;federal prisoners who are in custody pending criminal proceedings.&quot; The records of &quot;alleged civil contempors&quot; are not listed in the Federal Register as being in the system leading to a potential claim for damages under The Privacy Act, .

====News media in the United States====
In the United States, because of the broad protections granted by the First Amendment, with extremely limited exceptions, unless the media outlet is a party to the case, a media outlet cannot be found in contempt of court for reporting about a case because a court cannot order the media in general not to report on a case or forbid it from reporting facts discovered publicly. Newspapers cannot be closed because of their content.

====Criticism====
There have been criticisms over the practice of trying contempt from the bench. In particular, Supreme Court Justice Hugo Black wrote in a dissent, &quot;It is high time, in my judgment, to wipe out root and branch the judge-invented and judge-maintained notion that judges can try criminal contempt cases without a jury.&quot;

==See also==

*Contempt of cop
*Contumacy
*Judicial discretion
*Lèse-majesté
*Perjury
*Perverting the course of justice
*Obstruction of justice
*Offence of scandalizing the court in Singapore

==References==
==Further reading==
*Scarce, Rik. &quot;Contempt of Court: A Scholar&#x27;s Battle for Free Speech from behind Bars&quot; (2005) ().

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="0" end="17" title="Contempt of court" label="Contempt of court"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="53" end="61" title="Contempt of court" label="contempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="132" end="137" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358649" start="314" end="336" title="contempt of Parliament" label="contempt of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165041" start="340" end="360" title="contempt of Congress" label="contempt of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="409" end="416" title="Contempt of court" label="contemn"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="495" end="504" title="Contempt of court" label="contemnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="508" end="517" title="Contempt of court" label="contemner"/>
<link wikidata="Q43899484" start="721" end="739" title="Equitable remedy" label="equitable remedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="749" end="759" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="811" end="819" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="1060" end="1065" title="trial (law)" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q545861" start="1069" end="1076" title="hearing (law)" label="hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q32098" start="1296" end="1305" title="sanctions (law)" label="sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757432" start="1659" end="1669" title="fair trial" label="fair trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243001" start="1710" end="1714" title="fine (penalty)" label="fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="1716" end="1720" title="jail" label="jail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247269" start="1818" end="1831" title="process crime" label="process crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="1843" end="1853" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="1942" end="1951" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3746" end="3755" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131936549" start="3961" end="3975" title="Louis de Souza (barrister)" label="Louis de Souza"/>
<link wikidata="Q918126" start="3998" end="4012" title="British Guiana" label="British Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="4186" end="4199" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="4658" end="4670" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="4763" end="4774" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q132131969" start="4807" end="4819" title="Valence Gale" label="Valence Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858580" start="4823" end="4832" title="Barbadians" label="Barbadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="4986" end="5000" title="Barbados" label="Barbados&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="5058" end="5069" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091694" start="5243" end="5256" title="Criminal Code (Canada)" label="Criminal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153559" start="5304" end="5322" title="common law offence" label="common law offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000992" start="5966" end="5989" title="Federal Court of Appeal" label="Federal Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001081" start="5994" end="6007" title="Federal Court (Canada)" label="Federal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000932" start="6573" end="6592" title="Tax Court of Canada" label="Tax Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="6923" end="6939" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="6943" end="6963" title="justice of the peace" label="justice of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q837636" start="7145" end="7176" title="Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal" label="Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778860" start="7178" end="7201" title="High Court of Hong Kong" label="High Court of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283299" start="7203" end="7217" title="District Court (Hong Kong)" label="District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="7415" end="7425" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135588" start="7468" end="7489" title="officers of the court" label="officers of the court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="7607" end="7619" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="7663" end="7668" title="Juror" label="Juror"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731162" start="7909" end="7933" title="magistrates&amp;#x27; court (Hong Kong)" label="magistrates&amp;#x27; courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178384" start="8437" end="8460" title="Court of First Instance (Hong Kong)" label="Court of First Instance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="8556" end="8573" title="Law of England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="8577" end="8587" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q25041825" start="8694" end="8720" title="Contempt of Court Act 1981" label="Contempt of Court Act 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="9520" end="9550" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503186" start="9588" end="9602" title="Law Commission" label="Law Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901932" start="9891" end="9924" title="necessary in a democratic society" label="necessary in a democratic society"/>
<link wikidata="Q203895" start="9988" end="9999" title="Crown Court" label="Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577005" start="10005" end="10019" title="superior court" label="superior court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450672" start="10037" end="10059" title="Senior Courts Act 1981" label="Senior Courts Act 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284586" start="10117" end="10133" title="Divisional Court (England and Wales)" label="Divisional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="10149" end="10159" title="High Court of England and Wales" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="10709" end="10725" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141790" start="10748" end="10773" title="Crown Prosecution Service" label="Crown Prosecution Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q115826579" start="10857" end="10883" title="King&amp;#x27;s Bench Division" label="King&amp;#x27;s Bench Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="10891" end="10933" title="High Court of Justice of England and Wales" label="High Court of Justice of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="10967" end="10972" title="jury" label="juror"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="11081" end="11090" title="internet search" label="searching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546545" start="11125" end="11145" title="grievous bodily harm" label="grievous bodily harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q986172" start="11446" end="11469" title="Magistrates&amp;#x27; court (England and Wales)" label="Magistrates&amp;#x27; court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11695" end="11709" title="Judiciary of England and Wales#District judges" label="District Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731168" start="11724" end="11734" title="Magistrate (England and Wales)" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="12049" end="12059" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="12564" end="12580" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="12951" end="12961" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13416" end="13423" title="summons#Civil summons" label="summons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496829" start="13491" end="13506" title="Latitat" label="writ of latitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q584041" start="13541" end="13554" title="bench warrant" label="bench warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808975" start="13582" end="13590" title="tipstaff" label="tipstaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="13884" end="13888" title="bail" label="bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="14689" end="14702" title="jurisprudence" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q186361" start="14908" end="14916" title="punitive" label="punitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q651929" start="14970" end="15004" title="Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure" label="Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="15897" end="15907" title="civil suit" label="civil suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="16358" end="16374" title="Legal burden of proof" label="reasonable doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243001" start="16434" end="16438" title="Fine (penalty)" label="fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278288" start="16596" end="16603" title="Sheriffs in the United States" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="16897" end="16908" title="due process of law" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="16964" end="16979" title="Legal burden of proof" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="17002" end="17031" title="clear and convincing evidence" label="clear and convincing evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q603959" start="17111" end="17139" title="Proportionality (law)" label="principle of proportionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628090" start="17226" end="17244" title="H. Beatty Chadwick" label="H. Beatty Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189069" start="17760" end="17776" title="asset protection" label="asset protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758424" start="18189" end="18200" title="prerogative" label="prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="19488" end="19503" title="First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="19964" end="19977" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q459752" start="19986" end="19996" title="Hugo Black" label="Hugo Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q448544" start="20213" end="20228" title="Contempt of cop" label="Contempt of cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166035" start="20230" end="20239" title="Contumacy" label="Contumacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400787" start="20241" end="20260" title="Judicial discretion" label="Judicial discretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="20262" end="20274" title="Lèse-majesté" label="Lèse-majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="20276" end="20283" title="Perjury" label="Perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q10728581" start="20285" end="20317" title="Perverting the course of justice" label="Perverting the course of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q525302" start="20319" end="20341" title="Obstruction of justice" label="Obstruction of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926860" start="20343" end="20389" title="Offence of scandalizing the court in Singapore" label="Offence of scandalizing the court in Singapore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7202" wikidata="Q4964998" url="?curid=7202" title="Corroborating evidence">
<text>Corroborating evidence, also referred to as corroboration, is a type of evidence in lawful command.

==Types and uses==
Corroborating evidence tends to support a proposition that is already supported by some initial evidence, therefore confirming the proposition. For example, W, a witness, testifies that she saw X drive his automobile into a green car. Meanwhile, Y, another witness, &quot;corroborates&quot; the proposition by testifying that when he examined X&#x27;s car, later that day, he noticed green paint on its fender. There can also be corroborating evidence related to a certain source, such as what makes an author think a certain way due to the evidence that was supplied by witnesses or objects.

Another type of corroborating evidence comes from using the Baconian method, i.e., the method of agreement, method of difference, and method of concomitant variations.

These methods are followed in experimental design. They were codified by Francis Bacon, and developed further by John Stuart Mill and consist of controlling several variables, in turn, to establish which variables are causally connected. These principles are widely used intuitively in various kinds of proofs, demonstrations, and investigations, in addition to being fundamental to experimental design.

In law, corroboration refers to the requirement in some jurisdictions, such as in Scots law, that any evidence adduced be backed up by at least one other source (see Corroboration in Scots law).

== An example of corroboration ==
Defendant says, &quot;It was like what he/she (a witness) said but...&quot;. This is Corroborative evidence from the defendant that the evidence the witness gave is true and correct.

Corroboration is not needed in certain instances. For example, there are certain statutory exceptions. In the Education (Scotland) Act, it is only necessary to produce a register as proof of lack of attendance. No further evidence is needed.

==England and Wales==
Perjury

See section 13 of the Perjury Act 1911.

Speeding offences

See section 89(2) of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.

Sexual offences

See section 32 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994.

Confessions by mentally handicapped persons

See section 77 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.

Evidence of children

See section 34 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988.

Evidence of accomplices

See section 32 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994.

==See also==
* Karl Popper

==Notes==
==References==
* Plutchik, Robert (1983), &quot;Foundations of Experimental Research&quot;, Harper&#x27;s Experimental Psychology Series.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4964998" start="0" end="22" title="Corroborating evidence" label="Corroborating evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964998" start="44" end="57" title="Corroborating evidence" label="corroboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247456" start="774" end="789" title="Baconian method" label="Baconian method"/>
<link wikidata="Q301935" start="801" end="820" title="method of agreement" label="method of agreement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="822" end="842" title="Mill&amp;#x27;s Methods#Method of difference" label="method of difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q301935" start="848" end="880" title="method of concomitant variations" label="method of concomitant variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334061" start="913" end="932" title="experimental design" label="experimental design"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="956" end="969" title="Francis Bacon (philosopher)" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="996" end="1012" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="1048" end="1057" title="Dependent and independent variables" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="1101" end="1109" title="causality" label="causally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="1370" end="1379" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173019" start="1454" end="1480" title="Corroboration in Scots law" label="Corroboration in Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1812" end="1836" title="Education (Scotland) Act" label="Education (Scotland) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169003" start="1998" end="2014" title="Perjury Act 1911" label="Perjury Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339424" start="2061" end="2093" title="Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984" label="Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185574" start="2135" end="2177" title="Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994" label="Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209552" start="2247" end="2284" title="Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984" label="Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185560" start="2331" end="2356" title="Criminal Justice Act 1988" label="Criminal Justice Act 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185574" start="2406" end="2448" title="Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994" label="Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="2466" end="2477" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7203" wikidata="Q195414" url="?curid=7203" title="Cross-examination">
<text>In law, cross-examination is the interrogation of a witness by one&#x27;s opponent. It is preceded by direct examination (known as examination-in-chief in Ireland, the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, South Africa, India and Pakistan) and may be followed by a redirect (known as re-examination in the aforementioned countries). A redirect examination, performed by the attorney or pro se individual who performed the direct examination, clarifies the witness&#x27; testimony provided during cross-examination including any subject matter raised during cross-examination but not discussed during direct examination. Recross examination addresses the witness&#x27; testimony discussed in redirect by the opponent. Depending on the judge&#x27;s discretion, opponents are allowed multiple opportunities to redirect and recross examine witnesses (this may vary by jurisdiction).

== Variations by jurisdiction ==
In the United States federal courts, a cross-examining attorney is generally limited by Rule 611 of the Federal Rules of Evidence to the &quot;subject matter of the direct examination and matters affecting the witness&#x27;s credibility&quot;. The rule also permits the trial court, in its discretion, to &quot;allow inquiry into additional matters as if on direct examination&quot;. Many state courts do permit a lawyer to cross-examine a witness on matters not raised during direct examination, though California restricts cross-examination to &quot;any matter within the scope of the direct examination&quot;. Similarly, courts in England, South Africa, Australia, and Canada allow a cross-examiner to exceed the scope of direct examination.

Since a witness called by the opposing party is presumed to be hostile, leading questions are allowed on cross-examination. A witness called by a direct examiner, on the other hand, may only be treated as hostile by that examiner after being permitted to do so by the judge, at the request of that examiner and as a result of the witness being openly antagonistic and/or prejudiced against the party that called them.

== Affecting the outcome of jury trials ==
Cross-examination is a key component of a trial and the topic is given substantial attention during courses on trial advocacy. The opinions of a jury or judge are often changed if cross-examination casts doubt on the witness. On the other hand, a credible witness may reinforce the substance of their original statements and enhance the judge&#x27;s or jury&#x27;s belief. Though the closing argument is often considered the deciding moment of a trial, effective cross-examination wins trials.

Attorneys anticipate hostile witnesses&#x27; responses during pretrial planning, and often attempt to shape the witnesses&#x27; perception of the questions to draw out information helpful to the attorney&#x27;s case. Typically during an attorney&#x27;s closing argument, they will repeat any admissions made by witnesses that favor their case. In the United States, cross-examination is seen as a core part of the entire adversarial system of justice, in that it &quot;is the principal means by which the believability of a witness and the truth of his testimony are tested.&quot; Another key component affecting a trial outcome is jury selection, in which attorneys will attempt to include jurors from whom they feel they can get a favorable response or at the least an unbiased fair decision. So while there are many factors affecting the outcome of a trial, the cross-examination of a witness will often influence an open-minded unbiased jury searching for the certainty of facts upon which to base their decision.

==See also==
* 
* 

==References==
== Further reading ==
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="3" end="6" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q195414" start="8" end="25" title="Cross-examination" label="cross-examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q327018" start="33" end="46" title="interrogation" label="interrogation"/>
<link wikidata="Q196939" start="52" end="59" title="witness" label="witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280330" start="102" end="120" title="direct examination" label="direct examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039797" start="155" end="162" title="Law of the Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="168" end="182" title="Law of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503371" start="184" end="193" title="Australian legal system" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181756" start="195" end="201" title="Law of Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q376811" start="203" end="215" title="Law of South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973852" start="217" end="222" title="Law of India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503416" start="227" end="235" title="Law of Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305960" start="262" end="270" title="Redirect examination" label="redirect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196258" start="665" end="674" title="testimony" label="testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="731" end="736" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="917" end="945" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="United States federal courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="965" end="973" title="lawyer" label="attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308934" start="1299" end="1311" title="State court (United States)" label="state courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909446" start="1719" end="1726" title="hostile witness" label="hostile"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147500" start="1728" end="1744" title="leading question" label="leading question"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="2160" end="2165" title="trial" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839940" start="2229" end="2243" title="trial advocacy" label="trial advocacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="2263" end="2267" title="jury" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503629" start="2502" end="2518" title="closing argument" label="closing argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801315" start="3034" end="3052" title="adversarial system" label="adversarial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132347" start="3245" end="3259" title="jury selection" label="jury selection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7206" wikidata="Q292781" url="?curid=7206" title="Christiania">
<text>Christiania may refer to:

==Businesses and organizations==
* Christiania Bank, a former Norwegian bank
* Christiania Theatre, formerly in Oslo, Norway
** Christiania Norwegian Theatre, merged in 1863
* Christiania Spigerverk, a former Norwegian steel company 

==Places==
* Christiania or Kristiania, official names of Oslo (1624–1924), nickname (from 1925) for the part of Oslo that was founded by King Christian IV
* Christiania Islands, Antarctica
* Christiania Township, Jackson County, Minnesota, U.S.
* Freetown Christiania, or Christiania, an anarchist territory in Copenhagen, Denmark

==Other uses==
* &quot;Christiania&quot; (brachiopod), an extinct genus
*Christiania RK, a rowing club from Oslo, Norway
* Christiania SK, a former Norwegian Nordic skiing club

==See also==

* Cristian (disambiguation)
* Christiana (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q292781" start="0" end="11" title="Christiania" label="Christiania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355154" start="62" end="78" title="Christiania Bank" label="Christiania Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782787" start="106" end="125" title="Christiania Theatre" label="Christiania Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110461" start="155" end="184" title="Christiania Norwegian Theatre" label="Christiania Norwegian Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110467" start="203" end="225" title="Christiania Spigerverk" label="Christiania Spigerverk"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="320" end="324" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110458" start="420" end="439" title="Christiania Islands" label="Christiania Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898556" start="454" end="501" title="Christiania Township, Jackson County, Minnesota" label="Christiania Township, Jackson County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q202206" start="510" end="530" title="Freetown Christiania" label="Freetown Christiania"/>
<link wikidata="Q30601913" start="612" end="648" title="Christiania (brachiopod)" label="&amp;quot;Christiania&amp;quot; (brachiopod)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110462" start="668" end="682" title="Christiania RK" label="Christiania RK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110466" start="718" end="732" title="Christiania SK" label="Christiania SK"/>
<link wikidata="Q126174503" start="789" end="814" title="Cristian (disambiguation)" label="Cristian (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q423446" start="817" end="844" title="Christiana (disambiguation)" label="Christiana (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7207" wikidata="Q1063449" url="?curid=7207" title="Charles d'Abancourt">
<text>Charles Xavier Joseph de Franque Ville d&#x27;Abancourt (4 July 17589 September 1792) was a French statesman, minister to Louis XVI.

==Biography==
D&#x27;Abancourt was born in Douai, and was the nephew of Charles Alexandre de Calonne. He was Louis XVI&#x27;s last minister of war (July 1792), and organised the defence of the Tuileries Palace during the 10 August attack. Commanded by the Legislative Assembly to send away the Swiss Guards, he refused, and was arrested for treason to the nation and sent to Orléans to be tried.

At the end of August the Assembly ordered Abancourt and the other prisoners at Orléans to be transferred to Paris with an escort commanded by Claude Fournier, nicknamed &quot;l&#x27;Americain&quot;. At Versailles they learned of the massacres at Paris. Abancourt and his fellow-prisoners were murdered in cold blood during the 9 September massacres (9 September 1792) at Versailles. Fournier was unjustly charged with complicity in the crime.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1063449" start="0" end="55" title="Charles d&amp;#x27;Abancourt" label="Charles Xavier Joseph de Franque Ville d&amp;#x27;Abancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="122" end="131" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q193826" start="177" end="182" title="Douai" label="Douai"/>
<link wikidata="Q437832" start="206" end="234" title="Charles Alexandre de Calonne" label="Charles Alexandre de Calonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215099" start="265" end="280" title="minister of Defence (France)" label="minister of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q234364" start="327" end="343" title="Tuileries Palace" label="Tuileries Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154330" start="355" end="371" title="10 August (French Revolution)" label="10 August attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q780457" start="390" end="410" title="Legislative Assembly (France)" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q171504" start="428" end="439" title="Swiss Guard" label="Swiss Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="509" end="516" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="639" end="644" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977393" start="673" end="688" title="Claude Fournier (revolutionary)" label="Claude Fournier"/>
<link wikidata="Q621" start="733" end="743" title="Versailles (city)" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q862586" start="764" end="782" title="September Massacres" label="massacres at Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q862586" start="858" end="879" title="9 September massacres" label="9 September massacres"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7211" wikidata="Q206409" url="?curid=7211" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk">
<text>The Curtiss P-40 Warhawk is an American single-engined, single-seat, all-metal fighter-bomber that first flew in 1938. The P-40 design was a modification of the previous Curtiss P-36 Hawk which reduced development time and enabled a rapid entry into production and operational service. The Warhawk was used by most Allied powers during World War II, and remained in frontline service until the end of the war. It was the third most-produced American fighter of World War II, after the North American P-51 Mustang and Republic P-47 Thunderbolt; by November 1944, when production of the P-40 ceased, 13,738 had been built, all at Curtiss-Wright Corporation&#x27;s main production facilities in Buffalo, New York.

P-40 Warhawk was the name the United States Army Air Corps gave the plane, and after June 1941, the USAAF
adopted the name for all models, making it the official name in the U.S. for all P-40s. The British Commonwealth and Soviet air forces used the name Tomahawk for models equivalent to the original P-40, P-40B, and P-40C, and the name Kittyhawk for models equivalent to the P-40D and all later variants. P-40s first saw combat with the British Commonwealth squadrons of the Desert Air Force in the Middle East and North African campaigns, during June 1941. No. 112 Squadron Royal Air Force, was among the first to operate Tomahawks in North Africa and the unit was the first Allied military aviation unit to feature the &quot;shark mouth&quot; logo, copying similar markings on some Luftwaffe Messerschmitt Bf 110 twin-engine fighters.
The lack of a two-speed supercharger for the P-40&#x27;s Allison V-1710 engine&#x27;s made it inferior to Luftwaffe fighters such as the Messerschmitt Bf 109 or the Focke-Wulf Fw 190 in high-altitude combat and it was rarely used in operations in Northwest Europe. However, between 1941 and 1944, the P-40 played a critical role with Allied air forces in three major theaters: North Africa, the Southwest Pacific, and China. It also had a significant role in the Middle East, Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, Alaska and Italy. The P-40&#x27;s performance at high altitudes was not as important in those theaters, where it served as an air superiority fighter, bomber escort and fighter-bomber.

Although it gained a postwar reputation as a mediocre design, suitable only for close air support, more recent research including scrutiny of the records of Allied squadrons indicates that this was not the case; the P-40 performed surprisingly well as an air superiority fighter, at times suffering severe losses, but also inflicting a very heavy toll on enemy aircraft. Based on war-time victory claims, over 200 Allied fighter pilots – from the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, South Africa, the US and the Soviet Union – became aces flying the P-40. These included at least 20 double aces, mostly over North Africa, China, Burma and India, the South West Pacific and Eastern Europe. The P-40 offered the additional advantages of low cost and durability, which kept it in production as a ground-attack aircraft long after it was obsolescent as a fighter.

==Design and development==

===Origins===
On 14 October 1938, Curtiss test pilot Edward Elliott flew the prototype XP-40 on its first flight in Buffalo. The XP-40 was the 10th production Curtiss P-36 Hawk, with its Pratt &amp; Whitney R-1830 Twin Wasp 14-cylinder air-cooled radial engine replaced at the direction of Chief Engineer Don R. Berlin by a liquid-cooled, supercharged Allison V-1710 V-12 engine. The first prototype placed the glycol coolant radiator in an underbelly position on the fighter, just aft of the wing&#x27;s trailing edge. USAAC Fighter Projects Officer Lieutenant Benjamin S. Kelsey flew this prototype some 300 miles in 57 minutes, approximately . Hiding his disappointment, he told reporters that future versions would likely go faster. Kelsey was interested in the Allison engine because it was sturdy and dependable, and it had a smooth, predictable power curve. The V-12 engine offered as much power as a radial engine but had a smaller frontal area and allowed a more streamlined cowl than an aircraft with a radial engine, promising a theoretical 5% increase in top speed.

Curtiss engineers worked to improve the XP-40&#x27;s speed by moving the radiator forward in steps. Seeing little gain, Kelsey ordered the aircraft to be evaluated in a NACA wind tunnel to identify solutions for better aerodynamic qualities. From 28 March to 11 April 1939, the prototype was studied by NACA. Based on the data obtained, Curtiss moved the glycol coolant radiator forward to the chin; its new air scoop also accommodated the oil cooler air intake. Other improvements to the landing gear doors and the exhaust manifold combined to give performance that was satisfactory to the USAAC. Without beneficial tail winds, Kelsey flew the XP-40 from Wright Field back to Curtiss&#x27;s plant in Buffalo at an average speed of . Further tests in December 1939 proved the fighter could reach .

An unusual production feature was a special truck rig to speed delivery at the main Curtiss plant in Buffalo, New York. The rig moved the newly built P-40s in two main components, the main wing and the fuselage, the eight miles from the plant to the airport where the two units were mated for flight and delivery.

===Performance characteristics===

The P-40 was conceived as a pursuit aircraft and was agile at low and medium altitudes but suffered from a lack of power at higher altitudes. At medium and high speeds it was one of the tightest-turning early monoplane designs of the war, and it could out-turn most opponents it faced in North Africa and the Russian Front. In the Pacific Theater it was out-turned at lower speeds by the lightweight fighters Mitsubishi A6M Zero and Nakajima Ki-43 Hayabusa (known to Allies as &quot;Oscar&quot;). The American Volunteer Group Commander Claire Chennault advised against prolonged dog-fighting with the Japanese fighters due to speed reduction favoring the Japanese.

Allison&#x27;s V-1710 engines produced at sea level and . This was not powerful compared with contemporary fighters, and the early P-40 variants&#x27; top speeds were only average. The single-stage, single-speed supercharger meant that the P-40 was a poor high-altitude fighter. Later versions, with Allisons or more powerful 1,400 hp Packard Merlin engines were more capable. Climb performance was fair to poor, depending on the subtype. Dive acceleration was good and dive speed was excellent. The highest-scoring P-40 ace, Clive Caldwell (RAAF), who claimed 22 of his 28½ kills in the type, said that the P-40 had &quot;almost no vices&quot;, although &quot;it was a little difficult to control in terminal velocity&quot;. The P-40 had one of the fastest maximum dive speeds of any fighter of the early war period, and good high-speed handling.
The P-40 tolerated harsh conditions and a variety of climates. Its semi-modular design was easy to maintain in the field. It lacked innovations such as boosted ailerons or automatic leading edge slats, but its strong structure included a five-spar wing, which enabled P-40s to pull high-G turns and survive some midair collisions. Intentional ramming attacks against enemy aircraft were occasionally recorded as victories by the Desert Air Force and Soviet Air Forces. Caldwell said P-40s &quot;would take a tremendous amount of punishment, violent aerobatics as well as enemy action&quot;. Operational range was good by early war standards and was almost double that of the Supermarine Spitfire or Messerschmitt Bf 109, although inferior to the Mitsubishi A6M Zero, Nakajima Ki-43 and Lockheed P-38 Lightning.

Caldwell found the P-40C Tomahawk&#x27;s armament of two Browning AN/M2 &quot;light-barrel&quot; dorsal nose-mount synchronized machine guns and two Browning machine guns in each wing to be inadequate. This was improved with the P-40D (Kittyhawk I) which abandoned the synchronized gun mounts and instead had two guns in each wing, although Caldwell still preferred the earlier Tomahawk in other respects. The D had armor around the engine and the cockpit, which enabled it to withstand considerable damage. This allowed Allied pilots in Asia and the Pacific to attack Japanese fighters head on, rather than try to out-turn and out-climb their opponents. Late-model P-40s were well armored. Visibility was adequate, although hampered by a complex windscreen frame, and completely blocked to the rear in early models by a raised turtledeck. Poor ground visibility and relatively narrow landing gear track caused many losses on the ground.

Curtiss tested a follow-on design, the Curtiss XP-46, but it offered little improvement over newer P-40 models and was cancelled.

==Operational history==
In April 1939, the U.S. Army Air Corps, having witnessed the new, sleek, high-speed, in-line-engined fighters of the European air forces, placed the largest fighter order it had ever made for 524 P-40s.

===French Air Force===
An early order came from the French &quot;Armée de l&#x27;Air&quot;, which was already operating P-36s. The &quot;Armée de l&#x27;Air&quot; ordered 100 (later the order was increased to 230) as the Hawk 81A-1 but the French were defeated before the aircraft had left the factory and the aircraft were diverted to British and Commonwealth service (as the Tomahawk I), in some cases complete with metric flight instruments.

In late 1942, as French forces in North Africa split from the Vichy government to side with the Allies, U.S. forces transferred P-40Fs from 33rd FG to &quot;GC II/5&quot;, a squadron that was historically associated with the Lafayette Escadrille. GC II/5 used its P-40Fs and Ls in combat in Tunisia and later for patrol duty off the Mediterranean coast until mid-1944, when they were replaced by Republic P-47D Thunderbolts.

===British Commonwealth===

====Deployment====
In all, 18 Royal Air Force (RAF) squadrons, four Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF), three South African Air Force (SAAF) and two Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) squadrons serving with RAF formations, used P-40s. The first units to convert were Hawker Hurricane squadrons of the Desert Air Force (DAF), in early 1941. The first Tomahawks delivered came without armor, bulletproof windscreens or self-sealing fuel tanks, which were installed in subsequent shipments. Pilots used to British fighters sometimes found it difficult to adapt to the P-40&#x27;s rear-folding landing gear, which was more prone to collapse than the lateral-folding landing gear of the Hurricane or Supermarine Spitfire. In contrast to the &quot;three-point landing&quot; commonly employed with British types, P-40 pilots were obliged to use a &quot;wheels landing&quot;: a longer, low angle approach that touched down on the main wheels first.

Testing showed the aircraft did not have the performance needed for use in Northwest Europe at high-altitude, due to the service ceiling limitation. Spitfires used in the theater operated at heights around , while the P-40&#x27;s Allison engine, with its single-stage, low altitude rated supercharger, worked best at or lower. When the Tomahawk was used by Allied units based in the UK from February 1941, this limitation relegated the Tomahawk to low-level reconnaissance with RAF Army Cooperation Command
and only No. 403 Squadron RCAF was used in the fighter role for a mere 29 sorties, before being replaced by Spitfires. Air Ministry deemed the P-40 unsuitable for the theater. UK P-40 squadrons 
The Tomahawk was superseded in North Africa by the more powerful Kittyhawk (&quot;D&quot;-mark onwards) types from early 1942, though some Tomahawks remained in service until 1943. Kittyhawks included many improvements and were the DAF&#x27;s air superiority fighter for the critical first few months of 1942, until &quot;tropicalised&quot; Supermarine Spitfires were available. DAF units received nearly 330 Packard V-1650 Merlin-powered P-40Fs, called Kittyhawk IIs, most of which went to the USAAF and the majority of the 700 &quot;lightweight&quot; L models, also powered by the Packard Merlin, in which the armament was reduced to four .50 in (12.7 mm) Brownings (Kittyhawk IIA). The DAF also received some 21 of the later P-40K and the majority of the 600 P-40Ms built; these were known as Kittyhawk IIIs. The &quot;lightweight&quot; P-40Ns (Kittyhawk IV) arrived from early 1943 and were used mostly as fighter-bombers. From July 1942 until mid-1943, elements of the U.S. 57th Fighter Group (57th FG) were attached to DAF P-40 units. The British government also donated 23 P-40s to the Soviet Union.

====Combat performance====
Tomahawks and Kittyhawks bore the brunt of &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; and &quot;Regia Aeronautica&quot; fighter attacks during the North African campaign. The P-40s were considered superior to the Hurricane, which they replaced as the primary fighter of the Desert Air Force. 
The P-40 initially proved quite effective against Axis aircraft and contributed to a slight shift of advantage in the Allies&#x27; favor. The gradual replacement of Hurricanes by the Tomahawks and Kittyhawks led to the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; accelerating retirement of the Bf 109E and introducing the newer Bf 109F; these were to be flown by the veteran pilots of elite &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; units, such as &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 27 (JG27), in North Africa. The P-40 was generally considered roughly equal or slightly superior to the Bf 109 at low altitude but inferior at high altitude, particularly against the Bf 109F. Most air combat in North Africa took place well below , negating much of the Bf 109&#x27;s superiority. The P-40 usually had an advantage over the Bf 109 in turning, dive speed and structural strength, was roughly equal in firepower but was slightly inferior in speed and outclassed in rate of climb and operational ceiling.

The P-40 was generally superior to early Italian fighter types, such as the Fiat G.50 Freccia and the Macchi C.200. Its performance against the Macchi C.202 &quot;Folgore&quot; elicited varying opinions. Some observers consider the Macchi C.202 superior. Caldwell, who scored victories against them in his P-40, felt that the &quot;Folgore&quot; was superior to the P-40 and the Bf 109 except that its armament of only two or four machine guns was inadequate. Other observers considered the two equally matched or favored the &quot;Folgore&quot; in aerobatic performance, such as turning radius. The aviation historian Walter J. Boyne wrote that over Africa, the P-40 and the &quot;Folgore&quot; were &quot;equivalent&quot;. Against its lack of high-altitude performance, the P-40 was considered to be a stable gun platform and its rugged construction meant that it was able to operate from rough front line airstrips with a good rate of serviceability.

The earliest victory claims by P-40 pilots include Vichy French aircraft, during the 1941 Syria-Lebanon campaign, against Dewoitine D.520s, a type often considered to be the best French fighter of the war. The P-40 was deadly against Axis bombers in the theater, as well as against the Bf 110 twin-engine fighter. In June 1941, Caldwell, of 250 Squadron in Egypt, flying as flying Officer (F/O) Jack Hamlyn&#x27;s wingman, recorded in his log book that he was involved in the first air combat victory for the P-40. This was a CANT Z.1007 bomber on 6 June. The claim was not officially recognized, as the crash of the CANT was not witnessed. The first official victory occurred on 8 June, when Hamlyn and Flight Sergeant (Flt Sgt) Tom Paxton destroyed a CANT Z.1007 from &quot;211a Squadriglia&quot; of the &quot;Regia Aeronautica&quot;, over Alexandria. Several days later, the Tomahawk was in action over Syria with No. 3 Squadron RAAF, which claimed 19 aerial victories over Vichy French aircraft during June and July 1941, for the loss of one P-40 (and one lost to ground fire).
Some DAF units initially failed to use the P-40&#x27;s strengths or used outdated defensive tactics such as the Lufbery circle. The superior climb rate of the Bf 109 enabled fast, swooping attacks, neutralizing the advantages offered by conventional defensive tactics. Various new formations were tried by Tomahawk units from 1941 to 1942, including &quot;fluid pairs&quot; (similar to the German &quot;rotte&quot;); the Thach Weave (one or two &quot;weavers&quot;) at the back of a squadron in formation and whole squadrons bobbing and weaving in loose formations. Werner Schröer, who was credited with destroying 114 Allied aircraft in only 197 combat missions, referred to the latter formation as &quot;bunches of grapes&quot;, because he found them so easy to pick off. The leading German &quot;expert&quot; in North Africa, Hans-Joachim Marseille, claimed as many as 101 P-40s during his career.

From 26 May 1942, Kittyhawk units operated primarily as fighter-bomber units, giving rise to the nickname &quot;Kittybomber&quot;. As a result of this change in role and because DAF P-40 squadrons were frequently used in bomber escort and close air support missions, they suffered relatively high losses; many Desert Air Force P-40 pilots were caught flying low and slow by marauding Bf 109s.

Caldwell believed that Operational Training Units did not properly prepare pilots for air combat in the P-40 and as a commander, stressed the importance of training novice pilots properly.

Competent pilots who took advantage of the P-40&#x27;s strengths were effective against the best of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; and &quot;Regia Aeronautica&quot;. In August 1941, Caldwell was attacked by two Bf 109s, one of them piloted by German ace Werner Schröer. Although Caldwell was wounded three times and his Tomahawk was hit by more than 100 bullets and five 20 mm cannon shells, Caldwell shot down Schröer&#x27;s wingman and returned to base. Some sources also claim that in December 1941, Caldwell killed a prominent German &quot;Experte&quot;, Erbo von Kageneck (69 kills), while flying a P-40. Caldwell&#x27;s victories in North Africa included 10 Bf 109s and two Macchi C.202s. Billy Drake of 112 Squadron was the leading British P-40 ace with 13 victories. James &quot;Stocky&quot; Edwards (RCAF), who achieved 12 kills in the P-40 in North Africa, shot down German ace Otto Schulz (51 kills) while flying a Kittyhawk with No. 260 Squadron RAF. Caldwell, Drake, Edwards and Nicky Barr were among at least a dozen pilots who achieved ace status twice over while flying the P-40. A total of 46 British Commonwealth pilots became aces in P-40s, including seven double aces.

===Chinese Air Force===

====Flying Tigers (American Volunteer Group)====

The Flying Tigers, known officially as the 1st American Volunteer Group (AVG), were a unit of the Chinese Air Force, recruited from amongst U.S. Navy, Marine Corps and Army aviators and ground crew.

AVG leader Claire Chennault received crated Model Bs which his airmen assembled in Burma at the end of 1941, adding self-sealing fuel tanks and a second pair of wing guns, such that the aircraft became a hybrid of B and C models. These were not well-liked by their pilots: they lacked drop tanks for extra range, and there were no bomb racks on the wings. Chennault considered the liquid-cooled engine vulnerable in combat because a single bullet through the coolant system would cause the engine to overheat in minutes. The Tomahawks also had no radios, so the AVG improvised by installing a fragile radio transceiver, the RCA-7-H, which had been built for a Piper Cub. Because the plane had a single-stage low-altitude supercharger, its effective ceiling was about . The most critical problem was the lack of spare parts; the only source was from damaged aircraft. The planes were viewed as cast-offs that no one else wanted, dangerous and difficult to fly. But the pilots did appreciate some of the planes&#x27; features. There were two heavy sheets of steel behind the pilot&#x27;s head and back that offered solid protection, and overall the planes were ruggedly constructed.

Compared to opposing Japanese fighters, the P-40B&#x27;s strengths were that it was sturdy, well armed, faster in a dive and possessed an excellent rate of roll. While the P-40s could not match the maneuverability of the Japanese Army air arm&#x27;s Nakajima Ki-27s and Ki-43s, nor the much more famous Zero naval fighter in slow, turning dogfights, at higher speeds the P-40s were more than a match. Chennault trained his pilots to use the P-40&#x27;s particular performance advantages. The P-40 had a higher dive speed than any Japanese fighter aircraft of the early war years, for example, and could exploit so-called &quot;boom-and-zoom&quot; tactics. The AVG was highly successful, and its feats were widely publicized by an active cadre of international journalists to boost sagging public morale at home. According to its official records, in just months, the Flying Tigers destroyed 297 enemy aircraft for the loss of just four of its own in air-to-air combat.

In the spring of 1942, the AVG received a small number of Model E&#x27;s. Each came equipped with a radio, six .50-caliber machine guns, and auxiliary bomb racks that could hold 35-lb fragmentation bombs. Chennault&#x27;s armorer added bomb racks for 570-lb Russian bombs, which the Chinese had in abundance. These planes were used in the battle of the Salween River Gorge in late May 1942, which kept the Japanese from entering China from Burma and threatening Kunming. Spare parts, however, remained in short supply. &quot;Scores of new planes...were now in India, and there they stayed—in case the Japanese decided to invade... the AVG was lucky to get a few tires and spark plugs with which to carry on its daily war.&quot;

====4th Air Group====
China received 27 P-40E models in early 1943. These were assigned to squadrons of the 4th Air Group.

===United States Army Air Forces===

A total of 15 USAAF pursuit/fighter groups (FG), along with other pursuit/fighter squadrons and a few tactical reconnaissance (TR) units, operated the P-40 during 1941–45. As was also the case with the Bell P-39 Airacobra, many USAAF officers considered the P-40 exceptional but it was gradually replaced by the Lockheed P-38 Lightning, the Republic P-47 Thunderbolt and the North American P-51 Mustang. The bulk of the fighter operations by the USAAF in 1942–43 were borne by the P-40 and the P-39. In the Pacific, these two fighters, along with the U.S. Navy Grumman F4F Wildcat, contributed more than any other U.S. types to breaking Japanese air power during this critical period.

====Pacific theaters====
The P-40 was the main USAAF fighter aircraft in the South West Pacific and Pacific Ocean theaters during 1941–42. At Pearl Harbor and in the Philippines, USAAF P-40 squadrons suffered crippling losses on the ground and in the air to Japanese fighters such as the A6M Zero and Ki-43 Hayabusa respectively. During the attack on Pearl Harbor, most of the USAAF fighters were P-40Bs, the majority of which were destroyed. However, a few P-40s managed to get in the air and shoot down several Japanese aircraft, most notably by George Welch and Kenneth Taylor.

In the Dutch East Indies campaign, the 17th Pursuit Squadron (Provisional), formed from USAAF pilots evacuated from the Philippines, claimed 49 Japanese aircraft destroyed, for the loss of 17 P-40s The seaplane tender USS &quot;Langley&quot; was sunk by Japanese airplanes while delivering P-40s to Tjilatjap, Java. In the Solomon Islands and New Guinea Campaigns and the air defence of Australia, improved tactics and training allowed the USAAF to better use the strengths of the P-40. Due to aircraft fatigue, scarcity of spare parts and replacement problems, the US Fifth Air Force and Royal Australian Air Force created a joint P-40 management and replacement pool on 30 July 1942 and many P-40s went back and forth between the air forces.

The 49th Fighter Group was in action in the Pacific from the beginning of the war. Robert M. DeHaven scored 10 kills (of 14 overall) in the P-40 with the 49th FG. He compared the P-40 favorably with the P-38:
:&quot;If you flew wisely, the P-40 was a very capable aircraft. [It] could outturn a P-38, a fact that some pilots didn&#x27;t realize when they made the transition between the two aircraft. [...] The real problem with it was lack of range. As we pushed the Japanese back, P-40 pilots were slowly left out of the war. So when I moved to P-38s, an excellent aircraft, I did not [believe] that the P-40 was an inferior fighter, but because I knew the P-38 would allow us to reach the enemy. I was a fighter pilot and that was what I was supposed to do.&quot;

The 8th, 15th, 18th, 24th, 49th, 343rd and 347th PGs/FGs, flew P-40s in the Pacific theaters between 1941 and 1945, with most units converting to P-38s from 1943 to 1944. In 1945, the 71st Reconnaissance Group employed them as armed forward air controllers during ground operations in the Philippines, until it received delivery of P-51s. They claimed 655 aerial victories.

Contrary to conventional wisdom, with sufficient altitude, the P-40 could turn with the A6M and other Japanese fighters, using a combination of a nose-down vertical turn with a bank turn, a technique known as a low yo-yo. Robert DeHaven describes how this tactic was used in the 49th Fighter group:
:[Y]ou could fight a Jap on even terms, but you had to make him fight your way. He could outturn you at slow speed. You could outturn him at high speed. When you got into a turning fight with him, you dropped your nose down so you kept your airspeed up, you could outturn him. At low speed he could outroll you because of those big ailerons ... on the Zero. If your speed was up over 275, you could outroll [a Zero]. His big ailerons didn&#x27;t have the strength to make high speed rolls... You could push things, too. Because ... [i]f you decided to go home, you could go home. He couldn&#x27;t because you could outrun him. [...] That left you in control of the fight.

====China Burma India Theater====

USAAF and Chinese P-40 pilots performed well in this theater against many Japanese types such as the Ki-43, Nakajima Ki-44 &quot;Tojo&quot; and the Zero. The P-40 remained in use in the China Burma India Theater (CBI) until 1944 and was reportedly preferred over the P-51 Mustang by some US pilots flying in China. The American Volunteer Group (Flying Tigers) was integrated into the USAAF as the 23rd Fighter Group in June 1942. The unit continued to fly newer model P-40s until 1944, achieving a high kill-to-loss ratio.
In the Battle of the Salween River Gorge of May 1942 the AVG used the P-40E model equipped with wing racks that could carry six 35-pound fragmentation bombs and Chennault&#x27;s armorer developed belly racks to carry Russian 570-pound bombs, which the Chinese had in large quantity.

Units arriving in the CBI after the AVG in the 10th and 14th Air Forces continued to perform well with the P-40, claiming 973 kills in the theater, or 64.8 percent of all enemy aircraft shot down. Aviation historian Carl Molesworth stated that &quot;...the P-40 simply dominated the skies over Burma and China. They were able to establish air superiority over free China, northern Burma and the Assam valley of India in 1942, and they never relinquished it.&quot; The 3rd, 5th, 23rd, 51st and 80th FGs, along with the 10th TRS, operated the P-40 in the CBI. CBI P-40 pilots used the aircraft very effectively as a fighter-bomber. The 80th Fighter Group in particular used its so-called &quot;B-40&quot; (P-40s carrying 1,000-pound high-explosive bombs) to destroy bridges and kill bridge repair crews, sometimes demolishing their target with one bomb. At least 40 U.S. pilots reached ace status while flying the P-40 in the CBI.

====Europe and Mediterranean theaters====

On 14 August 1942, the first confirmed victory by a USAAF unit over a German aircraft in World War II was initiated by a P-40C pilot. 2nd Lt Joseph D. Shaffer, of the 33rd Fighter Squadron, intercepted a Focke-Wulf Fw 200C-3 maritime patrol aircraft that overflew his base at Reykjavík, Iceland. Shaffer damaged the Fw 200, which was finished off by a P-38F. Warhawks were used extensively in the Mediterranean and Middle East theatre of World War II by USAAF units, including the 33rd, 57th, 58th, 79th, 324th and 325th Fighter Groups. While the P-40 suffered heavy losses in the MTO, many USAAF P-40 units achieved high kill-to-loss ratios against Axis aircraft; the 324th FG scored better than a 2:1 ratio in the MTO. In all, 23 U.S. pilots became aces in the MTO on the P-40, most of them during the first half of 1943.
P-40 pilots from the 57th FG were the first USAAF fliers to see action in the MTO, while attached to Desert Air Force Kittyhawk squadrons, from July 1942. The 57th was also the main unit involved in the &quot;Palm Sunday Massacre&quot;, on 18 April 1943. Decoded Ultra signals revealed a plan for a large formation of Junkers Ju 52 transports to cross the Mediterranean, escorted by German and Italian fighters. Between 1630 and 1830 hours, all wings of the group were engaged in an intensive effort against the enemy air transports. Of the four Kittyhawk wings, three had left the patrol area before a convoy of a 100+ enemy transports were sighted by 57th FG, which tallied 74 aircraft destroyed. The group was last in the area, and intercepted the Ju 52s escorted by large numbers of Bf 109s, Bf 110s and Macchi C.202s. The group claimed 58 Ju 52s, 14 Bf 109s and two Bf 110s destroyed, with several probables and damaged. Between 20 and 40 of the Axis aircraft landed on the beaches around Cap Bon to avoid being shot down; six Allied fighters were lost, five of them P-40s.

On 22 April, in Operation Flax, a similar force of P-40s attacked a formation of 14 Messerschmitt Me 323 &quot;Gigant&quot; (&quot;Giant&quot;) six-engine transports, covered by seven Bf 109s from II./JG 27. All the transports were shot down, for a loss of three P-40s. The 57th FG was equipped with the Curtiss fighter until early 1944, during which time they were credited with at least 140 air-to-air kills. On 23 February 1943, during Operation Torch, the pilots of the 58th FG flew 75 P-40Ls off the aircraft carrier to the newly captured Vichy French airfield, Cazas, near Casablanca, in French Morocco. The aircraft supplied the 33rd FG and the pilots were reassigned.

The 325th FG (known as the &quot;Checkertail Clan&quot;) flew P-40s in the MTO and was credited with at least 133 air-to-air kills from April–October 1943, of which 95 were Bf 109s and 26 were Macchi C.202s, for the loss of 17 P-40s in combat. The 325th FG historian Carol Cathcart wrote:

Cathcart wrote that Lt. Robert Sederberg assisted a comrade being attacked by five Bf 109s, destroyed at least one German aircraft, and may have shot down as many as five. Sederberg was shot down and became a prisoner of war.

A famous African-American unit, the 99th FS, better known as the &quot;Tuskegee Airmen&quot; or &quot;Redtails&quot;, flew P-40s in stateside training and for their initial eight months in the MTO. On 9 June 1943, they became the first African-American fighter pilots to engage enemy aircraft, over Pantelleria, Italy. A single Focke-Wulf Fw 190 was reported damaged by Lieutenant Willie Ashley Jr. On 2 July the squadron claimed its first verified kill; a Fw 190 destroyed by Captain Charles Hall. The 99th continued to score with P-40s until February 1944, when they were assigned P-39s and P-51 Mustangs.

The much-lightened P-40L was most heavily used in the MTO, primarily by U.S. pilots. Many US pilots stripped down their P-40s even further to improve performance, often removing two or more of the wing guns to improve the roll rate.

===Royal Australian Air Force===

The Kittyhawk was the main fighter used by the RAAF in World War II, in greater numbers than the Spitfire. Two RAAF squadrons serving with the Desert Air Force, No. 3 and No. 450 Squadrons, were the first Australian units to be assigned P-40s. Other RAAF pilots served with RAF or SAAF P-40 squadrons in the theater.

Many RAAF pilots achieved high scores in the P-40. At least five reached &quot;double ace&quot; status: Clive Caldwell, Nicky Barr, John Waddy, Bob Whittle (11 kills each) and Bobby Gibbes (10 kills) in the Middle East, North African and/or New Guinea campaigns. In all, 18 RAAF pilots became aces while flying P-40s.

Nicky Barr, like many Australian pilots, considered the P-40 a reliable mount: &quot;The Kittyhawk became, to me, a friend. It was quite capable of getting you out of trouble more often than not. It was a real warhorse.&quot;

At the same time as the heaviest fighting in North Africa, the Pacific War was also in its early stages, and RAAF units in Australia were completely lacking in suitable fighter aircraft. Spitfire production was being absorbed by the war in Europe; P-38s were trialled, but were difficult to obtain; Mustangs had not yet reached squadrons anywhere, and Australia&#x27;s tiny and inexperienced aircraft industry was geared towards larger aircraft. USAAF P-40s and their pilots originally intended for the U.S. Far East Air Force in the Philippines, but diverted to Australia as a result of Japanese naval activity were the first suitable fighter aircraft to arrive in substantial numbers. By mid-1942, the RAAF was able to obtain some USAAF replacement shipments.

RAAF Kittyhawks played a crucial role in the South West Pacific theater. They fought on the front line as fighters during the critical early years of the Pacific War, and the durability and bomb-carrying abilities (1,000 lb/454 kg) of the P-40 also made it ideal for the ground attack role. During the Battle of Port Moresby RAAF 75 destroyed or damaged some 33 Japanese aircraft of various types, with another 30 probables. General Henry H. Arnold said of No 75 squadron: &quot;Victory in the entire air war against Japan can be traced back to the actions which took place from that dusty strip at Port Moresby in early 1942.&quot; For example, 75, and 76 Squadrons played a critical role during the Battle of Milne Bay, fending off Japanese aircraft and providing effective close air support for the Australian infantry, negating the initial Japanese advantage in light tanks and sea power. The Kittyhawks fired &quot;nearly 200,000 rounds of half-inch ammunition&quot; during the course of the battle.

The RAAF units that most used Kittyhawks in the South West Pacific were 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 82, 84 and 86 Squadrons. These squadrons saw action mostly in the New Guinea and Borneo campaigns.

Late in 1945, RAAF fighter squadrons in the South West Pacific began converting to P-51Ds. However, Kittyhawks were in use with the RAAF until the end of the war, in Borneo. In all, the RAAF acquired 841 Kittyhawks (not counting the British-ordered examples used in North Africa), including 163 P-40E, 42 P-40K, 90 P-40 M and 553 P-40N models. In addition, the RAAF ordered 67 Kittyhawks for use by No. 120 (Netherlands East Indies) Squadron (a joint Australian-Dutch unit in the South West Pacific). The P-40 was retired by the RAAF in 1947.

===Royal Canadian Air Force===
A total of 13 Royal Canadian Air Force units operated the P-40 in the North West European or Alaskan theaters.

In mid-May 1940, Canadian and US officers watched comparative tests of a XP-40 and a Spitfire, at RCAF Uplands, Ottawa. While the Spitfire was considered to have performed better, it was not available for use in Canada and the P-40 was ordered to meet home air defense requirements. In all, eight Home War Establishment Squadrons were equipped with the Kittyhawk: 72 Kittyhawk I, 12 Kittyhawk Ia, 15 Kittyhawk III and 35 Kittyhawk IV aircraft, for a total of 134 aircraft. These aircraft were mostly diverted from RAF Lend-Lease orders for service in Canada. The P-40 Kittyhawks were obtained in lieu of 144 P-39 Airacobras originally allocated to Canada but reassigned to the RAF.

However, before any home units received the P-40, three RCAF Article XV squadrons operated Tomahawk aircraft from bases in the United Kingdom. No. 403 Squadron RCAF, a fighter unit, used the Tomahawk Mk II briefly before converting to Spitfires. Two Army Co-operation (close air support) squadrons: 400 and 414 Sqns trained with Tomahawks, before converting to Mustang Mk. I aircraft and a fighter/reconnaissance role. Of these, only No. 400 Squadron used Tomahawks operationally, conducting a number of armed sweeps over France in the late 1941. RCAF pilots also flew Tomahawks or Kittyhawks with other British Commonwealth units based in North Africa, the Mediterranean, South East Asia and (in at least one case) the South West Pacific.

In 1942, the Imperial Japanese Navy occupied two islands, Attu and Kiska, in the Aleutians, off Alaska. RCAF home defense P-40 squadrons saw combat over the Aleutians, assisting the USAAF. The RCAF initially sent 111 Squadron, flying the Kittyhawk I, to the US base on Adak island. During the drawn-out campaign, 12 Canadian Kittyhawks operated on a rotational basis from a new, more advanced base on Amchitka, southeast of Kiska. 14 and 111 Sqns took &quot;turn-about&quot; at the base. During a major attack on Japanese positions at Kiska on 25 September 1942, Squadron Leader Ken Boomer shot down a Nakajima A6M2-N (&quot;Rufe&quot;) seaplane. The RCAF also purchased 12 P-40Ks directly from the USAAF while in the Aleutians. After the Japanese threat diminished, these two RCAF squadrons returned to Canada and eventually transferred to England without their Kittyhawks.

In January 1943, a further Article XV unit, 430 Squadron was formed at RAF Hartford Bridge, England and trained on obsolete Tomahawk IIA. The squadron converted to the Mustang I before commencing operations in mid-1943.

In early 1945 pilots from No. 133 Squadron RCAF, operating the P-40N out of RCAF Patricia Bay, (Victoria, British Columbia), intercepted and destroyed two Japanese balloon-bombs, which were designed to cause wildfires on the North American mainland. On 21 February, Pilot Officer E. E. Maxwell shot down a balloon, which landed on Sumas Mountain in Washington State. On 10 March, Pilot Officer J. 0. Patten destroyed a balloon near Saltspring Island, British Columbia. The last interception took place on 20 April 1945 when Pilot Officer P.V. Brodeur from 135 Squadron out of Abbotsford, British Columbia shot down a balloon over Vedder Mountain.

The RCAF units that operated P-40s were, in order of conversion: 
*Article XV squadrons serving in the UK under direct command and control of the RAF, with RAF owned aircraft. 
**403 Squadron (Tomahawk IIA and IIB, March 1941) 
**400 Squadron (Tomahawk I, IIA and IIB, April 1941 – September 1942) 
**414 Squadron (Tomahawk I, IIA and IIB, August 1941 – September 1942)
**430 Squadron (Tomahawk IIA and IIB, January 1943 – February 1943) 
* Operational Squadrons of the Home War Establishment (HWE) (Based in Canada)
**111 Squadron (Kittyhawk I, IV, November 1941 – December 1943 and P-40K, September 1942 – July 1943), 
**118 Squadron (Kittyhawk I, November 1941 – October 1943), 
**14 Squadron (Kittyhawk I, January 1942 – September 1943), 
**132 Squadron (Kittyhawk IA &amp; III, April 1942 – September 1944), 
**130 Squadron (Kittyhawk I, May 1942 – October 1942), 
**163 Squadron (Kittyhawk I &amp; III, October 1943 – March 1944), 
**133 Squadron (Kittyhawk I, March 1944 – July 1945) and 
**135 Squadron (Kittyhawk IV, May 1944 – September 1945).

===Royal New Zealand Air Force===

Some Royal New Zealand Air Force (RNZAF) pilots and New Zealanders in other air forces flew British P-40s while serving with DAF squadrons in North Africa and Italy, including the ace Jerry Westenra.

A total of 301 P-40s were allocated to the RNZAF under Lend-Lease, for use in the Pacific Theater, although four of these were lost in transit. The aircraft equipped 14 Squadron, 15 Squadron, 16 Squadron, 17 Squadron, 18 Squadron, 19 Squadron and 20 Squadron.

RNZAF P-40 squadrons were successful in air combat against the Japanese between 1942 and 1944. Their pilots claimed 100 aerial victories in P-40s, whilst losing 20 aircraft in combat Geoff Fisken, the highest scoring British Commonwealth ace in the Pacific, flew P-40s with 15 Squadron, although half of his victories were claimed with the Brewster Buffalo.

The overwhelming majority of RNZAF P-40 victories were scored against Japanese fighters, mostly Zeroes. Other victories included Aichi D3A &quot;Val&quot; dive bombers. The only confirmed twin engine claim, a Ki-21 &quot;Sally&quot; (misidentified as a G4M &quot;Betty&quot;) fell to Fisken in July 1943.

From late 1943 and 1944, RNZAF P-40s were increasingly used against ground targets, including the innovative use of naval depth charges as improvised high-capacity bombs. The last front line RNZAF P-40s were replaced by Vought F4U Corsairs in 1944. The P-40s were relegated to use as advanced pilot trainers.

The remaining RNZAF P-40s, excluding the 20 shot down and 154 written off, were mostly scrapped at Rukuhia in 1948.

===Soviet Union===

The Soviet Air Forces and Soviet Naval Aviation also referred to P-40s as &quot;Tomahawks&quot; and &quot;Kittyhawks&quot;. In fact, the Curtiss P-40 Tomahawk / Kittyhawk was the first Allied fighter supplied to the USSR under the Lend-Lease agreement.
The USSR received 247 P-40B/Cs (equivalent to the Tomahawk IIA/B in RAF service) and 2,178 P-40E, -K, -L, and -N models between 1941 and 1944. The Tomahawks were shipped from Great Britain and directly from the US, many of them arriving incomplete, lacking machine guns and even the lower half of the engine cowling. In late September 1941, the first 48 P-40s were assembled and checked in the USSR. Test flights showed some manufacturing defects: generator and oil pump gears and generator shafts failed repeatedly, which led to emergency landings. The test report indicated that the Tomahawk was inferior to Soviet &quot;M-105P-powered production fighters in speed and rate of climb. However, it had good short field performance, horizontal maneuverability, range, and endurance.&quot; Nevertheless, Tomahawks and Kittyhawks were used against the Germans. The 126th Fighter Aviation Regiment (IAP), fighting on the Western and Kalinin Fronts, were the first unit to receive the P-40. The regiment entered action on 12 October 1941. By 15 November 1941, the regiment had shot down 17 German aircraft. However, Lt (SG) Smirnov noted that the P-40 armament was sufficient for strafing enemy lines but rather ineffective in aerial combat. Another pilot, Stephan Ridny (a Hero of the Soviet Union), remarked that he had to shoot half the ammunition at 50–100 meters (165–340 ft) to shoot down an enemy aircraft.

In January 1942, some 198 aircraft sorties were flown (334 flying hours) and 11 aerial engagements were conducted, in which five Bf 109s, one Ju 88, and one He 111 were downed. These statistics reveal a surprising fact: it turns out that the Tomahawk was fully capable of successful air combat with a Bf 109. The reports of pilots about the circumstances of the engagements confirm this fact. On 18 January 1942, Lieutenants S. V. Levin and I. P. Levsha (in pair) fought an engagement with seven Bf 109s and shot down two of them without loss. On 22 January, a flight of three aircraft led by Lieutenant E. E. Lozov engaged 13 enemy aircraft and shot down two Bf 109Es, again without loss. Altogether, in January, two Tomahawks were lost; one downed by German anti-aircraft artillery and one lost to Messerschmitts.

The Soviets stripped down their P-40s significantly for combat, in many cases removing the wing guns altogether in P-40B/C types, for example. Soviet Air Force reports state that they liked the range and fuel capacity of the P-40, which were superior to most of the Soviet fighters, though they still preferred the P-39. Soviet pilot Nikolai G. Golodnikov recalled: &quot;The cockpit was vast and high. At first it felt unpleasant to sit waist-high in glass, as the edge of the fuselage was almost at waist level. But the bullet-proof glass and armored seat were strong and visibility was good. The radio was also good. It was powerful, reliable, but only on HF (high frequency). The American radios did not have hand microphones but throat microphones. These were good throat mikes: small, light and comfortable.&quot; The biggest complaint of some Soviet airmen was its poor climb rate and problems with maintenance, especially with burning out the engines. VVS pilots usually flew the P-40 at War Emergency Power settings while in combat, which brought acceleration and speed performance closer to that of their German rivals, but could burn out engines in a matter of weeks. Tires and batteries also failed. The fluid in the engine&#x27;s radiators often froze, cracking their cores, which made the Allison engine unsuitable for operations during harsh winter conditions. During the winter of 1941, the 126th Fighter Aviation Regiment suffered from cracked radiators on 38 occasions. Often, entire regiments were reduced to a single flyable aircraft because no replacement parts were available. They also had difficulty with the more demanding requirements for fuel and oil quality of the Allison engines. A fair number of burned-out P-40s were re-engined with Soviet Klimov M-105 engines, but these performed relatively poorly and were relegated to rear area use.

The P-40 saw the most front line use in Soviet hands in 1942 and early 1943. Deliveries over the Alaska-Siberia ALSIB ferry route began in October 1942. It was used in the northern sectors and played a significant role in the defense of Leningrad. The most numerically important types were P-40B/C, P-40E and P-40K/M. By the time the better P-40F and N types became available, production of superior Soviet fighters had increased sufficiently so that the P-40 was replaced in most Soviet Air Force units by the Lavochkin La-5 and various later Yakovlev types. In spring 1943, Lt D.I. Koval of the 45th IAP gained ace status on the North Caucasian front, shooting down six German aircraft flying a P-40. Some Soviet P-40 squadrons had good combat records. Some Soviet pilots became aces on the P-40, though not as many as on the P-39 Airacobra, the most numerous Lend-Lease fighter used by the Soviet Union. However, Soviet commanders thought the Kittyhawk significantly outclassed the Hurricane, although it was &quot;not in the same league as the Yak-1&quot;.

===Japan===
The Japanese Army captured some P-40s and later operated a number in Burma. The Japanese appear to have had as many as 10 flyable P-40Es. For a brief period in 1943, a few of them were used operationally by 2 &quot;Hiko Chutai&quot;, 50 &quot;Hiko Sentai&quot; (2nd Air Squadron, 50th Air Regiment) in the defense of Rangoon. Testimony of this is given by Yasuhiko Kuroe, a member of the 64 &quot;Hiko Sentai&quot;. In his memoirs, he says one Japanese-operated P-40 was shot down in error by a friendly Mitsubishi Ki-21 &quot;Sally&quot; over Rangoon.

===Other nations===

The P-40 was used by over two dozen countries during and after the war. The P-40 was used by Brazil, Egypt, Finland and Turkey. The last P-40s in military service, used by the Brazilian Air Force (FAB), were retired in 1954.

In the air war over Finland, several Soviet P-40s were shot down or had to crash-land due to other reasons. The Finns, short of good aircraft, collected these and managed to repair one P-40M, P-40M-10-CU 43–5925, &quot;white 23&quot;, which received Finnish Air Force serial number KH-51 (KH denoting &quot;Kittyhawk&quot;, as the British designation of this type was Kittyhawk III). This aircraft was attached to an operational squadron HLeLv 32 of the Finnish Air Force, but lack of spares kept it on the ground, with the exception of a few evaluation flights.

Several P-40Ns were used by the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army Air Force with No. 120 (Netherlands East Indies) Squadron RAAF against the Japanese before being used during the fighting in Indonesia until February 1949.

==Variants and development stages==

;XP-40
:The original Curtiss XP-40, ordered July 1937, was converted from the 10th P-36A by replacing the radial engine with a new Allison V-1710-19 engine. It flew for the first time in October 1938.
This new liquid-cooled engine fighter had a radiator mounted under the rear fuselage
but the prototype XP-40 was later modified and the radiator was moved forward under the engine.
;P-40
:The P-40 (Curtiss Model 81A-1) was the first production variant, 199 built.
;P-40A
:One P-40 was modified with a camera installation in the rear fuselage and re-designated P-40A.
*Revised versions of the P-40 soon followed: the P-40B or Tomahawk IIA had extra .30 in (7.62 mm) U.S., or .303 in (7.7 mm) machine guns in the wings and a partially protected fuel system; the P-40C or Tomahawk IIB added underbelly drop tank and bomb shackles, self-sealing fuel tanks and other minor revisions, but the extra weight did have a negative impact on aircraft performance. (All versions of the P-40 had a relatively low power-to-weight ratio compared to contemporary fighters.)
*Only a small number of P-40D or Kittyhawk Mk Is were made, fewer than 50. With a new, larger Allison engine, slightly narrower fuselage, redesigned canopy, and improved cockpit, the P-40D eliminated the nose-mounted .50 in (12.7 mm) guns and instead had a pair of .50 in (12.7 mm) guns in each wing. The distinctive chin airscoop grew larger so they could adequately cool the large Allison engine.
*Retrospective designation for a single prototype. The P-40A was a single camera-carrying aircraft.
*The P-40E or P-40E-1 was similar in most respects to the P-40D, except for a slightly more powerful engine and an extra .50 in (12.7 mm) gun in each wing, bringing the total to six. Some aircraft also had small underwing bomb shackles. Supplied to the Commonwealth air forces as the Kittyhawk Mk IA. The P-40E was the variant that bore the brunt of air-to-air combat by the type in the key period of early to mid 1942, for example with the first US squadrons to replace the AVG in China (the AVG was already transitioning to this type from the P-40B/C), the type used by the Australians at Milne Bay, by the New Zealand squadrons during most of their air-to-air combat, and by the RAF/Commonwealth in North Africa as the Kittyhawk IA.


*P-40F and P-40L, which both featured Packard V-1650 Merlin engine in place of the normal Allison, and thus did not have the carburetor scoop on top of the nose. Performance for these models at higher altitudes was better than their Allison-engined cousins. The L in some cases also featured a fillet in front of the vertical stabilizer, or a stretched fuselage to compensate for the higher torque. The P-40L was sometimes nicknamed &quot;Gypsy Rose Lee&quot;, after a famous stripper of the era, due to its stripped-down condition. Supplied to the Commonwealth air forces under the designation Kittyhawk Mk II, a total of 330 Mk IIs were supplied to the RAF under Lend-Lease. The first 230 aircraft are sometimes known as the Kittyhawk Mk IIA. The P-40F/L was extensively used by U.S. fighter groups operating in the Mediterranean Theater.
*P-40G: 43 P-40 aircraft fitted with the wings of the Tomahawk Mk IIA. A total of 16 aircraft were supplied to the Soviet Union, and the rest to the US Army Air Forces. It was later redesignated RP-40G.
*P-40K, an Allison-engined P-40L, with the nose-top scoop retained and the Allison-configured nose radiators scoop, cowl flaps and vertical-stabilizer-to-fuselage fillet. Supplied to the Commonwealth air forces as the Kittyhawk Mk III, it was widely used by US units in the CBI.
*P-40M, version generally similar to the P-40K, with a stretched fuselage like the P-40L and powered by an Allison V-1710-81 engine giving better performance at altitude (compared to previous Allison versions). It had some detail improvements and it was characterized by two small air scoops just before the exhaust pipes. Most of them were supplied to Allied countries (mainly UK and USSR), while some others remained in the US for advanced training. It was also supplied to the Commonwealth air forces as the Kittyhawk Mk. III.
*P-40N (manufactured 1943–44), the final production model. The P-40N featured a stretched rear fuselage to counter the torque of the more powerful, late-war Allison engine, and the rear deck of the cockpit behind the pilot was cut down at a moderate slant to improve rearward visibility. A great deal of work was also done to try and eliminate excess weight to improve the Warhawk&#x27;s climb rate. Early N production blocks dropped a .50 in (12.7 mm) gun from each wing, bringing the total back to four; later production blocks reintroduced it after complaints from units in the field. Supplied to Commonwealth air forces as the Kittyhawk Mk IV. A total of 553 P-40Ns were acquired by the Royal Australian Air Force, making it the variant most commonly used by the RAAF. Subvariants of the P-40N ranged widely in specialization from stripped down four-gun &quot;hot rods&quot; that could reach the highest top speeds of any production variant of the P-40 (up to 380 mph), to overweight types with all the extras intended for fighter-bombing or even training missions. The 15,000th P-40 was an N model decorated with the markings of 28 nations that had employed any of Curtiss-Wright&#x27;s various aircraft products, not just P-40s. &quot;These spectacular markings gave rise to the erroneous belief that the P-40 series had been used by all 28 countries.&quot; Since the P-40N was by 1944 used mainly as a ground attack aircraft in Europe, it was nicknamed B-40 by pilots. Survivors redesignated as ZF-40N in June 1948.

*P-40P: The designation of 1,500 aircraft ordered with V-1650-1 engines, but actually built as the P-40N with V-1710-81 engines.
*XP-40Q: Three P-40N modified with a 4-bladed prop, cut-down rear fuselage and bubble canopy, four guns, squared-off wingtips and tail surfaces, and improved engine with two-speed supercharger. Even with these changes, its performance was not enough of an improvement to merit production when compared to the contemporary late model P-47Ds and P-51Ds pouring off production lines. The XP-40Q was, however, the fastest of the P-40 series with a top speed of as a result of the introduction of a high-altitude supercharger gear. (No P-40 model with a single-speed supercharger could even approach )
*P-40R: The designation of P-40F and P-40L aircraft that had Allison engines retrofitted in the field for standardization and logistics.
*RP-40: Some American P-40s were converted into reconnaissance aircraft.
*TP-40: Some P-40s were converted into two-seat trainers.
*Twin P-40: A single photo exists of a P-40 mocked up with two Merlin engines, mounted atop the wings, over the main landing gear.

==Operators==

* Royal Australian Air Force
* Brazilian Air Force
* Royal Canadian Air Force
* Chinese Nationalist Air Force
* Royal Egyptian Air Force
* Finnish Air Force
* French Air Force
* Indonesian Air Force
*Japanese Army Air Force – Captured P-40s.
* Royal Netherlands East Indies Army Air Force
;: Royal New Zealand Air Force
* Polish Air Force
* South African Air Force
* Soviet Air Force
* Soviet Naval Aviation
* Turkish Air Force
* Royal Air Force
* United States Army Air Corps
* United States Army Air Forces

==Surviving aircraft==

Of the 13,738 P-40s built, only 28 remain airworthy, with three of them being converted to dual-controls/dual-seat configuration. Approximately 13 aircraft are on static display and another 36 airframes are under restoration for either display or flight.
==Notable P-40 pilots==
*Nicky Barr: RAAF ace (11 victories); also a member of the Australia national rugby union team.
*Gregory Boyington: AVG/US Marine Corps; later commanded USMC VMF-214, the &quot;Black Sheep Squadron&quot;.
*Clive Caldwell: RAAF, highest-scoring P-40 pilot from any air force (22 victories); highest-scoring Allied pilot in North Africa; Australia&#x27;s highest-scoring ace in World War II (28.5 victories).
*Levi R. Chase: USAAF; leading US P-40 ace in the Mediterranean theater, with 10 claims; CO 60th Fighter Squadron, 33rd Fighter Group; retired with the rank of Major General.
*Claire Chennault: commander, 1st American Volunteer Group (AVG; better known as the &quot;Flying Tigers&quot;), Chinese Air Force.
*, the CO of the Chinese Air Force P-40E-equipped 23rd PS, 4th PG and ace who famously &quot;hijacked&quot; a USAAF P-66 at Liangshan Airbase as it was being raided by Imperial Japanese Army Air Service aircraft; he pursued the raiders shooting down two Kawasaki Ki-48 bombers, while 11 of his comrade&#x27;s P-40Es were destroyed on the ground in that raid.
*Daniel H. David: USAAF; later famous as the comedian and actor Dan Rowan; scored two victories and was wounded, while flying P-40s in the South West Pacific.
*Billy Drake: RAF, the leading British P-40 ace, with 13 victories.
*Neville Duke: RAF Leading Allied ace in the Mediterranean theater with 27 victories (including eight in P-40); post-war a test pilot and holder of the world air speed record.
*James Francis Edwards: RCAF, 15.75 victories (12 on the P-40); also wrote two books about British Commonwealth Kittyhawk pilots.
*Geoff Fisken: RNZAF, the highest scoring British Commonwealth ace in the Pacific theater (11 victories), including five victories in Kittyhawks.
*Jack Frost: SAAF, the highest scoring air ace in a South African unit, with 15 victories (seven on the P-40); missing in action since 16 June 1942.
*Herschel &quot;Herky&quot; Green: USAAF; 18 victory claims (including three in P-40s) while flying for the 325th Fighter Group in North Africa and Italy.
*John Gorton: RAAF; Prime Minister of Australia, 1968–1971. Gorton survived a near-fatal crash in a Hurricane IIb at Singapore in 1942; later flew Kittyhawks with No. 77 Squadron in New Guinea and became an instructor on the type.
*John F. Hampshire: USAAF; equal top-scoring US P-40 pilot (13 victory claims), all over China with the 75th FS (23rd FG), 1942–1943; killed in action. 
*David Lee &quot;Tex&quot; Hill: AVG/USAAF, 2nd Squadron AVG and 23rd FG USAAF, 12¼ P-40 victories (18¼ total).
*Bruce K. Holloway: AVG/USAAF, equal top-scoring US P-40 pilot (13 victories); later commander of USAF Strategic Air Command and retired with the rank of General (four star).
*James H. Howard: AVG/USAAF, six victories in P-40s; later, the only fighter pilot to receive the Medal of Honor for service over Europe, while flying a P-51; retired with the rank of Brigadier-General in 1966.
*Nikolai Fedorovitch Kuznetsov: VVS; the highest-scoring Soviet P-40 ace; credited with 22 victories while flying Hurricanes, P-40s and P-39s; twice awarded Hero of the Soviet Union (&quot;GSS&quot;); also awarded the British OBE.
*Pyotr Pokryshev: (Pyotr Afanasyevich Pokryshev) AV-MF (Soviet Naval); twice awarded &quot;GSS&quot;; 11 victory claims (out of a total of 22) made while flying P-40s, as commander of 154th IAP.
*Boris Safonov: AV-MF (Soviet Naval Aviation); Soviet quadruple (25 victory) ace and twice awarded &quot;GSS&quot;; shot down three Ju-88 bombers in one engagement while flying a P-40E, over the Baltic.
*Robert Lee Scott, Jr.: USAAF, commander of the 23rd FG, China; more than 10 victories in P-40s.
*Kenneth M. Taylor: USAAF; one of only two US pilots to get airborne (in a P-40) during the attack on Pearl Harbor (7 December 1941), during which he shot down two aircraft and was wounded in the arm.
*Keith Truscott: RAAF; pre-war star of Australian football; became an ace flying Spitfires in the UK during 1941, before flying Kittyhawks over New Guinea and Australia; commanded 76 Sqn RAAF at the Battle of Milne Bay (1942); killed in an accident while flying a P-40 (1943).
*Clinton D. &quot;Casey&quot; Vincent: USAAF; six victory claims while flying P-40s over China.
* John Waddy: RAAF; 12½ victory claims while flying P-40s over North Africa.
*Boyd Wagner: USAAF; while flying P-40s, Wagner became the first USAAF ace of the war, during the Philippines campaign (1941–1942).
*Len Waters: RAAF, the only Aboriginal Australian fighter pilot of World War II.
*George Welch: USAAF; one of only two US fighter pilots to get airborne during the first attack on Pearl Harbor, in a P-40; Welch claimed three Japanese aircraft that day.

==Specifications (P-40E)==


==Notable appearances in media==


==See also==

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Notes===
===Bibliography===

* Angelucci, Enzo and Paolo Matricardi. &quot;World Aircraft: World War II, Volume II&quot; (Sampson Low Guides). Maidenhead, UK: Sampson Low, 1978. .
* Arena, Nino. &quot;Macchi 205 &quot;Veltro&quot; (in Italian)&quot;. Modena: Stem Mucchi Editore, 1994.
* Berliner, Don. &quot;Surviving Fighter Aircraft of World War Two: Fighters&quot;. London: Pen &amp; Sword Aviation, 2011. .
* Boyne, Walter J. &quot;Clash of Titans&quot;. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1994. .
* Boyne, Walter J. and Michael Fopp. &quot;Air Warfare: An International Encyclopedia&quot;. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, 2002. .
* Bowers, Peter M. &quot;Curtiss Aircraft, 1907–1947&quot;. London: Putnam &amp; Company Ltd., 1979. .
* Bowers, Peter M. and Enzo Angellucci. &quot;The American Fighter&quot;. New York: Orion Books, 1987. .
* Brown, Russell. &quot;Desert Warriors: Australian P-40 Pilots at War in the Middle East and North Africa, 1941–1943&quot;. Maryborough, Australia: Banner Books, 1983. .
* Coyle, Brendan. &quot;War on Our Doorstep: The Unknown Campaign on North America&#x27;s West Coast&quot;. Victoria, BC: Heritage House Publishing Co. Ltd., 2002. .
* Crawford, Jerry L. &quot;Messerschmitt Bf 110 Zerstörer in action&quot;. Carrollton, Texas: Squadron/Signal Publications, 1977. .
* Donald, David, ed. &quot;Curtiss Model 81/87 (P-40 Warhawk)&quot;&quot;Encyclopedia of World Aircraft&quot;. Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada: Prospero, 1997. .
* Drabkin, Artem. &quot;The Red Air Force at War: Barbarossa and the Retreat to Moscow – Recollections of Fighter Pilots on the Eastern Front&quot;. Barnsley, South Yorkshire, UK: Pen &amp; Sword Military, 2007. .
* Ford, Daniel. &quot;Flying Tigers: Claire Chennault and His American Volunteers, 1941–1942&quot;. Washington, D.C.: HarperCollins|Smithsonian Books, 2007. .
* Ethell, Jeffrey L. and Joe Christy. &quot;P-40 Hawks at War&quot;. Shepperton, UK: Ian Allan Ltd., 1979. .
* Ford, Daniel. &quot;100 Hawks for China: The Story of the Shark-Nosed P-40 That Made the Flying Tigers Famous&quot;. Warbird Books, 2014
* Glancey, Jonathan. &quot;Spitfire: The Illustrated Biography&quot;. London: Atlantic Books, 2006. .
* Gordon, Yefim. &quot;Soviet Air Power in World War 2&quot;. Hinckley, Leicestershire, UK: Midland Ian Allan Publishing, 2008. .
* Green, William. &quot;War Planes of the Second World War, Volume Four: Fighters&quot;. London: MacDonald &amp; Co. (Publishers) Ltd., 1961 (Sixth impression 1969). .
* Green, William and Gordon Swanborough. &quot;WW2 Aircraft Fact Files: US Army Air Force Fighters, Part 1&quot;. London: Macdonald and Jane&#x27;s Publishers Ltd., 1977. .
* Gunston, Bill. &quot;Gli aerei della 2a Guerra Mondiale&quot;. Milan: Alberto Peruzzo Editore, 1984.
* Gunston, Bill, ed. &quot;The Illustrated History of Fighters&quot;. New York, New York: Exeter Books Division of Simon &amp; Schuster, 1981. .
* Hardesty, Von. &quot;Red Phoenix: The Rise of Soviet Air Power 1941–1945&quot;. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1982. .
* Higham, Robin. &quot;Flying American Combat Aircraft of WW II&quot;. Manhattan, Kansas: Sunflower University Press, 2004. .
* Horn, Alex. &quot;Wings Over the Pacific: The RNZAF in the Pacific Air War&quot;. Auckland, NZ: Random House New Zealand, 1992. 
* Johnsen, F.A. &quot;P-40 Warhawk&quot; (Warbird History). St. Paul, Minnesota: Motorbooks International, 1999. 
* King, John. &quot;The Whole Nine Yards: The Story of an Anzac P-40&quot;. Auckland, NZ: Reed Books, 2002. . (A P-40 with No. 75 Squadron RAAF)
* Kinzey, Bert. &quot;Attack on Pearl Harbor: Japan Awakens a Sleeping Giant&quot;. Blacksburg, Virginia: Military Aviation Archives, 2010. .
*
* Lavigne, J. P. A. Michel and James F. Edwards. &quot;Kittyhawk Pilot&quot;. Battleford, Saskatchewan, Canada: Turner-Warwick, 1983. .
*
* Matricardi, Paolo. &quot;Aerei Militari: Caccia e Ricognitori – Volume 1&quot; (in Italian). Milan: Electa Mondadori, 2006.
* McDowell, Earnest R. &quot;Famous Aircraft: The P-40 Kittyhawk&quot;. New York: ARCO Publishing Company, 1968.
* Mellinger, George. &quot;Soviet Lend-Lease Fighter Aces of World War 2&quot; (Aircraft of the Aces No. 74). Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2006. .
* Merriam, Ray. &quot;U. S. Warplanes of World War II&quot;. Bennington, Virginia: Merriam Press, 2000. .
* Molesworth, Carl. &quot;P-40 Warhawk Aces of the MTO&quot; (Aircraft of the Aces No. 43). London: Osprey Publishing, 2002. .
* Molesworth, Carl. &quot;P-40 Warhawk Aces of the Pacific&quot; (Aircraft of the Aces). London: Osprey Publishing, 2003. .
* Molesworth, Carl. &quot;P-40 Warhawk Aces of the CBI&quot; (Aircraft of the Aces No. 35). Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2000. .
* Molesworth, Carl. &quot;P-40 Warhawk vs Ki-43 Oscar: China 1944–45&quot;. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2008. .
* Molesworth, Carl. &quot;P-40 Soviet Lend-Lease Fighter Aces of World War 2&quot; (Aircraft of the Aces No. 74). Oxford, UL: Osprey Publishing, 2006. .
* Müller, Rolf-Dieter. &quot;Der Bombenkrieg 1939–1945&quot; (in German). Berlin: Links Verlag, 2004. .
* Murphy, Justin D. and Matthew A. McNiece. &quot;Military aircraft, 1919–1945: An Illustrated History of their Impact&quot;. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, 2009. .
* Neulen, Hans Werner. &quot;In the Skies of Europe: Air Forces Allied to the Luftwaffe, 1939–1945&quot; Ramsbury, Marlborough, UK: The Crowood Press, 2005. .
* Pentland, Geoffrey. &quot;The P-40 Kittyhawk in Service&quot;. Melbourne, Victoria, Australia: Kookaburra Technical Publications Pty. Ltd., 1974. .
* Snedden, Robert. &quot;World War II Combat Aircraft&quot;. Bristol, UK: Factfinders Parragon, 1997. .
* Rudge, Chris. &quot;Air-To-Air: The Story Behind the Air-to-Air Combat Claims of the RNZAF&quot;. Lyttelton, Canterbury, New Zealand: Adventure Air, 2003 .
* Scott, Robert L. &quot;Damned to Glory&quot;. New York: Scribner&#x27;s, 1944. No ISBN.
* Scutts, Jerry. &quot;Bf 109 Aces of North Africa and the Mediterranean&quot;. London: Osprey Publishing, 1994. .
* Shamburger, Page and Joe Christy. &quot;The Curtiss Hawk Fighters&quot;. New York: Sports Car Press Ltd., 1971. .
* Shores, Christopher and Hans Ring. &quot;Fighters over the Desert&quot;. London: Neville Spearman Limited, 1969. .
* Shores, Christopher and Clive Williams. &quot;Aces High: A Further Tribute to the Most Notable Fighter Pilots of the British and Commonwealth Air Forces in WWII, v. 2&quot;. London: Grub Street, 1994. .
* Thomas, Andrew. &quot;Tomahawk and Kittyhawk Aces of the RAF and Commonwealth&quot;. London: Osprey Books, 2002. .
* &quot;United States Air Force Museum Guidebook&quot;. Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio: Air Force Museum Foundation, 1975.
* Vader, John. &quot;Pacific Hawk&quot;. London: MacDonald &amp; Co, 1970.
* Weal, John. &quot;Jagdgeschwader 27 &#x27;Afrika&#x27; &quot;. Oxford, UK: Osprey, 2003. .
==External links==
* (1944) AN 01-25CN-2 Erection and Maintenance Instructions for Army Model P-40N Series – British Model Kittyhawk IV Airplanes
* Bu #41-13297 P-40B-CU detailed virtual view of a restoration. Pearl Harbor survivor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="4" end="24" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk" label="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="79" end="93" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q933767" start="170" end="187" title="Curtiss P-36 Hawk" label="Curtiss P-36 Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="315" end="328" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="485" end="512" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="North American P-51 Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q207089" start="517" end="542" title="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt" label="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138291" start="628" end="654" title="Curtiss-Wright Corporation" label="Curtiss-Wright Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="692" end="709" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="742" end="770" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="United States Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="812" end="817" title="USAAF" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="910" end="930" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="935" end="941" title="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="967" end="975" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk" label="Tomahawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="1051" end="1060" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk" label="Kittyhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895978" start="1190" end="1206" title="Desert Air Force" label="Desert Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042867" start="1273" end="1289" title="No. 112 Squadron RAF" label="No. 112 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1290" end="1305" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="1391" end="1397" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575305" start="1474" end="1490" title="ZG 76" label="similar markings"/>
<link wikidata="Q155642" start="1509" end="1529" title="Messerschmitt Bf 110" label="Messerschmitt Bf 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="1566" end="1588" title="supercharger" label="two-speed supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q167745" start="1609" end="1623" title="Allison V-1710" label="Allison V-1710"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="1658" end="1667" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="1689" end="1709" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q34775" start="1717" end="1734" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="1799" end="1815" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Northwest Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="1929" end="1941" title="North African campaign" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423295" start="1947" end="1964" title="South West Pacific theatre of World War II" label="Southwest Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="1970" end="1975" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q696817" start="2015" end="2026" title="Mediterranean and Middle East theatre of World War II" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q524272" start="2028" end="2042" title="South-East Asian theatre of World War II" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="2044" end="2058" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q249708" start="2060" end="2066" title="Aleutian Islands campaign" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="2071" end="2076" title="Italian campaign (World War II)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518049" start="2186" end="2209" title="air superiority fighter" label="air superiority fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="2229" end="2243" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="2326" end="2343" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="2780" end="2784" title="Flying ace" label="aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092558" start="3322" end="3358" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney R-1830 Twin Wasp" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney R-1830 Twin Wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q214098" start="3382" end="3395" title="radial engine" label="radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009905" start="3440" end="3453" title="Don R. Berlin" label="Don R. Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q245272" start="3502" end="3506" title="V12 engine" label="V-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889202" start="3697" end="3715" title="Benjamin S. Kelsey" label="Benjamin S. Kelsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="4383" end="4387" title="NACA" label="NACA"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="4870" end="4882" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="5772" end="5791" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero" label="Mitsubishi A6M Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q700703" start="5796" end="5819" title="Nakajima Ki-43 Hayabusa" label="Nakajima Ki-43 Hayabusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q468716" start="5899" end="5915" title="Claire Lee Chennault" label="Claire Chennault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="6241" end="6253" title="supercharger" label="supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479025" start="6364" end="6378" title="Packard V-1650" label="Packard Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="6550" end="6553" title="Flying Ace" label="ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249338" start="6555" end="6569" title="Clive Caldwell" label="Clive Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="6571" end="6575" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q912009" start="6949" end="6956" title="Modularity" label="modular"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="7037" end="7044" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534008" start="7059" end="7077" title="Leading-edge slat" label="leading edge slats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303116" start="7120" end="7124" title="Spar (aviation)" label="spar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335379" start="7220" end="7258" title="Aerial ramming" label="ramming attacks against enemy aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895978" start="7306" end="7322" title="Desert Air Force" label="Desert Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="7327" end="7344" title="Soviet Air Forces" label="Soviet Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="7552" end="7572" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="7576" end="7596" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q172913" start="7663" end="7686" title="Lockheed P-38 Lightning" label="Lockheed P-38 Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q218932" start="7746" end="7760" title="Browning M2" label="Browning AN/M2"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261839" start="7838" end="7858" title="Browning machine gun" label="Browning machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q548852" start="8667" end="8680" title="Curtiss XP-46" label="Curtiss XP-46"/>
<link wikidata="Q117464905" start="9052" end="9071" title="French Air Force" label="Armée de l&amp;#x27;Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="9495" end="9511" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy government"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="9529" end="9535" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635228" start="9573" end="9580" title="33d Operations Group" label="33rd FG"/>
<link wikidata="Q371917" start="9658" end="9678" title="Lafayette Escadrille" label="Lafayette Escadrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="9724" end="9731" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="9766" end="9785" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q207089" start="9829" end="9843" title="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt" label="Republic P-47D"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="9917" end="9932" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="9955" end="9979" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519024" start="9994" end="10017" title="South African Air Force" label="South African Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="10033" end="10059" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="10150" end="10166" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895978" start="10184" end="10200" title="Desert Air Force" label="Desert Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q930931" start="10300" end="10322" title="self-sealing fuel tank" label="self-sealing fuel tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="10578" end="10598" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414323" start="10900" end="10916" title="North-West Europe" label="Northwest Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862828" start="11303" end="11331" title="RAF Army Cooperation Command" label="RAF Army Cooperation Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637320" start="11341" end="11362" title="No. 403 Squadron RCAF" label="No. 403 Squadron RCAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="11451" end="11463" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="11849" end="11861" title="Tropics" label="tropicalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="11868" end="11888" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817723" start="12506" end="12524" title="57th Operations Group" label="57th Fighter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517242" start="12737" end="12754" title="Regia Aeronautica" label="Regia Aeronautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="12788" end="12810" title="North African campaign" label="North African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q667731" start="13340" end="13369" title="Jagdgeschwader 27" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgeschwader&amp;quot; 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273" start="13961" end="13978" title="Fiat G.50 Freccia" label="Fiat G.50 Freccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043" start="13987" end="13999" title="Macchi C.200" label="Macchi C.200"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975" start="14029" end="14061" title="Macchi C.202" label="Macchi C.202 &amp;quot;Folgore&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965219" start="14504" end="14519" title="Walter J. Boyne" label="Walter J. Boyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="14891" end="14903" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy French"/>
<link wikidata="Q770698" start="14930" end="14952" title="Syria-Lebanon campaign" label="Syria-Lebanon campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q831251" start="14962" end="14977" title="Dewoitine D.520" label="Dewoitine D.520"/>
<link wikidata="Q155642" start="15126" end="15132" title="Messerschmitt Bf 110" label="Bf 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043226" start="15181" end="15193" title="No. 250 Squadron RAF" label="250 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="15197" end="15202" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="15214" end="15228" title="flying Officer" label="flying Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024272" start="15366" end="15377" title="CANT Z.1007" label="CANT Z.1007"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459333" start="15544" end="15559" title="Flight Sergeant" label="Flight Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="15682" end="15692" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043463" start="15757" end="15776" title="No. 3 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 3 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699597" start="16034" end="16048" title="Lufbery circle" label="Lufbery circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119070" start="16343" end="16354" title="Thach Weave" label="Thach Weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q75661" start="16488" end="16502" title="Werner Schröer" label="Werner Schröer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57259" start="16751" end="16773" title="Hans-Joachim Marseille" label="Hans-Joachim Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160130" start="16775" end="16782" title="Confirmation and overclaiming of aerial victories" label="claimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097768" start="17241" end="17266" title="Operational Conversion Unit" label="Operational Training Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q75661" start="17657" end="17671" title="Werner Schröer" label="Werner Schröer"/>
<link wikidata="Q698638" start="17774" end="17786" title="MG 151 cannon" label="20 mm cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q96845" start="17962" end="17979" title="Erbo Graf von Kageneck" label="Erbo von Kageneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912486" start="18098" end="18109" title="Billy Drake" label="Billy Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q15503646" start="18178" end="18210" title="James Francis Edwards" label="James &amp;quot;Stocky&amp;quot; Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064252" start="18344" end="18364" title="No. 260 Squadron RAF" label="No. 260 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339839" start="18395" end="18405" title="Nicky Barr" label="Nicky Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q467249" start="18672" end="18685" title="Flying Tigers" label="Flying Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q702659" start="18766" end="18783" title="Republic of China Air Force" label="Chinese Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q336368" start="19153" end="19162" title="drop tank" label="drop tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q700685" start="20300" end="20314" title="Nakajima Ki-27" label="Nakajima Ki-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q26422" start="21373" end="21386" title="Salween River" label="Salween River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040374" start="21946" end="21951" title="group (air force unit)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="21992" end="22000" title="squadron (aviation)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="22012" end="22035" title="tactical reconnaissance" label="tactical reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q385778" start="22112" end="22131" title="Bell P-39 Airacobra" label="Bell P-39 Airacobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="22461" end="22470" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334612" start="22471" end="22490" title="Grumman F4F Wildcat" label="Grumman F4F Wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423295" start="22673" end="22691" title="South West Pacific theater of World War II" label="South West Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920892" start="22696" end="22717" title="Pacific Ocean Area" label="Pacific Ocean theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="22738" end="22750" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q696462" start="22758" end="22773" title="battle of the Philippines (1941–42)" label="the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508574" start="23144" end="23156" title="George Welch (pilot)" label="George Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195188" start="23161" end="23175" title="Kenneth M. Taylor" label="Kenneth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q698226" start="23185" end="23211" title="Netherlands East Indies campaign" label="Dutch East Indies campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553703" start="23217" end="23238" title="17th Fighter Squadron" label="17th Pursuit Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q860057" start="23396" end="23419" title="USS Langley (CV-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Langley&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q10612" start="23477" end="23486" title="Tjilatjap" label="Tjilatjap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="23488" end="23492" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759161" start="23501" end="23516" title="Solomon Islands campaign" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276692" start="23521" end="23540" title="New Guinea Campaign" label="New Guinea Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q176557" start="23550" end="23574" title="Air raids on Australia, 1942–43" label="air defence of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817902" start="23747" end="23762" title="Fifth Air Force" label="Fifth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="23767" end="23793" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q54045245" start="23927" end="23945" title="49th Fighter Group" label="49th Fighter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q115031609" start="24006" end="24023" title="Robert M. DeHaven" label="Robert M. DeHaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q488598" start="24924" end="24947" title="forward air controllers" label="forward air controllers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25277" end="25286" title="Basic fighter maneuvers#Low Yo-Yo" label="low yo-yo"/>
<link wikidata="Q700727" start="26181" end="26195" title="Nakajima Ki-44" label="Nakajima Ki-44"/>
<link wikidata="Q715314" start="26259" end="26284" title="China Burma India Theater" label="China Burma India Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631589" start="26470" end="26488" title="23rd Fighter Group" label="23rd Fighter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160130" start="26993" end="27001" title="Confirmation and overclaiming of aerial victories" label="claiming"/>
<link wikidata="Q271416" start="27514" end="27532" title="80th Flying Training Wing" label="80th Fighter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q157485" start="28057" end="28074" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764" start="28129" end="28138" title="Reykjavík" label="Reykjavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="28140" end="28147" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q696817" start="28250" end="28303" title="Mediterranean and Middle East theatre of World War II" label="Mediterranean and Middle East theatre of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635228" start="28334" end="28338" title="33d Operations Group" label="33rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817723" start="28340" end="28344" title="57th Operations Group" label="57th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640929" start="28346" end="28350" title="58th Operations Group" label="58th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640352" start="28352" end="28356" title="79th Fighter Group" label="79th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546469" start="28358" end="28363" title="324th Fighter Group" label="324th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634975" start="28368" end="28387" title="325th Operations Group" label="325th Fighter Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28886" end="28906" title="Operation Flax#Palm Sunday Massacre" label="Palm Sunday Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="28940" end="28945" title="Ultra (World War II intelligence)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26066" start="28995" end="29008" title="Junkers Ju 52" label="Junkers Ju 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975" start="29485" end="29497" title="Macchi C.202" label="Macchi C.202"/>
<link wikidata="Q849879" start="29671" end="29678" title="Cap Bon" label="Cap Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533209" start="29773" end="29787" title="Operation Flax" label="Operation Flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q723296" start="29841" end="29861" title="Messerschmitt Me 323" label="Messerschmitt Me 323"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="30196" end="30211" title="Operation Torch" label="Operation Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="30336" end="30346" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="30351" end="30365" title="French Morocco" label="French Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="30960" end="30976" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q39372" start="30987" end="30994" title="Tuskegee Airmen" label="99th FS"/>
<link wikidata="Q481758" start="31250" end="31261" title="Pantelleria" label="Pantelleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34775" start="31279" end="31296" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043463" start="31989" end="31994" title="No. 3 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043516" start="31999" end="32015" title="No. 450 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 450 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249338" start="32250" end="32264" title="Clive Caldwell" label="Clive Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339839" start="32266" end="32276" title="Nicky Barr" label="Nicky Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245063" start="32278" end="32288" title="John Lloyd Waddy" label="John Waddy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32290" end="32301" title="Bob Whittle" label="Bob Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935033" start="32322" end="32334" title="Bobby Gibbes" label="Bobby Gibbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276692" start="32387" end="32406" title="New Guinea campaign" label="New Guinea campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="32755" end="32766" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434533" start="33195" end="33218" title="United States Far East Air Force" label="U.S. Far East Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423295" start="33500" end="33526" title="South West Pacific theater of World War II" label="South West Pacific theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872083" start="33757" end="33779" title="Battle of Port Moresby" label="Battle of Port Moresby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043795" start="33785" end="33787" title="No. 75 Squadron RAAF" label="75"/>
<link wikidata="Q436102" start="33888" end="33903" title="Henry H. Arnold" label="Henry H. Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043795" start="34101" end="34103" title="No. 75 Squadron RAAF" label="75"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043799" start="34109" end="34111" title="No. 76 Squadron RAAF" label="76"/>
<link wikidata="Q113621" start="34156" end="34175" title="Battle of Milne Bay" label="Battle of Milne Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064293" start="34541" end="34543" title="No. 77 Squadron RAAF" label="77"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043805" start="34545" end="34547" title="No. 78 Squadron RAAF" label="78"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043825" start="34549" end="34551" title="No. 80 Squadron RAAF" label="80"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043831" start="34553" end="34555" title="No. 82 Squadron RAAF" label="82"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043836" start="34557" end="34559" title="No. 84 Squadron RAAF" label="84"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043846" start="34564" end="34566" title="No. 86 Squadron RAAF" label="86"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156895" start="34634" end="34650" title="Borneo campaign (1945)" label="Borneo campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042889" start="35052" end="35094" title="No. 120 (Netherlands East Indies) Squadron" label="No. 120 (Netherlands East Indies) Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="35115" end="35120" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="35242" end="35266" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319833" start="35438" end="35450" title="Ottawa Macdonald–Cartier International Airport" label="RCAF Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800904" start="36084" end="36103" title="Article XV squadron" label="Article XV squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="36273" end="36290" title="Close air support" label="Army Co-operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q249708" start="36800" end="36820" title="Aleutian Islands Campaign" label="occupied two islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q758260" start="36822" end="36826" title="Attu Island" label="Attu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096067" start="36831" end="36836" title="Kiska" label="Kiska"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="36845" end="36854" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutians"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="36860" end="36866" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q651188" start="37033" end="37037" title="Adak Airport" label="Adak"/>
<link wikidata="Q460282" start="37165" end="37173" title="Amchitka" label="Amchitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096067" start="37188" end="37193" title="Kiska" label="Kiska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37343" end="37353" title="Ken Boomer" label="Ken Boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q649529" start="37366" end="37381" title="Nakajima A6M2-N" label="Nakajima A6M2-N"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136440" start="37711" end="37730" title="RAF Hartford Bridge" label="RAF Hartford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q130193" start="37937" end="37954" title="Victoria International Airport" label="RCAF Patricia Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55554851" start="38025" end="38038" title="fire balloon" label="balloon-bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636978" start="38192" end="38206" title="Sumas Mountain" label="Sumas Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215523" start="38293" end="38310" title="Saltspring Island" label="Saltspring Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q271730" start="38437" end="38465" title="Abbotsford, British Columbia" label="Abbotsford, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800904" start="38576" end="38596" title="Article XV squadrons" label="Article XV squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637320" start="38688" end="38700" title="No. 403 Squadron RCAF" label="403 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816699" start="38739" end="38751" title="No. 400 Squadron RCAF" label="400 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927098" start="38810" end="38822" title="No. 414 Squadron RCAF" label="414 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816805" start="38881" end="38893" title="No. 430 Squadron RCAF" label="430 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637978" start="39028" end="39040" title="No. 111 Squadron RCAF" label="111 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816809" start="39132" end="39144" title="No. 118 Squadron RCAF" label="118 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816833" start="39193" end="39204" title="No. 14 Squadron RCAF" label="14 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39254" end="39266" title="No. 132 Squadron RCAF" label="132 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39325" end="39337" title="No. 130 Squadron RCAF" label="130 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39381" end="39393" title="No. 163 Squadron RCAF" label="163 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39449" end="39461" title="No. 133 Squadron RCAF" label="133 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39507" end="39519" title="No. 135 Squadron RCAF" label="135 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="39604" end="39631" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39783" end="39797" title="Jerry Westenra" label="Jerry Westenra"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="39855" end="39865" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042985" start="39966" end="39977" title="14 Squadron RNZAF" label="14 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927077" start="39979" end="39990" title="No. 15 Squadron RNZAF" label="15 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927079" start="39992" end="40003" title="No. 16 Squadron RNZAF" label="16 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043042" start="40005" end="40016" title="No. 17 Squadron RNZAF" label="17 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927081" start="40018" end="40029" title="No. 18 Squadron RNZAF" label="18 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043072" start="40031" end="40042" title="No. 19 Squadron RNZAF" label="19 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927083" start="40047" end="40058" title="No. 20 Squadron RNZAF" label="20 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534607" start="40244" end="40256" title="Geoffrey Fisken" label="Geoff Fisken"/>
<link wikidata="Q722674" start="40401" end="40417" title="Brewster Buffalo" label="Brewster Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q403668" start="40549" end="40558" title="Aichi D3A" label="Aichi D3A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253358" start="40629" end="40634" title="Mitsubishi Ki-21" label="Ki-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q697583" start="40673" end="40676" title="Mitsubishi G4M" label="G4M"/>
<link wikidata="Q465806" start="40946" end="40964" title="Vought F4U Corsair" label="Vought F4U Corsair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368739" start="41135" end="41142" title="Hamilton Airport (New Zealand)" label="Rukuhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="41177" end="41194" title="Soviet Air Forces" label="Soviet Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424026" start="41199" end="41220" title="Soviet Naval Aviation" label="Soviet Naval Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q977265" start="42049" end="42055" title="Klimov M-105" label="M-105P"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42288" end="42319" title="126th Fighter Aviation Regiment" label="126th Fighter Aviation Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42678" end="42691" title="Stephan Ridny" label="Stephan Ridny"/>
<link wikidata="Q178473" start="42695" end="42719" title="Hero of the Soviet Union" label="Hero of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q977265" start="45425" end="45437" title="Klimov M-105" label="Klimov M-105"/>
<link wikidata="Q14363960" start="45635" end="45640" title="ALSIB" label="ALSIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="45749" end="45769" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="defense of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q846989" start="46034" end="46048" title="Lavochkin La-5" label="Lavochkin La-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158758" start="46120" end="46128" title="45th Fighter Aviation Regiment" label="45th IAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q505673" start="46571" end="46576" title="Yakovlev Yak-1" label="Yak-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="46601" end="46614" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="46666" end="46671" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q37995" start="46914" end="46921" title="Rangoon" label="Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7464238" start="46953" end="46967" title="Yasuhiko Kuroe" label="Yasuhiko Kuroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253358" start="47101" end="47117" title="Mitsubishi Ki-21" label="Mitsubishi Ki-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="47265" end="47271" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="47273" end="47278" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="47280" end="47287" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="47292" end="47298" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q634542" start="47348" end="47367" title="Brazilian Air Force" label="Brazilian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q847492" start="47648" end="47665" title="Finnish Air Force" label="Finnish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q847492" start="47852" end="47869" title="Finnish Air Force" label="Finnish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198727" start="47994" end="48038" title="Royal Netherlands East Indies Army Air Force" label="Royal Netherlands East Indies Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042889" start="48044" end="48091" title="No. 120 (Netherlands East Indies) Squadron RAAF" label="No. 120 (Netherlands East Indies) Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332160" start="48142" end="48150" title="Indonesian National Revolution" label="fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q259255" start="48898" end="48905" title=".303 British" label=".303 in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642768" start="49223" end="49244" title="power-to-weight ratio" label="power-to-weight ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479025" start="50556" end="50577" title="Packard V-1650" label="Packard V-1650 Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="50643" end="50653" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080767" start="50835" end="50854" title="vertical stabilizer" label="vertical stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q267186" start="50957" end="50971" title="Gypsy Rose Lee" label="Gypsy Rose Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982224" start="54103" end="54116" title="bubble canopy" label="bubble canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="55038" end="55064" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q634542" start="55067" end="55086" title="Brazilian Air Force" label="Brazilian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="55089" end="55113" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266754" start="55116" end="55145" title="Chinese Nationalist Air Force" label="Chinese Nationalist Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351405" start="55148" end="55172" title="Royal Egyptian Air Force" label="Royal Egyptian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q847492" start="55175" end="55192" title="Finnish Air Force" label="Finnish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q117464905" start="55195" end="55211" title="French Air Force" label="French Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304002" start="55214" end="55234" title="Indonesian Air Force" label="Indonesian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q702107" start="55236" end="55259" title="Japanese Army Air Force" label="Japanese Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198727" start="55280" end="55324" title="Royal Netherlands East Indies Army Air Force" label="Royal Netherlands East Indies Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="55328" end="55355" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q918504" start="55358" end="55374" title="Polish Air Force" label="Polish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519024" start="55377" end="55400" title="South African Air Force" label="South African Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="55403" end="55419" title="Soviet Air Force" label="Soviet Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424026" start="55422" end="55443" title="Soviet Naval Aviation" label="Soviet Naval Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983085" start="55446" end="55463" title="Turkish Air Force" label="Turkish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="55466" end="55481" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="55484" end="55512" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="United States Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="55515" end="55544" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339839" start="55850" end="55860" title="Nicky Barr" label="Nicky Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="55908" end="55943" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Australia national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q684140" start="55946" end="55963" title="Gregory Boyington" label="Gregory Boyington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506341" start="56007" end="56014" title="VMF-214" label="VMF-214"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249338" start="56055" end="56069" title="Clive Caldwell" label="Clive Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25039581" start="56257" end="56270" title="Levi R. Chase" label="Levi R. Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q468716" start="56432" end="56448" title="Claire Chennault" label="Claire Chennault"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56613" end="56628" title="Development of Chinese Nationalist air force (1937–1945)#Units of the Chinese Airforce 1937–1945" label="23rd PS, 4th PG"/>
<link wikidata="Q275552" start="56679" end="56683" title="Vultee P-66 Vanguard" label="P-66"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540050" start="56687" end="56704" title="Liangping Airport" label="Liangshan Airbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q702107" start="56731" end="56765" title="Imperial Japanese Army Air Service" label="Imperial Japanese Army Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q703175" start="56817" end="56831" title="Kawasaki Ki-48" label="Kawasaki Ki-48"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013195" start="56986" end="56995" title="Dan Rowan" label="Dan Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912486" start="57082" end="57093" title="Billy Drake" label="Billy Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q787348" start="57150" end="57162" title="Neville Duke" label="Neville Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15503646" start="57326" end="57347" title="James Francis Edwards" label="James Francis Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534607" start="57456" end="57468" title="Geoff Fisken" label="Geoff Fisken"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996257" start="57602" end="57612" title="John Frost (pilot)" label="Jack Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487410" start="57751" end="57783" title="Herschel Green" label="Herschel &amp;quot;Herky&amp;quot; Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="57906" end="57917" title="John Gorton" label="John Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="57925" end="57952" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064293" start="58068" end="58083" title="No. 77 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 77 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58137" end="58154" title="John F. Hampshire" label="John F. Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236416" start="58290" end="58320" title="David Lee Hill" label="David Lee &amp;quot;Tex&amp;quot; Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q991673" start="58402" end="58419" title="Bruce K. Holloway" label="Bruce K. Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q937064" start="58504" end="58525" title="Strategic Air Command" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135188" start="58577" end="58592" title="James H. Howard" label="James H. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="58674" end="58688" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58788" end="58817" title="Nikolai Fedorovitch Kuznetsov" label="Nikolai Fedorovitch Kuznetsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q178473" start="58944" end="58968" title="Hero of the Soviet Union" label="Hero of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="59013" end="59016" title="Order of British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4369472" start="59019" end="59034" title="Pyotr Pokryshev" label="Pyotr Pokryshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q893656" start="59214" end="59227" title="Boris Safonov" label="Boris Safonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346822" start="59417" end="59438" title="Robert Lee Scott, Jr." label="Robert Lee Scott, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3195188" start="59514" end="59531" title="Kenneth M. Taylor" label="Kenneth M. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="59605" end="59627" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385138" start="59715" end="59729" title="Keith Truscott" label="Keith Truscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="59753" end="59772" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q113621" start="59913" end="59932" title="Battle of Milne Bay" label="Battle of Milne Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134100" start="59992" end="60028" title="Clinton D. &amp;quot;Casey&amp;quot; Vincent" label="Clinton D. &amp;quot;Casey&amp;quot; Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245063" start="60089" end="60099" title="John Lloyd Waddy" label="John Waddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996373" start="60165" end="60176" title="Boyd Wagner" label="Boyd Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817232" start="60297" end="60307" title="Len Waters" label="Len Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="60324" end="60345" title="indigenous Australian" label="Aboriginal Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508574" start="60378" end="60390" title="George Welch (pilot)" label="George Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043795" start="64203" end="64223" title="No. 75 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 75 Squadron RAAF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7212" wikidata="Q1140925" url="?curid=7212" title="Creed">
<text>A creed, also known as a confession of faith, a symbol, or a statement of faith, is a statement of the shared beliefs of a community (often a religious community) which summarize its core tenets.

Many Christian denominations use three creeds: the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, the Apostles&#x27; Creed and the Athanasian Creed. Some Christian denominations do not use any of those creeds. 

The term &quot;creed&quot; is sometimes extended to comparable concepts in non-Christian theologies. The Islamic concept of &quot;ʿaqīdah&quot; (literally &quot;bond, tie&quot;) is often rendered as &quot;creed&quot;.

== History ==
The earliest known creed in Christianity, &quot;Jesus is Lord&quot;, originated in the writings of Paul the Apostle. One of the most significant and widely used Christian creeds is the Nicene Creed, first formulated in AD 325 at the First Council of Nicaea to affirm the deity of Christ and revised at the First Council of Constantinople in AD 381 to affirm the trinity as a whole. The creed was further affirmed in 431 by the Chalcedonian Definition, which clarified the doctrine of Christ. Affirmation of this creed, which describes the Trinity, is often taken as a fundamental test of orthodoxy by many Christian denominations, and was historically purposed against Arianism. The Apostles&#x27; Creed, another early creed which concisely details the trinity, virgin birth, crucifixion, and resurrection, is most popular within western Christianity, and is widely used in Christian church services.
In Islamic theology, the term most closely corresponding to &quot;creed&quot; is &quot;ʿaqīdah&quot; ().

==Terminology==

The word &quot;creed&quot; is particularly used for a concise statement which is recited as part of liturgy. The term is anglicized from Latin &quot;credo&quot; &quot;I believe&quot;, the incipit of the Latin texts of the Apostles&#x27; Creed and the Nicene Creed. A creed is sometimes referred to as a &quot;symbol&quot; in a specialized meaning of that word (which was first introduced to Late Middle English in this sense), after Latin &quot;symbolum&quot; &quot;creed&quot; (as in &quot;Symbolum Apostolorum&quot; = the &quot;Apostles&#x27; Creed&quot;, a shorter version of the traditional Nicene Creed), after Greek &quot;symbolon&quot; &quot;token, watchword&quot;.

Some longer statements of faith in the Protestant tradition are instead called &quot;confessions of faith&quot;, or simply &quot;confession&quot; (as in e.g. Helvetic Confession). Within Evangelical Protestantism, the terms &quot;doctrinal statement&quot; or &quot;doctrinal basis&quot; tend to be preferred. Doctrinal statements may include positions on lectionary and translations of the Bible, particularly in fundamentalist churches of the King James Only movement.

==Christianity==
The first confession of faith established within Christianity was the Nicene Creed by the Early Church in 325. It was established to summarize the foundations of the Christian faith and to protect believers from false doctrines. Various Christian denominations from Protestantism and Evangelical Christianity have published confession of faith as a basis for fellowship among churches of the same denomination.

Many Christian denominations did not try to be too exhaustive in their confessions of faith and thus allow different opinions on some secondary topics. In addition, some churches are open to revising their confession of faith when necessary. Moreover, Baptist &quot;confessions of faith&quot; have often had a clause such as this from the First London Baptist Confession (Revised edition, 1646):

=== Excommunication ===
Excommunication is a practice of the Bible to exclude members who do not respect the Church&#x27;s confession of faith and do not want to repent. It is practiced by most Christian denominations and is intended to protect against the consequences of heretics&#x27; teachings and apostasy.

===Christians without creeds===
Some Christian denominations do not profess a creed. This stance is often referred to as &quot;non-creedalism&quot;.

Anabaptism, with its origins in the 16th century Radical Reformation, spawned a number of sects and denominations that espouse &quot;No creed, but the Bible/New Testament&quot;. This was a common reason for Anabaptist persecution from Catholic and Protestant believers. Anabaptist groups that exist today include the Amish, Hutterites, Mennonites, Schwarzenau Brethren (Church of the Brethren), River Brethren, Bruderhof, and the Apostolic Christian Church. 

The Religious Society of Friends, the group known as the Quakers, was founded in the 17th century and is similarly non-creedal. They believe that such formal structures, “be they written words, steeple-houses or a clerical hierarchy,” cannot take the place of communal relationships and a shared connection with God.

Similar reservations about the use of creeds can be found in the Restoration Movement and its descendants, the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), the Churches of Christ, and the Christian churches and churches of Christ. Restorationists profess &quot;no creed but Christ&quot;.

The Seventh-day Adventist Church also shares this sentiment.

Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses contrast &quot;memorizing or repeating creeds&quot; with acting to &quot;do what Jesus said&quot;.

===Christian creeds===

Several creeds originated in Christianity.
* 1 Corinthians 15:3–7 includes an early creed about Jesus&#x27; death and resurrection which was probably received by Paul. The antiquity of the creed has been located by most biblical scholars to no more than five years after Jesus&#x27; death, probably originating from the Jerusalem apostolic community.
* The Old Roman Creed is an earlier and shorter version of the Apostles&#x27; Creed. It was based on the 2nd century Rules of Faith and the interrogatory declaration of faith for those receiving baptism, which by the 4th century was everywhere tripartite in structure, following Matthew 28:19.
* The Apostles&#x27; Creed is used in Western Christianity for both liturgical and catechetical purposes.
* The Nicene Creed reflects the concerns of the First Council of Nicaea in 325 which had as their chief purpose to establish what Christians believed.
* The Chalcedonian Creed was adopted at the Council of Chalcedon in 451 in Asia Minor. It defines that Christ is &#x27;acknowledged in two natures&#x27;, which &#x27;come together into one person and hypostasis&#x27;.
* The Athanasian Creed (&quot;Quicunque vult&quot;) is a Christian statement of belief focusing on Trinitarian doctrine and Christology. It is the first creed in which the equality of the three persons of the Trinity is explicitly stated and differs from the Nicene and Apostles&#x27; Creeds in the inclusion of anathemas, or condemnations of those who disagree with the Creed.
* The Tridentine Creed was initially contained in the papal bull &quot;Iniunctum Nobis&quot;, issued by Pope Pius IV on 13 November 1565. The creed was intended to summarise the teaching of the Council of Trent (1545–1563).
* The Maasai Creed is a creed composed in 1960 by the Maasai people of East Africa in collaboration with missionaries from the Congregation of the Holy Ghost. The creed attempts to express the essentials of the Christian faith within the Maasai culture.
* The Credo of the People of God is a confession of faith that Pope Paul VI published with the &quot;motu proprio&quot; &quot;Solemni hac liturgia&quot; of 30 June 1968. Pope Paul VI spoke of it as &quot;a creed which, without being strictly speaking a dogmatic definition, repeats in substance, with some developments called for by the spiritual condition of our time, the creed of Nicea, the creed of the immortal tradition of the holy Church of God.&quot;

===Christian confessions of faith===
Protestant denominations are usually associated with confessions of faith, which are similar to creeds but usually longer.
* The &quot;Sixty-seven Articles&quot; of the Swiss reformers, drawn up by Zwingli in 1523
* The &quot;Schleitheim Confession&quot; of the Anabaptist Swiss Brethren in 1527
* The &quot;Augsburg Confession&quot; of 1530, the work of Martin Luther and Philip Melanchthon, which marked the breach with Rome
* The &quot;Tetrapolitan Confession&quot; of the German Reformed Church, 1530
* The &quot;Smalcald Articles&quot; of Martin Luther, 1537
* The &quot;Guanabara Confession of Faith&quot;, 1558
* The &quot;Gallic Confession&quot;, 1559
* The &quot;Scots Confession&quot;, drawn up by John Knox in 1560
* The &quot;Belgic Confession&quot; drawn up by Guido de Bres in 1561
* The &quot;Thirty-nine Articles&quot; of the Church of England in 1562
* The &quot;Formula of Concord&quot; and its Epitome in 1577
* The &quot;Irish Articles&quot; in 1615
* The &quot;Remonstrant Confession&quot; in 1621
* The &quot;Dordrecht Confession of Faith&quot; of Dutch Mennonites in 1632
* The Baptist Confession of Faith in 1644 (upheld by Particular Baptists)
* The &quot;Westminster Confession of Faith&quot; in 1647 was the work of the Westminster Assembly of Divines and has commended itself to the Presbyterian Churches of all English-speaking peoples, and also in other languages.
* The &quot;Savoy Declaration&quot; of 1658 which was a modification of the Westminster Confession to suit Congregationalist polity
* The &quot;Standard Confession&quot; in 1660 (upheld by General Baptists)
* &quot;A Catechism and Confession of Faith&quot; in 1673 upheld by the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers)
* The &quot;Orthodox Creed&quot; in 1678 (upheld by General Baptists)
* The &quot;Baptist Confession&quot; in 1689 (upheld by Reformed Baptists)
* The &quot;Confession of Faith of the Calvinistic Methodists (Presbyterians) of Wales&quot; of 1823
* The &quot;New Hampshire Confession&quot; in 1833 (upheld by Landmark Baptists)
* The &quot;Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral&quot; of the Anglican Communion in 1870
* The &quot;Richmond Declaration&quot; in 1887, upheld by Orthodox Gurneyite Quakers
* The Assemblies of God Statement of Fundamental Truths in 1916
* The &quot;Confession of Faith&quot; of the United Methodist Church, adopted in 1968

=== Controversies ===
In the Swiss Reformed Churches, there was a quarrel about the Apostles&#x27; Creed in the mid-19th century. As a result, most cantonal reformed churches stopped prescribing any particular creed.

In 2005, Bishop John Shelby Spong, retired Episcopal Bishop of Newark, has written that dogmas and creeds were merely &quot;a stage in our development&quot; and &quot;part of our religious childhood.&quot; In his book, &quot;Sins of the Scripture&quot;, Spong wrote that &quot;Jesus seemed to understand that no one can finally fit the holy God into his or her creeds or doctrines. That is idolatry.&quot;

==Similar concepts in other religions==

=== The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ===
Within the sects of the Latter Day Saint movement, the &quot;Articles of Faith&quot; are contained in a list which was composed by Joseph Smith as part of an 1842 letter which he sent to &quot;Long&quot; John Wentworth, editor of the &quot;Chicago Democrat&quot;. It is canonized along with the King James Version of the Bible, the &quot;Book of Mormon&quot;, the &quot;Doctrine &amp; Covenants&quot; and the &quot;Pearl of Great Price&quot;, as a part of the standard works of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

=== Islamic &quot;aqīdah&quot; ===
In Islamic theology, the term most closely corresponding to &quot;creed&quot; is &quot;ʿaqīdah&quot; (). The first such creed was written as &quot;a short answer to the pressing heresies of the time&quot; is known as &quot;Al-Fiqh Al-Akbar&quot; and ascribed to Abū Ḥanīfa. Two well known creeds were the &quot;Fiqh Akbar II&quot; &quot;representative&quot; of the al-Ash&#x27;ari, and &quot;Fiqh Akbar III&quot;, &quot;representative&quot; of the Ash-Shafi&#x27;i.

&quot;Iman&quot; () in Islamic theology denotes a believer&#x27;s religious faith. Its most simple definition is the belief in the six articles of faith, known as &quot;arkān al-īmān&quot;.
#Belief in God
#Belief in the Angels
#Belief in Divine Books
#Belief in the Prophets
#Belief in the Day of Judgement
#Belief in God&#x27;s predestination

===Jewish &quot;Shema Yisrael&quot;===
Rabbi Milton Steinberg wrote that &quot;By its nature Judaism is averse to formal creeds which of necessity limit and restrain thought&quot; and asserted in his book &quot;Basic Judaism&quot; (1947) that &quot;Judaism has never arrived at a creed.&quot; The 1976 Centenary Platform of the Central Conference of American Rabbis, an organization of Reform rabbis, agrees that &quot;Judaism emphasizes action rather than creed as the primary expression of a religious life.&quot;

Still, the opening lines of the prayer Shema Yisrael can be read as a creedal statement of strict monotheism: &quot;Hear O Israel, the Lord is our God, the Lord is One&quot; (; transliterated &quot;Shema Yisrael Adonai Eloheinu Adonai Echad&quot;).

A notable statement of Jewish principles of faith was drawn up by Maimonides as his 13 Principles of Faith.

==Religions without creeds==

Following a debate that lasted more than twenty years, the National Conference of the American Unitarian Association passed a resolution in 1894 that established the denomination as non-creedal. The Unitarians later merged with the Universalist Church of America to form the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA). Instead of a creed, the UUA abides by a set of principles, such as “a free and responsible search for truth and meaning”. It cites diverse sources of inspiration, including Christianity, Judaism, Humanism, and Earth-centered traditions.

==See also==
* Covenant
* Credo
* Mission statement
* The American&#x27;s Creed – a 1917 statement about Americans&#x27; belief in democracy
* The Five Ks
* Pesher

== References ==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Christian Confessions: a Historical Introduction&quot;, [by] Ted A. Campbell. First ed. xxi, 336 p. Louisville, Ky.: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1996. 
* &quot;Creeds and Confessions of Faith in the Christian Tradition&quot;. Edited by Jaroslav Pelikan and Valerie Hotchkiss. Yale University Press 2003.
* &quot;Creeds in the Making: a Short Introduction to the History of Christian Doctrine&quot;, [by] Alan Richardson. Reissued. London: S.C.M. Press, 1979, cop. 1935. 128 p. 
* &quot;Ecumenical Creeds and Reformed Confessions&quot;. Grand Rapids, Mich.: C.R.C. [&quot;i.e&quot;. Christian Reformed Church] Publications, 1987. 148 p. 
* &quot;The Three Forms of Unity (Heidelberg Catechism, Belgic Confession, [and the] Canons of Dordrecht), and the Ecumenical Creeds (the Apostles&#x27; Creed, the Athanasian Creed, [and the] Creed of Chalcedon)&quot;. Reprinted [ed.]. Mission Committee of the Protestant Reformed Churches in America, 1991. 58 p. Without ISBN

==External links==
* The Creeds of Christendom – A website linking to many formal Christian declarations of faith.
* Creeds and Canons – A Guide to Early Church Documents from Internet Christian Library
* ICP Website International Creed for Peace</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1140925" start="2" end="7" title="Creed" label="creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140925" start="25" end="44" title="Creed" label="confession of faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140925" start="48" end="54" title="Creed" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140925" start="61" end="79" title="Creed" label="statement of faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="110" end="116" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="202" end="225" title="Christian denominations" label="Christian denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="248" end="279" title="Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed" label="Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="285" end="305" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q747243" start="314" end="330" title="Athanasian Creed" label="Athanasian Creed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="361" end="391" title="#Christians without creeds" label="do not use any of those creeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q235258" start="525" end="532" title="ʿAqīdah" label="ʿaqīdah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="656" end="668" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188297" start="676" end="689" title="Jesus is Lord" label="Jesus is Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="727" end="743" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="813" end="825" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="861" end="884" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179826" start="934" end="965" title="First Council of Constantinople" label="First Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="1167" end="1174" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="1216" end="1225" title="orthodoxy" label="orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="1234" end="1256" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="1297" end="1305" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="1458" end="1478" title="western Christianity" label="western Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q906066" start="1512" end="1526" title="church service" label="church service"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1532" end="1537" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q235258" start="1616" end="1623" title="ʿAqīdah" label="ʿaqīdah"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="1752" end="1759" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161138" start="1840" end="1847" title="incipit" label="incipit"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="1874" end="1894" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="1903" end="1915" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="2043" end="2062" title="Late Middle English" label="Late Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="2143" end="2163" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Symbolum Apostolorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="2182" end="2202" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2365" end="2375" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q676162" start="2484" end="2503" title="Helvetic Confession" label="Helvetic Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="2513" end="2538" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q284465" start="2681" end="2691" title="lectionary" label="lectionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q86860" start="2696" end="2721" title="translations of the Bible" label="translations of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="2739" end="2753" title="Christian fundamentalism" label="fundamentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411760" start="2770" end="2794" title="King James Only movement" label="King James Only movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2863" end="2875" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="2884" end="2896" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="2904" end="2916" title="Early Church" label="Early Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q32577" start="2920" end="2923" title="325" label="325"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="3051" end="3074" title="Christian denominations" label="Christian denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3080" end="3093" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="3098" end="3122" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="3231" end="3254" title="Christian denominations" label="Christian denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="3478" end="3485" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146553" start="3565" end="3596" title="First London Baptist Confession" label="First London Baptist Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="3647" end="3662" title="Excommunication" label="Excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="3684" end="3689" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="3817" end="3840" title="Christian denominations" label="Christian denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="3896" end="3910" title="heresy" label="heretics&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="3925" end="3933" title="apostasy" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="4086" end="4096" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786655" start="4135" end="4154" title="Radical Reformation" label="Radical Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="4403" end="4408" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="4410" end="4420" title="Hutterites" label="Hutterites"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="4422" end="4432" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q833158" start="4434" end="4454" title="Schwarzenau Brethren" label="Schwarzenau Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089826" start="4456" end="4478" title="Church of the Brethren" label="Church of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394042" start="4481" end="4495" title="River Brethren" label="River Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q992197" start="4497" end="4506" title="Bruderhof" label="Bruderhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087403" start="4516" end="4542" title="Apostolic Christian Church" label="Apostolic Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="4550" end="4578" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Religious Society of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="4603" end="4610" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q585110" start="4929" end="4949" title="Restoration Movement" label="Restoration Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="4975" end="5013" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272775" start="5019" end="5037" title="Churches of Christ" label="Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110310" start="5047" end="5088" title="Christian churches and churches of Christ" label="Christian churches and churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="5152" end="5180" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="5210" end="5234" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="5388" end="5400" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="5404" end="5420" title="1 Corinthians 15" label="1 Corinthians 15"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5679" end="5708" title="Early centers of Christianity#Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem apostolic community"/>
<link wikidata="Q445209" start="5716" end="5731" title="Old Roman Creed" label="Old Roman Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="5773" end="5793" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="5905" end="5912" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="6010" end="6030" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="6042" end="6062" title="Western Christianity" label="Western Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285545" start="6072" end="6082" title="Christian liturgy" label="liturgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735729" start="6087" end="6099" title="catechetical" label="catechetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="6116" end="6128" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="6158" end="6181" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037472" start="6267" end="6285" title="Chalcedonian Creed" label="Chalcedonian Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q747243" start="6485" end="6501" title="Athanasian Creed" label="Athanasian Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="6863" end="6879" title="Tridentine Creed" label="Tridentine Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="6911" end="6921" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6928" end="6943" title="Iniunctum Nobis" label="Iniunctum Nobis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161983" start="6961" end="6973" title="Pope Pius IV" label="Pope Pius IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="7051" end="7067" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721219" start="7087" end="7099" title="Maasai Creed" label="Maasai Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q163022" start="7135" end="7148" title="Maasai people" label="Maasai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q687562" start="7208" end="7238" title="Holy Ghost Fathers" label="Congregation of the Holy Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q16671252" start="7341" end="7367" title="Credo of the People of God" label="Credo of the People of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="7398" end="7410" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643" start="7436" end="7448" title="motu proprio" label="motu proprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="7709" end="7723" title="Nicene Creed" label="creed of Nicea"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="8030" end="8037" title="Zwingli" label="Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q265613" start="8058" end="8080" title="Schleitheim Confession" label="Schleitheim Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="8094" end="8104" title="Anabaptist" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q474889" start="8105" end="8119" title="Swiss Brethren" label="Swiss Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q154483" start="8140" end="8159" title="Augsburg Confession" label="Augsburg Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="8187" end="8200" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q76325" start="8205" end="8223" title="Philip Melanchthon" label="Philip Melanchthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="8254" end="8258" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q319300" start="8271" end="8294" title="Tetrapolitan Confession" label="Tetrapolitan Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642736" start="8308" end="8330" title="German Reformed Church" label="German Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q819690" start="8349" end="8366" title="Smalcald Articles" label="Smalcald Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613536" start="8408" end="8437" title="Guanabara Confession of Faith" label="Guanabara Confession of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125186" start="8462" end="8479" title="Gallic Confession" label="Gallic Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125192" start="8504" end="8520" title="Scots Confession" label="Scots Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q189937" start="8540" end="8549" title="John Knox" label="John Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377480" start="8570" end="8587" title="Belgic Confession" label="Belgic Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368959" start="8606" end="8619" title="Guido de Bres" label="Guido de Bres"/>
<link wikidata="Q937617" start="8640" end="8660" title="Thirty-nine Articles" label="Thirty-nine Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="8674" end="8691" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q702184" start="8712" end="8730" title="Formula of Concord" label="Formula of Concord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8773" end="8787" title="Irish Articles" label="Irish Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q74445873" start="8814" end="8836" title="Remonstrant Confession" label="Remonstrant Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q957109" start="8863" end="8892" title="Dordrecht Confession of Faith" label="Dordrecht Confession of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146553" start="8933" end="8960" title="1644 Baptist Confession of Faith" label="Baptist Confession of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q815013" start="9013" end="9044" title="Westminster Confession of Faith" label="Westminster Confession of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886961" start="9079" end="9110" title="Westminster Assembly of Divines" label="Westminster Assembly of Divines"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="9143" end="9162" title="Presbyterian Church" label="Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566677" start="9239" end="9256" title="Savoy Declaration" label="Savoy Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q960252" start="9334" end="9358" title="Congregationalist polity" label="Congregationalist polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531727" start="9416" end="9432" title="General Baptists" label="General Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="9506" end="9534" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Religious Society of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q965897" start="9627" end="9645" title="1689 Baptist Confession of Faith" label="Baptist Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422268" start="9729" end="9751" title="Calvinistic Methodists" label="Calvinistic Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554380" start="9803" end="9827" title="New Hampshire Confession of Faith" label="New Hampshire Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961487" start="9853" end="9870" title="Landmarkism" label="Landmark Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q474229" start="9884" end="9913" title="Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral" label="Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="9927" end="9945" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042692" start="9966" end="9986" title="Richmond Declaration" label="Richmond Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620227" start="10021" end="10030" title="Gurneyite" label="Gurneyite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808651" start="10045" end="10094" title="Assemblies of God Statement of Fundamental Truths" label="Assemblies of God Statement of Fundamental Truths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159988" start="10115" end="10134" title="Confession of Faith (United Methodist)" label="Confession of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="10148" end="10171" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="10219" end="10240" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196186" start="10424" end="10441" title="John Shelby Spong" label="John Shelby Spong"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="10451" end="10460" title="Episcopal Church in the United States of America" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179248" start="10923" end="10928" title="List of sects in the Latter Day Saint movement" label="sects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="10936" end="10961" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="11043" end="11055" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983048" start="11075" end="11081" title="The Wentworth Letter" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q361224" start="11099" end="11130" title="John Wentworth (mayor)" label="&amp;quot;Long&amp;quot; John Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095576" start="11152" end="11168" title="Chicago Democrat" label="Chicago Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="11207" end="11225" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="11233" end="11238" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q459842" start="11250" end="11264" title="Book of Mormon" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q462463" start="11282" end="11306" title="Doctrine &amp;amp; Covenants" label="Doctrine &amp;amp; Covenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q459864" start="11327" end="11347" title="Pearl of Great Price (Mormonism)" label="Pearl of Great Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847515" start="11372" end="11386" title="standard works" label="standard works"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="11390" end="11437" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q235258" start="11562" end="11569" title="ʿAqīdah" label="ʿaqīdah"/>
<link wikidata="Q190896" start="11737" end="11747" title="Abū Ḥanīfa" label="Abū Ḥanīfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q539918" start="11840" end="11855" title="Ash&amp;#x27;ari" label="al-Ash&amp;#x27;ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="11923" end="11939" title="Shafi&amp;#x27;i" label="Ash-Shafi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q12818349" start="11965" end="11981" title="Islamic theology" label="Islamic theology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12069" end="12094" title="Iman (concept)#The six articles of faith" label="the six articles of faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q174495" start="12133" end="12146" title="Tawhid" label="Belief in God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266031" start="12148" end="12168" title="Islamic view of angels" label="Belief in the Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q235131" start="12170" end="12192" title="Islamic holy books" label="Belief in Divine Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="12194" end="12216" title="Prophets in Islam" label="Belief in the Prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q12200906" start="12218" end="12248" title="Yawm al-Qiyāmah" label="Belief in the Day of Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024054" start="12250" end="12285" title="Predestination in Islam" label="Belief in God&amp;#x27;s predestination"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="12326" end="12331" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858100" start="12332" end="12348" title="Milton Steinberg" label="Milton Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060634" start="12615" end="12652" title="Central Conference of American Rabbis" label="Central Conference of American Rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="12673" end="12679" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q207607" start="12843" end="12856" title="Shema Yisrael" label="Shema Yisrael"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="12902" end="12912" title="monotheism" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916967" start="12981" end="12995" title="Romanization of Hebrew" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152751" start="13077" end="13103" title="Jewish principles of faith" label="Jewish principles of faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="13120" end="13130" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152751" start="13138" end="13160" title="13 principles of faith" label="13 Principles of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843054" start="13279" end="13309" title="American Unitarian Association" label="American Unitarian Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q893252" start="13425" end="13455" title="Universalist Church of America" label="Universalist Church of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q671506" start="13468" end="13502" title="Unitarian Universalist Association" label="Unitarian Universalist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="13706" end="13714" title="Humanism" label="Humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758236" start="13720" end="13745" title="Earth religion" label="Earth-centered traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178970" start="13763" end="13771" title="Covenant (religion)" label="Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139456" start="13774" end="13779" title="Credo" label="Credo"/>
<link wikidata="Q942830" start="13782" end="13799" title="Mission statement" label="Mission statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742831" start="13802" end="13827" title="The American&amp;#x27;s Creed" label="The American&amp;#x27;s Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505882" start="13891" end="13902" title="The Five Ks" label="The Five Ks"/>
<link wikidata="Q119530" start="13905" end="13911" title="Pesher" label="Pesher"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="14235" end="14256" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707628" start="14363" end="14378" title="Alan Richardson (priest)" label="Alan Richardson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7213" wikidata="Q313782" url="?curid=7213" title="Claudius Aelianus">
<text>Claudius Aelianus (, Greek transliteration &quot;Kláudios Ailianós&quot;; ), commonly Aelian (), born at Praeneste, was a Roman author and teacher of rhetoric who flourished under Septimius Severus and probably outlived Elagabalus, who died in 222. He spoke Greek so fluently that he was called &quot;honey-tongued&quot; ( ); Roman-born, he preferred Greek authors, and wrote in a slightly archaizing Greek himself.

His two chief works are valuable for the numerous quotations from the works of earlier authors, which are otherwise lost, and for the surprising lore, which offers unexpected glimpses into the Greco-Roman world-view. &quot;De Natura Animalium&quot; is also the only Greco-Roman work to mention Gilgamesh.

==&quot;De Natura Animalium&quot;==
&quot;On the Nature of Animals&quot; (alternatively &quot;On the Characteristics of Animals&quot;; , &quot;&quot;; usually cited by its Latin title &quot;De Natura Animalium&quot;) is a collection, in seventeen books, of brief stories of natural history. Some are included for the moral lessons they convey; others because they are astonishing.
The Loeb Classical Library introduction characterizes the book as &quot;an appealing collection of facts and fables about the animal kingdom that invites the reader to ponder contrasts between human and animal behavior&quot;.

Aelian&#x27;s anecdotes on animals rarely depend on direct observation: they are almost entirely taken from written sources, not only Pliny the Elder, Theopompus, and Lycus of Rhegium, but also other authors and works now lost, to whom he is thus a valuable witness. He is more attentive to marine life than might be expected, though, and this seems to reflect first-hand personal interest; he often quotes &quot;fishermen&quot;. At times he strikes the modern reader as thoroughly credulous, but at others he specifically states that he is merely reporting what is told by others, and even that he does not believe them. Aelian&#x27;s work is one of the sources of medieval natural history and of the bestiaries of the Middle Ages.

The surviving portions of the text are badly mangled and garbled and replete with later interpolations. Conrad Gessner (or Gesner), the Swiss scientist and natural historian of the Renaissance, made a Latin translation of Aelian&#x27;s work, to give it a wider European audience. An English translation by A. F. Scholfield has been published in the Loeb Classical Library, 3 vols. (1958-59).

==&quot;Varia Historia&quot;==

&quot;Various History&quot; (, &quot;&quot;)—for the most part preserved only in an abridged form—is Aelian&#x27;s other well-known work, a miscellany of anecdotes and biographical sketches, lists, pithy maxims, and descriptions of natural wonders and strange local customs, in 14 books, with many surprises for the cultural historian and the mythographer, anecdotes about the famous Greek philosophers, poets, historians, and playwrights and myths instructively retold. The emphasis is on &quot;various&quot; moralizing tales about heroes and rulers, athletes and wise men; reports about food and drink, different styles in dress or lovers, local habits in giving gifts or entertainments, or in religious beliefs and death customs; and comments on Greek painting. Aelian gives accounts of, among other things, fly fishing using lures of red wool and feathers, lacquerwork, and serpent worship. Essentially, the &quot;Various History&quot; is a classical &quot;magazine&quot; in the original sense of that word. He is not perfectly trustworthy in details, and his writing was heavily influenced by Stoic opinions, perhaps so that his readers will not feel guilty, but Jane Ellen Harrison found survivals of archaic rites mentioned by Aelian very illuminating in her &quot;Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion&quot; (1903, 1922).

&quot;Varia Historia&quot; was first printed in 1545. The standard modern text is that of Mervin R. Dilts (1974).

Two English translations of the &quot;Various History,&quot; by Fleming (1576) and Stanley (1665) made Aelian&#x27;s miscellany available to English readers, but after 1665 no English translation appeared, until three English translations appeared almost simultaneously: James G. DeVoto, &quot;Claudius Aelianus: Ποικίλης Ἱστορίας (&quot;Varia Historia&quot;)&quot; Chicago, 1995; Diane Ostrom Johnson, &quot;An English Translation of Claudius Aelianus&#x27; &quot;Varia Historia&quot;&quot;, 1997; and N. G. Wilson, &quot;Aelian: Historical Miscellany&quot; in the Loeb Classical Library.

==Other works==
Considerable fragments of two other works, &quot;On Providence&quot; and &quot;Divine Manifestations&quot;, are preserved in the early medieval encyclopedia, the &quot;Suda.&quot; Twenty &quot;letters from a farmer&quot; after the manner of Alciphron are also attributed to him. The letters are invented compositions to a fictitious correspondent, which are a device for vignettes of agricultural and rural life, set in Attica, though mellifluous Aelian once boasted that he had never been outside Italy, never been aboard a ship (which is at variance, though, with his own statement, &quot;de Natura Animalium&quot; XI.40, that he had seen the bull Serapis with his own eyes). Thus conclusions about actual agriculture in the &quot;Letters&quot; are as likely to evoke Latium as Attica. The fragments have been edited in 1998 by D. Domingo-Foraste, but are not available in English. The &quot;Letters&quot; are available in the Loeb Classical Library, translated by Allen Rogers Benner and Francis H. Fobes (1949).

==See also==
*&quot;Historiae animalium&quot; by Gessner

==References==
==Further reading==
*Aelian, &quot;On Animals&quot;. 3 volumes. Translated by A. F. Scholfield. 1958–9. Loeb Classical Library. , , and 
*Aelian, &quot;Historical Miscellany&quot;. Translated by Nigel G. Wilson. 1997. Loeb Classical Library. 
*Alciphron, Aelian, and Philostratus, &quot;The Letters&quot;. Translated by A. R. Benner, F. H. Fobes. 1949. Loeb Classical Library. 
*Aelian, &quot;On the Nature of Animals&quot;. Translated by Gregory McNamee. 2011. Trinity University Press. 
*Ailianos, &quot;Vermischte Forschung&quot;. Greek and German by Kai Brodersen. 2018. Sammlung Tusculum. De Gruyter Berlin &amp; Boston 
*Ailianos, &quot;Tierleben&quot;. Greek and German by Kai Brodersen. 2018. Sammlung Tusculum. De Gruyter Berlin &amp; Boston 2018, 
*Claudius Aelianus, &quot;Vom Wesen der Tiere - De natura animalium&quot;. German and Commentary by Paul-Gerhard Veh, Philipp Stahlhut. 2020. Bibliothek der Griechischen Literaur. Anton Hiersemann Verlag Stuttgart 2020, ISBN 

==External links==
* 
* Ποικίλη ἱστορία – bibliotheca Augustana
* Raw Greek OCR of Hercher&#x27;s 1864 Teubner edition of Aelian&#x27;s works at the Lace repository of Mount Allison University: vol. I, vol. 2 
* Various History at James Eason&#x27;s site (excerpts in English translation)
* English translation of Aelian&#x27;s fragments at &quot;attalus.org&quot;
* Some quotes from Aelian&#x27;s natural history (English)
* Aelian from the fly-fisherman&#x27;s point-of-view
* The Evidence for Aelian&#x27;s Katêgoria tou gunnidos regarding Aelian&#x27;s presumed invective against Elagabalus
===Aelian&#x27;s &quot;Characteristics of Animals&quot;===
;Greek with English translation
*Aelian on the Characteristics of Animals, Books I-V (Greek with English translation by A.F. Scholfield, 1950)
*Aelian on the Characteristics of Animals, Books VI-XI (Greek with English translation by A.F. Scholfield, 1950)
*Aelian on the Characteristics of Animals, Books XII-XVII (Greek with English translation by A.F. Scholfield, 1950)
*HTML version of Scholfield&#x27;s English translation at &quot;attalus.org&quot;
;Latin translation
* &quot;De natura animalium&quot; at LacusCurtius (complete Latin translation)
;Greek
* &quot;De natura animalium libri XVII, Varia historia, Epistolae fragmenta, ex recognitione Rudolphi Hercheri&quot;, Lipsiae, in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1864: vol. 1, vol. 2.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="0" end="17" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Claudius Aelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="86" end="92" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Aelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q243133" start="105" end="114" title="Praeneste" label="Praeneste"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="150" end="158" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="180" end="197" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="220" end="230" title="Elagabalus" label="Elagabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="258" end="263" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q159709" start="711" end="720" title="Gilgamesh" label="Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="895" end="900" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="1108" end="1130" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1465" end="1480" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318" start="1482" end="1492" title="Theopompus" label="Theopompus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1498" end="1514" title="Lycus of Rhegium" label="Lycus of Rhegium"/>
<link wikidata="Q830560" start="2033" end="2043" title="Bestiary" label="bestiaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q60116" start="2169" end="2183" title="Conrad Gessner" label="Conrad Gessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="2414" end="2436" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="2833" end="2845" title="mythographer" label="mythographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q898886" start="3301" end="3312" title="fly fishing" label="fly fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817235" start="3319" end="3324" title="Artificial fly" label="lures"/>
<link wikidata="Q368972" start="3351" end="3362" title="Lacquerware" label="lacquerwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q721221" start="3368" end="3375" title="Serpent (symbolism)" label="serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="3588" end="3593" title="Stoicism" label="Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q437675" start="3658" end="3677" title="Jane Ellen Harrison" label="Jane Ellen Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="4507" end="4529" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="4716" end="4720" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q559866" start="4789" end="4798" title="Alciphron" label="Alciphron"/>
<link wikidata="Q214554" start="5198" end="5205" title="Serapis" label="Serapis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="5318" end="5324" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="5328" end="5334" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849598" start="5579" end="5621" title="Historiae animalium (Gesner)" label="&amp;quot;Historiae animalium&amp;quot; by Gessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898683" start="5716" end="5732" title="A. F. Scholfield" label="A. F. Scholfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989543" start="5833" end="5848" title="Nigel Wilson (Classicist)" label="Nigel G. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q110878" start="6192" end="6205" title="Kai Brodersen" label="Kai Brodersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q110878" start="6318" end="6331" title="Kai Brodersen" label="Kai Brodersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q742150" start="6791" end="6815" title="Mount Allison University" label="Mount Allison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="7207" end="7217" title="Elagabalus" label="Elagabalus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7214" wikidata="Q203673" url="?curid=7214" title="Callisto (mythology)">
<text>In Greek mythology, Callisto (; ) was a nymph, or the daughter of King Lycaon; the myth varies in such details. She was believed to be one of the followers of Artemis (Diana for the Romans) who attracted Zeus. Many versions of Callisto&#x27;s story survive. According to some writers, Zeus transformed himself into the figure of Artemis to pursue Callisto, and she slept with him believing Zeus to be Artemis. She became pregnant and when this was eventually discovered, she was expelled from Artemis&#x27;s group, after which a furious Hera, the wife of Zeus, transformed her into a bear, although in some versions, Artemis is the one to give her an ursine form. Later, just as she was about to be killed by her son when he was hunting, she was set among the stars as Ursa Major (&quot;the Great Bear&quot;) by Zeus. She was the bear-mother of the Arcadians, through her son Arcas by Zeus.

In other accounts, the birth mother of Arcas was called Megisto, daughter of Ceteus, son of Lycaon, or else Themisto, daughter of Inachus.

The fourth Galilean moon of Jupiter and a main belt asteroid are named after Callisto.

== Mythology ==
As a follower of Artemis, Callisto, who Hesiod said was the daughter of Lycaon, king of Arcadia, took a vow to remain a virgin, as did all the nymphs of Artemis.

According to Hesiod, she was seduced by Zeus, and of the consequences that followed:

[Callisto] chose to occupy herself with wild-beasts in the mountains together with Artemis, and, when she was seduced by Zeus, continued some time undetected by the goddess, but afterwards, when she was already with child, was seen by her bathing and so discovered. Upon this, the goddess was enraged and changed her into a beast. Thus she became a bear and gave birth to a son called Arcas. But while she was in the mountains, she was hunted by some goat-herds and given up with her babe to Lycaon. Some while after, she thought fit to go into the forbidden precinct of Zeus, not knowing the law, and being pursued by her own son and the Arcadians, was about to be killed because of the said law; but Zeus delivered her because of her connection with him and put her among the stars, giving her the name Bear because of the misfortune which had befallen her.

Eratosthenes also mentions a variation in which the virginal companion of Artemis that was seduced by Zeus and eventually transformed into the constellation Ursa Minor was named Phoenice instead.

According to Ovid, it was Jupiter who took the form of Diana so that he might evade his wife Juno&#x27;s detection, forcing himself upon Callisto while she was separated from Diana and the other nymphs. Callisto recognized that something was wrong the moment Jupiter started giving her &quot;non-virginal kisses&quot;, but by that point it was too late, and even though she fought him off, he overpowered her. The real Diana arrived in the scene soon after and called Callisto to her, only for the girl to run away in fear she was Jupiter, until she noticed the nymphs accompanying the goddess. Callisto&#x27;s subsequent pregnancy was discovered several months later while she was bathing with Diana and her fellow nymphs. Diana became enraged when she saw that Callisto was pregnant and expelled her from the group. Callisto later gave birth to Arcas. Juno then took the opportunity to avenge her wounded pride and transformed the nymph into a bear. Sixteen years later Callisto, still a bear, encountered her son Arcas hunting in the forest. Just as Arcas was about to kill his own mother with his javelin, Jupiter averted the tragedy by placing mother and son amongst the stars as Ursa Major and Minor, respectively. Juno, enraged that her attempt at revenge had been frustrated, appealed to Tethys that the two might never meet her waters, thus providing a poetic explanation for the constellations&#x27; circumpolar positions in ancient times.

According to Hyginus, the origin of the transformation of Zeus, with its lesbian overtones, was from a rendition of the tale in a comedy in a lost work by the Attic comedian Amphis where Zeus embraced Callisto as Artemis and she, after being questioned by Artemis for her pregnancy, blamed the goddess, thinking she had impregnated her; Artemis then changed her into a bear. She was caught by some Aetolians and brought to Lycaon, her father. Still a bear, she rushed with her son Arcas into a temple of Zeus as the Arcadians followed to kill them; Zeus turned mother and son into constellations. Hyginus also records a version where Hera changed Callisto for sleeping with Zeus, and Artemis later slew her while hunting, not recognizing her. In another of the versions Hyginus records, it was Zeus who turned Callisto into a bear, to conceal her from Juno, who had noticed what her husband was doing. Juno then pointed Callisto to Diana, who proceeded to shoot her with her arrows.

According to the mythographer Apollodorus, Zeus forced himself on Callisto when he disguised himself as Artemis or Apollo, in order to lure the sworn maiden into his embrace. Apollodorus is the only author to mention Apollo, but implies that it is not a rarity. Callisto was then turned into a bear by Zeus trying to hide her from Hera, but Hera asked Artemis to shoot the animal, and Artemis complied. Zeus then took the child, named it Arcas, and gave it to Maia to bring up in Arcadia; and Callisto he turned into a star and called it the Bear. Alternatively, Artemis killed Callisto for not protecting her virginity. Nonnus also writes that a &quot;female paramour entered a woman&#x27;s bed.&quot;

Either Artemis &quot;slew Kallisto with a shot of her silver bow,&quot; according to Homer, in order to please Juno (Hera) as Pausanias and Pseudo-Apollodorus write or later Arcas, the eponym of Arcadia, nearly killed his bear-mother, when she had wandered into the forbidden precinct of Zeus. In every case, Zeus placed them both in the sky as the constellations Ursa Major, called &quot;Arktos&quot; (), the Bear, by Greeks, and Ursa Minor.

According to John Tzetzes, Charon of Lampsacus wrote that Callisto&#x27;s son Arcas had been fathered not by Zeus but rather by Apollo.

As a constellation, Ursa Major (who was also known as Helice, from an alternative origin story of the constellation) told Demeter, when the goddess asked the stars whether they knew anything about her daughter Persephone&#x27;s abduction, to ask Helios the sun god, for he knew the deeds of the day well, while the night was blameless.

== Origin of the myth ==
The name &quot;Kalliste&quot; (), &quot;most beautiful&quot;, may be recognized as an epithet of the goddess herself, though none of the inscriptions at Athens that record priests of &quot;Artemis Kalliste&quot; (), date before the third century BCE. Artemis Kalliste was worshiped in Athens in a shrine which lay outside the Dipylon gate, by the side of the road to the Academy. W. S. Ferguson suggested that Artemis Soteira and Artemis Kalliste were joined in a common cult administered by a single priest. The bearlike character of Artemis herself was a feature of the Brauronia. It has been suggested that the myths of Artemis&#x27; nymphs breaking their vows were originally about Artemis herself, before her characterization shifted to that of a sworn virgin who fiercely defends her chastity.

The myth in &quot;Catasterismi&quot; may be derived from the fact that a set of constellations appear close together in the sky, in and near the Zodiac sign of Libra, namely Ursa Minor, Ursa Major, Boötes, and Virgo. The constellation Boötes, was explicitly identified in the Hesiodic &quot;Astronomia&quot; () as Arcas, the &quot;Bear-warden&quot; (&quot;Arktophylax&quot;; ): He is Arkas the son of Kallisto and Zeus, and he lived in the country about Lykaion. After Zeus had seduced Kallisto, Lykaon, pretending not to know of the matter, entertained Zeus, as Hesiod says, and set before him on the table the babe [Arkas] which he had cut up.

The stars of Ursa Major were all circumpolar in Athens of 400 BCE, and all but the stars in the Great Bear&#x27;s left foot were circumpolar in Ovid&#x27;s Rome, in the first century CE. Now, however, due to the precession of the equinoxes, the feet of the Great Bear constellation do sink below the horizon from Rome and especially from Athens; however, Ursa Minor (Arcas) does remain completely above the horizon, even from latitudes as far south as Honolulu and Hong Kong.

According to Julien d&#x27;Huy, who used phylogenetic and statistical tools, the story could be a recent transformation of a Palaeolithic myth.

==In art==
Callisto&#x27;s story was sometimes depicted in classical art, where the moment of transformation into a bear was the most popular. From the Renaissance on a series of major history paintings as well as many smaller cabinet paintings and book illustrations, usually called &quot;Diana and Callisto&quot;, depicted the traumatic moment of discovery of the pregnancy, as the goddess and her nymphs bathed in a pool, following Ovid&#x27;s account. The subject&#x27;s attraction was undoubtedly mainly the opportunity it offered for a group of several females to be shown largely nude.

Titian&#x27;s &quot;Diana and Callisto&quot; (1556–1559), was the greatest (though not the first) of these, quickly disseminated by a print by Cornelius Cort. Here, as in most subsequent depictions, Diana points angrily, as Callisto is held by two nymphs, who may be pulling off what little clothing remains on her. Other versions include one by Rubens, and &quot;Diana Bathing with her Nymphs with Actaeon and Callisto&quot; by Rembrandt, which unusually combines the moment with the arrival of Actaeon. The basic composition is rather unusually consistent. Carlo Ridolfi said there was a version by Giorgione, who died in 1510, though his many attributions to Giorgione of paintings that are now lost are treated with suspicion by scholars. Other, less dramatic, treatments before Titian established his composition are by Palma Vecchio and Dosso Dossi. Annibale Carracci&#x27;s &quot;The Loves of the Gods&quot; includes an image of Juno urging Diana to shoot Callisto in ursine form.

Although Ovid places the discovery in the ninth month of Callisto&#x27;s pregnancy, in paintings she is generally shown with a rather modest bump for late pregnancy. With the &quot;Visitation&quot; in religious art, this was the leading recurring subject in history painting that required showing pregnancy in art, which Early Modern painters still approached with some caution. In any case, the narrative required that the rest of the group had not previously noticed the pregnancy.
Callisto being seduced by Zeus/Jupiter in disguise was also a popular subject, usually called &quot;Jupiter and Callisto&quot;; it was the clearest common subject with lesbian lovers from classical mythology. The two lovers are usually shown happily embracing in a bower. The violence described by Ovid as following Callisto&#x27;s realization of what is going on is rarely shown. In versions before about 1700 Callisto may show some doubt about what is going on, as in the versions by Rubens. It was especially popular in the 18th century, when depictions were increasingly erotic; François Boucher painted several versions.

During the Nazi occupation of France, resistance poet Robert Desnos wrote a collection of poems entitled &quot;Calixto suivi de contrée,&quot; where he used the myth of Callisto as a symbol for beauty imprisoned beneath ugliness: a metaphor for France under the German occupation.

Aeschylus&#x27; tragedy &quot;Callisto&quot; is lost. However, Callisto rejoined the dramatic tradition in the Baroque period when Francesco Cavalli composed La Calisto in 1651.

== Genealogy ==
| style=&quot;padding: 0.6em 4em;&quot; |




|-
|style=&quot;text-align: left;&quot;|

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Baucis and Philemon
* Lilaeus
* Rhodopis and Euthynicus
* Syceus
* Titanis

== Notes ==
== References ==
*Brigstocke, Hugh; Italian and Spanish Paintings in the National Gallery of Scotland, 2nd Edn, 1993, National Galleries of Scotland, 
*&quot;Gods&quot;: Aghion I., Barbillon C., Lissarrague, F., &quot;Callisto&quot;, in &quot;Gods and Heroes of Classical Antiquity&quot;, Flammarion Iconographic Guides, pp. 77–78, 1996, 
*Hall, James, &quot;Diana: 5&quot;, in &quot;Hall&#x27;s Dictionary of Subjects and Symbols in Art&quot;, pp. 102–103, 1996 (2nd edn.), John Murray, 
* Maurus Servius Honoratus. &quot;In Vergilii carmina comentarii. Servii Grammatici qui feruntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii; recensuerunt Georgius Thilo et Hermannus Hagen&quot;. Georgius Thilo. Leipzig. B. G. Teubner. 1881.

==Further reading==
*Pseudo-Apollodorus. &quot;Bibliotheke&quot; III.8.2.
*Hyginus, attrib., &quot;Poeticon astronomicon&quot;, II.1: the Great Bear.
*Scholia to Lycophron&#x27;s &quot;Alexandra&quot;, marginal notes by Isaak and Ioannis Tzetzes and others from the Greek edition of Eduard Scheer (Weidmann 1881). Online version at the Topos Text Project.. 

==External links==

* Hesiod, &quot;Astronomy&quot;, quoted by the Pseudo-Eratosthenes, &quot;Catasterismi&quot;: e-text (English)
* Theoi Project – Kallisto
* Richard Wilson&#x27;s &#x27;Landscape with Diana and Callisto&#x27; at the Lady Lever Art Gallery
* Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (ca 220 images of Callisto)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q203673" start="20" end="28" title="Callisto (mythology)" label="Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="40" end="45" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q501667" start="71" end="77" title="Lycaon (king of Arcadia)" label="Lycaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="159" end="166" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132543" start="168" end="173" title="Diana (mythology)" label="Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="204" end="208" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="537" end="541" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069604" start="584" end="588" title="Bears in antiquity" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735629" start="746" end="765" title="Catasterismi" label="set among the stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="769" end="779" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="849" end="856" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q606422" start="876" end="881" title="Arcas" label="Arcas"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417113" start="948" end="955" title="Megisto (mythology)" label="Megisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q105360187" start="969" end="975" title="Ceteus" label="Ceteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q501667" start="984" end="990" title="Lycaon (king of Arcadia)" label="Lycaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105274568" start="1000" end="1008" title="Themisto (mythology)" label="Themisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q735623" start="1022" end="1029" title="Inachus" label="Inachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134" start="1036" end="1067" title="Callisto (moon)" label="fourth Galilean moon of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q147082" start="1074" end="1092" title="204 Kallisto" label="main belt asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="1176" end="1182" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q501667" start="1208" end="1214" title="Lycaon (king of Arcadia)" label="Lycaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="1224" end="1231" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="1312" end="1318" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q106483495" start="2424" end="2432" title="Phoenice (mythology)" label="Phoenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="2456" end="2460" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="2469" end="2476" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q132543" start="2498" end="2503" title="Diana (mythology)" label="Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q606422" start="3290" end="3295" title="Arcas" label="Arcas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="3628" end="3638" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q10478" start="3643" end="3648" title="Ursa Minor" label="Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184216" start="3739" end="3745" title="Tethys (mythology)" label="Tethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q12115" start="3853" end="3864" title="circumpolar star" label="circumpolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738147" start="3907" end="3914" title="Fabulae" label="Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="3967" end="3974" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q696632" start="4068" end="4074" title="Amphis" label="Amphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="4908" end="4919" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="4993" end="4999" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205233" start="5338" end="5342" title="Maia" label="Maia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="5499" end="5505" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="5667" end="5672" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="5693" end="5697" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="5699" end="5703" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="5708" end="5717" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="5767" end="5773" title="eponym" label="eponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="5777" end="5784" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q740625" start="5848" end="5866" title="Temenos" label="forbidden precinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="5931" end="5944" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10478" start="6013" end="6023" title="Ursa Minor" label="Ursa Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="6039" end="6051" title="John Tzetzes" label="John Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229422" start="6063" end="6072" title="Lampsacus" label="Lampsacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094612" start="6217" end="6223" title="Helice (mythology)" label="Helice"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="6285" end="6292" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45967" start="6373" end="6383" title="Persephone" label="Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="6409" end="6415" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="6611" end="6618" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="6896" end="6903" title="Platonic Academy" label="Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193138" start="7097" end="7106" title="Brauronia" label="Brauronia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735629" start="7344" end="7356" title="Catasterismi" label="Catasterismi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="7471" end="7477" title="Zodiac" label="Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q134394" start="7486" end="7491" title="Libra (astrology)" label="Libra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8667" start="7524" end="7530" title="Boötes" label="Boötes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8842" start="7536" end="7541" title="Virgo (constellation)" label="Virgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8667" start="7547" end="7567" title="Boötes" label="constellation Boötes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83094" start="8185" end="8212" title="precession of the equinoxes" label="precession of the equinoxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747618" start="8654" end="8667" title="classical art" label="classical art"/>
<link wikidata="Q742333" start="8780" end="8796" title="history painting" label="history painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448670" start="8822" end="8838" title="cabinet painting" label="cabinet painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="9030" end="9034" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="9189" end="9195" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161055" start="9209" end="9227" title="Diana and Callisto" label="Diana and Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q167220" start="9332" end="9346" title="Cornelius Cort" label="Cornelius Cort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706769" start="9528" end="9541" title="Diana and Callisto (Rubens)" label="one by Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q153788" start="9553" end="9608" title="Diana Bathing with her Nymphs with Actaeon and Callisto" label="Diana Bathing with her Nymphs with Actaeon and Callisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="9618" end="9627" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208531" start="9685" end="9692" title="Actaeon" label="Actaeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q776990" start="9748" end="9761" title="Carlo Ridolfi" label="Carlo Ridolfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8459" start="9790" end="9799" title="Giorgione" label="Giorgione"/>
<link wikidata="Q9342" start="10014" end="10027" title="Palma Vecchio" label="Palma Vecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q356777" start="10032" end="10043" title="Dosso Dossi" label="Dosso Dossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824" start="10045" end="10062" title="Annibale Carracci" label="Annibale Carracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749083" start="10076" end="10097" title="The Loves of the Gods" label="The Loves of the Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q691810" start="10359" end="10369" title="Visitation (Christianity)" label="Visitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29601569" start="10475" end="10491" title="pregnancy in art" label="pregnancy in art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="10499" end="10511" title="Early Modern" label="Early Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q180932" start="11245" end="11261" title="François Boucher" label="François Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="11300" end="11325" title="Nazi occupation of france" label="Nazi occupation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q170095" start="11343" end="11356" title="Robert Desnos" label="Robert Desnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="11571" end="11580" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="11682" end="11696" title="Baroque period" label="Baroque period"/>
<link wikidata="Q108062" start="11702" end="11719" title="Francesco Cavalli" label="Francesco Cavalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q536064" start="11729" end="11739" title="La Calisto" label="La Calisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q637209" start="11885" end="11904" title="Baucis and Philemon" label="Baucis and Philemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111914476" start="11907" end="11914" title="Lilaeus (mythology)" label="Lilaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q115919854" start="11917" end="11940" title="Rhodopis and Euthynicus" label="Rhodopis and Euthynicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686799" start="11943" end="11949" title="Syceus" label="Syceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q116457121" start="11952" end="11959" title="Titanis (mythology)" label="Titanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="12464" end="12488" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Maurus Servius Honoratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="12740" end="12751" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393179" start="12768" end="12775" title="De astronomia" label="Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393179" start="12792" end="12813" title="Poeticon astronomicon" label="Poeticon astronomicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="12844" end="12851" title="Scholia" label="Scholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q432737" start="12855" end="12871" title="Lycophron" label="Lycophron&amp;#x27;s"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7218" wikidata="Q13266" url="?curid=7218" title="Cookie">
<text>A cookie (American English) or biscuit (British English) is a baked snack or dessert that is typically small, flat, and sweet. It usually contains flour, sugar, egg, and some type of oil, fat, or butter. It may include other ingredients such as raisins, oats, chocolate chips, or nuts.

Most English-speaking countries call crunchy cookies &quot;biscuits&quot;, except for the United States and Canada, where &quot;biscuit&quot; refers to a type of quick bread. Chewier biscuits are sometimes called &quot;cookies,” even in the Commonwealth. Some cookies may also be named by their shape, such as date squares or bars.

Biscuit or cookie variants include sandwich biscuits, such as custard creams, Jammie Dodgers, Bourbons, and Oreos, with marshmallows or jam filling and sometimes dipped in chocolate or another sweet coating. Cookies are often served with beverages such as milk, coffee, or tea and sometimes dunked, an approach which releases more flavour from confections by dissolving the sugars, while also softening their texture. Factory-made cookies are sold in grocery stores, convenience stores, and vending machines. Fresh-baked cookies are sold at bakeries and coffeehouses.

==Terminology==

In many English-speaking countries outside North America, including the United Kingdom, the most common word for a crisp cookie is &quot;biscuit&quot;. Where biscuit is the most common term, &quot;cookie&quot; often only refers to one type of biscuit, a chocolate chip cookie. However, in some regions both terms are used. The container used to store cookies may be called a cookie jar.

In Scotland, the term &quot;cookie&quot; is sometimes used to describe a plain bun.

Cookies that are baked as a solid layer on a sheet pan and then cut, rather than being baked as individual pieces, are called bar cookies in American English or traybakes in British English.

==Etymology==

The word &quot;cookie&quot; dates from at least 1701 in Scottish usage where the word meant &quot;plain bun&quot;, rather than thin baked good, and so it is not certain whether it is the same word. From 1808, the word &quot;cookie&quot; is attested &quot;...in the sense of &quot;small, flat, sweet cake&quot; in American English. The American use is derived from Dutch &quot;little cake&quot;, which is a diminutive of &quot;&quot; (&quot;cake&quot;), which came from the Middle Dutch word &quot;&quot; with an informal, dialect variant . According to the Scottish National Dictionary, its Scottish name may derive from the diminutive form (+ suffix &quot;-ie&quot;) of the word &quot;cook&quot;, giving the Middle Scots &quot;cookie&quot;, &quot;cooky&quot; or &quot;cu(c)kie&quot;. There was much trade and cultural contact across the North Sea between the Low Countries and Scotland during the Middle Ages, which can also be seen in the history of curling and, perhaps, golf.

==Description==
Cookies are most commonly baked until crisp or else for just long enough to ensure a soft interior. Other types of cookies are not baked at all, such as varieties of peanut butter cookies that use solidified chocolate rather than set eggs and wheat gluten as a binder. Cookies are produced in a wide variety of styles, using an array of ingredients including sugars, spices, chocolate, butter, peanut butter, nuts, or dried fruits.

A general theory of cookies may be formulated in the following way. Despite its descent from cakes and other sweetened breads, the cookie in almost all its forms has abandoned water as a medium for cohesion. Water in cakes serves to make the batter as thin as possible, the better to allow bubbles—responsible for a cake&#x27;s fluffiness—to form. In the cookie the agent of cohesion has become some form of oil. Oils, whether in the form of butter, vegetable oils, or lard, are much more viscous than water and evaporate freely at a far higher temperature. Thus a cake made with butter or eggs in place of water is much denser after removal from the oven.

Rather than evaporating as water does in a baking cake, oils in cookies remain. These oils saturate the cavities created during baking by bubbles of escaping gases. These gases are primarily composed of steam vaporized from the egg whites and the carbon dioxide released by heating the baking powder. This saturation produces the most texturally attractive feature of the cookie, and indeed all fried foods: crispness saturated with a moisture (namely oil) that does not render soggy the food it has soaked into.

==History==

Cookie-like hard wafers have existed for as long as baking has been documented, in part because they survive travel very well, but they were usually not sweet enough to be considered cookies by modern standards.

Cookies appear to have their origins in 7th century AD Persia, shortly after the use of sugar became relatively common in the region. They spread to Europe through the Muslim conquest of Spain. By the 14th century, they were common in all levels of society throughout Europe, from royal cuisine to street vendors. The first documented instance of the figure-shaped gingerbread man was at the court of Elizabeth I of England in the 16th century. She had the gingerbread figures made and presented in the likeness of some of her important guests.

With global travel becoming widespread at that time, cookies made a natural travel companion, a modernized equivalent of the travel cakes used throughout history. One of the most popular early cookies, which traveled especially well and became known on every continent by similar names, was the jumble, a relatively hard cookie made largely from nuts, sweetener, and water.

Cookies came to America through the Dutch in New Amsterdam in the late 1620s. The Dutch word &quot;&quot; was Anglicized to &quot;cookie&quot; or cooky. The earliest reference to cookies in America is in 1703, when &quot;The Dutch in New York provided...&#x27;in 1703...at a funeral 800 cookies...

The modern form of cookies, which is based on creaming butter and sugar together, did not appear commonly until the 18th century. The Industrial Revolution in Britain and the consumers it created saw cookies (biscuits) become products for the masses, and firms such as Huntley &amp; Palmers (formed in 1822), McVitie&#x27;s (formed in 1830) and Carr&#x27;s (formed in 1831) were all established. The decorative biscuit tin, invented by Huntley &amp; Palmers in 1831, saw British cookies exported around the world. In 1891, Cadbury filed a patent for a chocolate-coated cookie.

==Classification==

Cookies are broadly classified according to how they are formed or made, including at least these categories:
* &quot;Bar cookies&quot; consist of batter or other ingredients that are poured or pressed into a pan (sometimes in multiple layers) and cut into cookie-sized pieces after baking. In British English, bar cookies are known as &quot;tray bakes&quot;. Examples include brownies, fruit squares, and bars such as date squares.
* &quot;Drop cookies&quot; are made from a relatively soft dough that is dropped by spoonfuls onto the baking sheet. During baking, the mounds of dough spread and flatten. Chocolate chip cookies (Toll House cookies), oatmeal raisin (or other oatmeal-based) cookies, and rock cakes are popular examples of drop cookies. This may also include &quot;thumbprint cookies&quot;, for which a small central depression is created with a thumb or small spoon before baking to contain a filling, such as jam or a chocolate chip. In the UK, the term &quot;cookie&quot; often refers only to this particular type of product.
* &quot;Filled cookies&quot; are made from a rolled cookie dough filled with a fruit, jam or confectionery filling before baking. Hamantashen are a filled cookie.
* &quot;Molded cookies&quot; are also made from a stiffer dough that is molded into balls or cookie shapes by hand before baking. Snickerdoodles and peanut butter cookies are examples of molded cookies. Some cookies, such as hermits or biscotti, are molded into large flattened loaves that are later cut into smaller cookies.
* &quot;No-bake cookies&quot; are made by mixing a filler, such as cereal or nuts, into a melted confectionery binder, shaping into cookies or bars, and allowing to cool or harden. Oatmeal clusters and rum balls are no-bake cookies.
* &quot;Pressed cookies&quot; are made from a soft dough that is extruded from a cookie press into various decorative shapes before baking. Spritzgebäck is an example of a pressed cookie.
* &quot;Refrigerator cookies&quot; (also known as &quot;icebox cookies&quot;) are made from a stiff dough that is refrigerated to make the raw dough even stiffer before cutting and baking. The dough is typically shaped into cylinders which are sliced into round cookies before baking. Pinwheel cookies and those made by Pillsbury are representative.
* &quot;Rolled cookies&quot; are made from a stiffer dough that is rolled out and cut into shapes with a cookie cutter. Gingerbread men are an example.
* &quot;Sandwich cookies&quot; are rolled or pressed cookies that are assembled as a sandwich with a sweet filling. Fillings include marshmallow, jam, and icing. The Oreo cookie, made of two chocolate cookies with a vanilla icing filling, is an example.
Other types of cookies are classified for other reasons, such as their ingredients, size, or intended time of serving:
* &quot;Breakfast cookies&quot; are typically larger, lower-sugar cookies filled with &quot;heart-healthy nuts and fiber-rich oats&quot; that are eaten as a quick breakfast snack.
* &quot;Low-fat cookies&quot; or &quot;diet cookies&quot; typically have lower fat than regular cookies.
* &quot;Raw cookie dough&quot; is served in some restaurants, though the eggs may be omitted since the dough is eaten raw, which could pose a salmonella risk if eggs were used. Cookie Dough Confections in New York City is a restaurant that has a range of raw cookie dough flavors, which are scooped into cups for customers like ice cream.
* &quot;Skillet cookies&quot; are big cookies that are cooked in a cast-iron skillet and served warm, while they are still soft and chewy. They are either eaten straight from the pan or cut into wedges, often with vanilla ice cream on top.
* &quot;Supersized cookies&quot; are large cookies such as the Panera Kitchen Sink Cookie. These very large cookies are sold at grocery stores, restaurants and coffeeshops.
* &quot;Vegan cookies&quot; can be made with flour, sugar, nondairy milk, and nondairy margarine. Aquafaba icing can be used to decorate the cookies.
*&quot;Cookie cakes&quot; are made in a larger circular shape usually with writing made of frosting.

==Reception==
Leah Ettman from Nutrition Action has criticized the high-calorie count and fat content of supersized cookies, which are extra large cookies; she cites the Panera Kitchen Sink Cookie, a supersized chocolate chip cookie, which measures inches in diameter and has 800 calories. For busy people who eat breakfast cookies in the morning, Kate Bratskeir from the &quot;Huffington Post&quot; recommends lower-sugar cookies filled with &quot;heart-healthy nuts and fiber-rich oats&quot;. A book on nutrition by Paul Insel et al. notes that &quot;low-fat&quot; or &quot;diet cookies&quot; may have the same number of calories as regular cookies, due to added sugar.

==In popular culture==
There are a number of slang usages of the term &quot;cookie&quot;. The slang use of &quot;cookie&quot; to mean a person, &quot;especially an attractive woman&quot; is attested to in print since 1920. The catchphrase &quot;that&#x27;s the way the cookie crumbles&quot;, which means &quot;that&#x27;s just the way things happen&quot; is attested to in print in 1955. Other slang terms include &quot;smart cookie&quot; and &quot;tough cookie.&quot; According to &quot;The Cambridge International Dictionary of Idioms&quot;, a smart cookie is &quot;someone who is clever and good at dealing with difficult situations.&quot; The word &quot;cookie&quot; has been vulgar slang for &quot;vagina&quot; in the US since 1970. The word &quot;cookies&quot; is used to refer to the contents of the stomach, often in reference to vomiting (e.g., &quot;pop your cookies&quot;, a 1960s expression, or &quot;toss your cookies&quot;, a 1970s expression). The expression &quot;cookie cutter&quot;, in addition to referring literally to a culinary device used to cut rolled cookie dough into shapes, is also used metaphorically to refer to items or things &quot;having the same configuration or look as many others&quot; (e.g., a &quot;cookie cutter tract house&quot;) or to label something as &quot;stereotyped or formulaic&quot; (e.g., an action movie filled with &quot;generic cookie cutter characters&quot;).
&quot;Cookie duster&quot; is a whimsical expression for a mustache.

Cookie Monster is a Muppet on the children&#x27;s television show &quot;Sesame Street.&quot; He is best known for his voracious appetite for cookies and his famous eating phrases, such as &quot;Me want cookie!&quot;, &quot;Me eat cookie!&quot; (or simply &quot;COOKIE!&quot;), and &quot;Om nom nom nom&quot; (said through a mouth full of food).

Cookie Clicker is a game where players click a cookie to buy upgrades to make more cookies.

==Notable varieties==
* Alfajor
* Angel Wings (Chruściki)
* Animal cracker
* Anzac biscuit
* Berger cookie
* Berner Haselnusslebkuchen
* Biscotti
* Biscuit rose de Reims
* Black and white cookie
* Blondie
* Bourbon biscuit
* Brownie
* Butter cookie
* Chocolate chip cookie
* Chocolate-coated marshmallow treat
* Congo bar
* Digestive biscuit
* Fat rascal
* Fattigmann
* Flies graveyard
* Florentine biscuit
* Fortune cookie
* Fruit squares and bars (date, fig, lemon, raspberry, etc.)
* Ginger snap
* Gingerbread house
* Gingerbread man
* Graham cracker
* Hamentashen
* Hobnob biscuit
* Joe Frogger
* Jumble
* Kifli
* Koulourakia
* Krumkake
* Linzer cookie
* Macaroon
* Meringue
* Nice biscuit
* Oatmeal raisin cookie
* Pastelito
* Peanut butter blossom cookie
* Peanut butter cookie
* Pepparkakor
* Pfeffernüsse
* Pizzelle
* Polvorón
* Qurabiya
* Rainbow cookie
* Ranger Cookie
* Rich tea
* Riposteria
* Rosette
* Rum ball
* Rusk
* Russian tea cake
* Rock cake
* Sablé
* Sandbakelse
* Şekerpare
* Shortbread
* Snickerdoodle
* Speculoos
* Springerle
* Spritzgebäck (Spritz)
* Stroopwafel
* Sugar cookie
* Tea biscuit
* Toruń gingerbread
* Tuile
* Wafer
* Windmill cookie

== Gallery ==
==Related pastries and confections==

* Acıbadem kurabiyesi
* Animal crackers
* Berliner (pastry)
* Bun
* Candy
* Cake
* Churro
* Cracker (food)
* Cupcake
* Danish pastry
* Doughnut
* Funnel cake
* Galette
* Graham cracker
* Hershey&#x27;s Cookies &#x27;n&#x27; Creme
* Kit Kat
* Halvah
* Ladyfinger (biscuit)
* Lebkuchen
* Mille-feuille
* Marzipan
* Mille-feuille (Napoleon)
* Moon pie
* Pastry
* Palmier
* Petit four
* Rum ball
* S&#x27;more
* Snack cake
* Tartlet
* Teacake
* Teething biscuit
* Whoopie pie
==Manufacturers==

* Arnott&#x27;s Biscuits
* Bahlsen
* Burton&#x27;s Foods
* D.F. Stauffer Biscuit Company
* DeBeukelaer 
* Famous Amos (division of Ferrero)
* Fazer
* Fox&#x27;s Biscuits
* Interbake Foods
* Jules Destrooper
* Keebler
* Lance
* Lotte Confectionery (division of Lotte)
* Lotus Bakeries
* McKee Foods
* Meiji Seika Kaisha Ltd.
* Mrs. Fields
* Nabisco (division of Mondelēz International)
* Nestlé
* Northern Foods
* Otis Spunkmeyer (division of Aryzta)
* Pillsbury (division of General Mills)
* Pinnacle Foods
* Pepperidge Farm (division of Campbell Soup Company)
* Royal Dansk (division of Kelsen Group)
* Sunshine Biscuits (historical)
* United Biscuits
* Walkers Shortbread
* Utz Brands
==Product lines and brands==

* Animal Crackers (Nabisco, Keebler, Cadbury, Bahlsen, others)
* Anna&#x27;s (Lotus)
* Archway Cookies (Lance)
* Barnum&#x27;s Animals (Nabisco)
* Betty Crocker (General Mills, cookie mixes)
* Biscoff (Lotus)
* Chips Ahoy! (Nabisco)
* Chips Deluxe (Keebler)
* Danish Butter Cookies (Royal Dansk)
* Duncan Hines (Pinnacle, cookie mixes)
* Famous Amos (Kellogg)
* Fig Newton (Nabisco)
* Fox&#x27;s Biscuits (Northern)
* Fudge Shoppe (Keebler)
* Girl Scout cookie (Keebler, Interbake)
* Hello Panda (Meiji)
* Hit (Bahlsen)
* Hydrox (Sunshine, discontinued by Keebler)
* Jaffa Cakes (McVitie)
* Jammie Dodgers (United)
* Koala&#x27;s March (Lotte)
* Leibniz-Keks (Bahlsen)
* Little Debbie (McKee)
* Lorna Doone (Nabisco)
* Maryland Cookies (Burton&#x27;s)
* McVitie&#x27;s (United)
* Milano (Pepperidge Farm)
* Nilla Wafers (Nabisco)
* Nutter Butter (Nabisco)
* Oreo (Nabisco)
* Pillsbury (General Mills, cookie mixes)
* Pecan Sandies (Keebler)
* Peek Freans (United)
* Pirouline (DeBeukelaer)
* Stauffer&#x27;s (Meiji)
* Stella D&#x27;Oro (Lance)
* Sunshine (Keebler)
* Teddy Grahams (Nabisco)
* Toll House (Nestle)
* Tim Tam (Arnott&#x27;s)
* Vienna Fingers (Keebler)
==Miscellaneous==

* Christmas cookie
* Cookie cutter
* Cookie dough
* Cookie exchange
* Cookie Clicker
* Cookie Monster
* Cookie sheet
* Cookie table
* Cookies and cream
* Girl Scout cookie
==See also==

* List of baked goods
* List of cookies
** List of shortbread biscuits and cookies
* List of desserts

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13266" start="2" end="8" title="Cookie" label="cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="10" end="26" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266" start="31" end="38" title="Cookie" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="40" end="55" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q720398" start="62" end="67" title="Baked goods" label="baked"/>
<link wikidata="Q182940" start="77" end="84" title="dessert" label="dessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="147" end="152" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="154" end="159" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="161" end="164" title="Eggs as food" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q427457" start="183" end="186" title="Cooking oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="188" end="191" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="196" end="202" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13186" start="245" end="251" title="raisin" label="raisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="254" end="257" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329680" start="260" end="274" title="chocolate chip" label="chocolate chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="292" end="318" title="English-speaking world" label="English-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="346" end="353" title="biscuit" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917272" start="415" end="422" title="Biscuit (bread)" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276778" start="449" end="460" title="quick bread" label="quick bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="524" end="540" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227616" start="597" end="609" title="date squares" label="date squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243043" start="655" end="672" title="Sandwich cookie" label="sandwich biscuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246820" start="682" end="695" title="custard cream" label="custard cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q506115" start="698" end="712" title="Jammie Dodgers" label="Jammie Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q863966" start="714" end="722" title="Bourbon biscuit" label="Bourbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q138585" start="728" end="732" title="Oreo" label="Oreo"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="792" end="801" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40050" start="858" end="867" title="Drink" label="beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="876" end="880" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="882" end="888" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="893" end="896" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315375" start="911" end="917" title="dunking (biscuit)" label="dunked"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173974" start="951" end="958" title="Flavoring" label="flavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="964" end="975" title="Confectionery" label="confections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295201" start="1071" end="1084" title="grocery store" label="grocery store"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="1087" end="1104" title="convenience store" label="convenience store"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="1111" end="1126" title="vending machine" label="vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q274393" start="1161" end="1169" title="bakery" label="bakeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="1174" end="1185" title="coffeehouse" label="coffeehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1249" end="1262" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="1343" end="1350" title="biscuit" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051441" start="1581" end="1591" title="cookie jar" label="cookie jar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377687" start="1673" end="1676" title="bun" label="bun"/>
<link wikidata="Q502335" start="1724" end="1733" title="sheet pan" label="sheet pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="1820" end="1836" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="1853" end="1868" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="2199" end="2215" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2250" end="2255" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178806" start="2359" end="2371" title="Middle Dutch" label="Middle Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437868" start="2443" end="2471" title="Scottish National Dictionary" label="Scottish National Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="2511" end="2526" title="diminutive form" label="diminutive form"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327000" start="2595" end="2607" title="Middle Scots" label="Middle Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="2724" end="2733" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="2746" end="2759" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2784" end="2795" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="2827" end="2845" title="history of curling" label="history of curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q465944" start="2860" end="2864" title="History of golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q147651" start="3049" end="3062" title="peanut butter" label="peanut butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="3091" end="3100" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="3250" end="3255" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="3269" end="3275" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009" start="3292" end="3295" title="nut (fruit)" label="nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="3307" end="3312" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="3805" end="3812" title="viscous" label="viscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="4221" end="4235" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4769" end="4775" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="4882" end="4906" title="Muslim conquest of Spain" label="Muslim conquest of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984665" start="5079" end="5094" title="gingerbread man" label="gingerbread man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="5115" end="5137" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310826" start="5555" end="5561" title="Jumble (cookie)" label="jumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="5717" end="5722" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="6068" end="6089" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q836679" start="6203" end="6224" title="Huntley &amp;amp; Palmers" label="Huntley &amp;amp; Palmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q557614" start="6243" end="6257" title="McVitie&amp;#x27;s" label="McVitie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045951" start="6279" end="6290" title="Carr&amp;#x27;s" label="Carr&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301714" start="6345" end="6356" title="biscuit tin" label="biscuit tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="6457" end="6464" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103646" start="6486" end="6509" title="Chocolate biscuit" label="chocolate-coated cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="6826" end="6841" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q503129" start="6909" end="6917" title="chocolate brownie" label="brownies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227616" start="6951" end="6962" title="date square" label="date square"/>
<link wikidata="Q14169302" start="7137" end="7158" title="Chocolate chip cookie" label="Chocolate chip cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16682389" start="7182" end="7196" title="Oatmeal raisin cookie" label="oatmeal raisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089240" start="7207" end="7214" title="oatmeal" label="oatmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354783" start="7235" end="7244" title="rock cake" label="rock cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q74048276" start="7458" end="7461" title="jam" label="jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329680" start="7467" end="7481" title="chocolate chip" label="chocolate chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519830" start="7706" end="7715" title="Hamantash" label="Hamantash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547731" start="7869" end="7882" title="Snickerdoodle" label="Snickerdoodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157930" start="7888" end="7909" title="peanut butter cookies" label="peanut butter cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q769635" start="7975" end="7983" title="biscotti" label="biscotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q270997" start="8267" end="8275" title="rum ball" label="rum ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167102" start="8379" end="8391" title="cookie press" label="cookie press"/>
<link wikidata="Q284738" start="8438" end="8450" title="Spritzgebäck" label="Spritzgebäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423726" start="8806" end="8815" title="Pillsbury Company" label="Pillsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916202" start="8941" end="8954" title="cookie cutter" label="cookie cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984665" start="8956" end="8971" title="Gingerbread man" label="Gingerbread men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243043" start="8996" end="9012" title="Cookie sandwich" label="Sandwich cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803" start="9073" end="9081" title="sandwich" label="sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q272198" start="9121" end="9132" title="marshmallow" label="marshmallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q29437" start="9143" end="9148" title="icing (food)" label="icing"/>
<link wikidata="Q138585" start="9154" end="9158" title="Oreo" label="Oreo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="9204" end="9211" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="9788" end="9798" title="salmonella" label="salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287" start="10485" end="10494" title="margarine" label="margarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19820584" start="10496" end="10504" title="Aquafaba" label="Aquafaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011065" start="11309" end="11320" title="added sugar" label="added sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207763" start="12392" end="12398" title="Rolling pin" label="rolled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140144" start="12575" end="12586" title="tract house" label="tract house"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179" start="12796" end="12804" title="mustache" label="mustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="12807" end="12821" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953422" start="12827" end="12833" title="The Muppets" label="Muppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273568" start="12841" end="12872" title="children&amp;#x27;s television series" label="children&amp;#x27;s television show"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="12879" end="12892" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q15103408" start="13153" end="13167" title="Cookie Clicker" label="Cookie Clicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q938682" start="13270" end="13277" title="Alfajor" label="Alfajor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35056" start="13280" end="13291" title="Angel Wings" label="Angel Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764932" start="13306" end="13320" title="Animal cracker" label="Animal cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560689" start="13323" end="13336" title="Anzac biscuit" label="Anzac biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891611" start="13339" end="13352" title="Berger Cookies" label="Berger cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002268" start="13355" end="13380" title="Berner Haselnusslebkuchen" label="Berner Haselnusslebkuchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q769635" start="13383" end="13391" title="Biscotti" label="Biscotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904639" start="13394" end="13415" title="Biscuit rose de Reims" label="Biscuit rose de Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q338242" start="13418" end="13440" title="Black and white cookie" label="Black and white cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709220" start="13443" end="13450" title="Blondie (confection)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q863966" start="13453" end="13468" title="Bourbon biscuit" label="Bourbon biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q503129" start="13471" end="13478" title="Chocolate brownie" label="Brownie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038537" start="13481" end="13494" title="Butter cookie" label="Butter cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14169302" start="13497" end="13518" title="Chocolate chip cookie" label="Chocolate chip cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578239" start="13521" end="13555" title="Chocolate-coated marshmallow treat" label="Chocolate-coated marshmallow treat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709220" start="13558" end="13567" title="Blondie (confection)" label="Congo bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247120" start="13570" end="13587" title="Digestive biscuit" label="Digestive biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437245" start="13590" end="13600" title="Fat rascal" label="Fat rascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152783" start="13603" end="13613" title="Fattigmann" label="Fattigmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459109" start="13616" end="13631" title="Flies graveyard" label="Flies graveyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429469" start="13634" end="13652" title="Florentine biscuit" label="Florentine biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q782794" start="13655" end="13669" title="Fortune cookie" label="Fortune cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227616" start="13696" end="13700" title="Date square" label="date"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879663" start="13733" end="13744" title="Ginger snap" label="Ginger snap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382778" start="13747" end="13764" title="Gingerbread house" label="Gingerbread house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984665" start="13767" end="13782" title="Gingerbread man" label="Gingerbread man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593383" start="13785" end="13799" title="Graham cracker" label="Graham cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519830" start="13802" end="13813" title="Hamentashen" label="Hamentashen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874601" start="13816" end="13830" title="Hobnob biscuit" label="Hobnob biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60755899" start="13833" end="13844" title="Joe Frogger" label="Joe Frogger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310826" start="13847" end="13853" title="Jumble (cookie)" label="Jumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q877538" start="13856" end="13861" title="Kifli" label="Kifli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778090" start="13864" end="13875" title="Koulourakia" label="Koulourakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q694022" start="13878" end="13886" title="Krumkake" label="Krumkake"/>
<link wikidata="Q552287" start="13889" end="13902" title="Linzer torte" label="Linzer cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699636" start="13905" end="13913" title="Macaroon" label="Macaroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q276276" start="13916" end="13924" title="Meringue" label="Meringue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024710" start="13927" end="13939" title="Nice biscuit" label="Nice biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16682389" start="13942" end="13963" title="Oatmeal raisin cookie" label="Oatmeal raisin cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192112" start="13966" end="13975" title="Pastelito" label="Pastelito"/>
<link wikidata="Q96398686" start="13978" end="14006" title="Peanut butter blossom cookie" label="Peanut butter blossom cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157930" start="14009" end="14029" title="Peanut butter cookie" label="Peanut butter cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660010" start="14032" end="14043" title="Christmas cookies" label="Pepparkakor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051739" start="14046" end="14058" title="Pfeffernüsse" label="Pfeffernüsse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743152" start="14061" end="14069" title="Pizzelle" label="Pizzelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671459" start="14072" end="14080" title="Polvorón" label="Polvorón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704982" start="14083" end="14091" title="Qurabiya" label="Qurabiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353020" start="14094" end="14108" title="Rainbow cookie" label="Rainbow cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324317" start="14111" end="14124" title="Ranger Cookie" label="Ranger Cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q275540" start="14127" end="14135" title="Rich tea" label="Rich tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660010" start="14138" end="14148" title="Christmas cookies" label="Riposteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667251" start="14151" end="14158" title="Rosette (pastry)" label="Rosette"/>
<link wikidata="Q270997" start="14161" end="14169" title="Rum ball" label="Rum ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477096" start="14172" end="14176" title="Rusk" label="Rusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382291" start="14179" end="14195" title="Russian tea cake" label="Russian tea cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354783" start="14198" end="14207" title="Rock cake" label="Rock cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915670" start="14210" end="14215" title="Sablé (biscuit)" label="Sablé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357698" start="14218" end="14229" title="Sandbakelse" label="Sandbakelse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823701" start="14232" end="14241" title="Şekerpare" label="Şekerpare"/>
<link wikidata="Q652695" start="14244" end="14254" title="Shortbread" label="Shortbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547731" start="14257" end="14270" title="Snickerdoodle" label="Snickerdoodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q107064986" start="14273" end="14282" title="Speculoos" label="Speculoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429062" start="14285" end="14295" title="Springerle" label="Springerle"/>
<link wikidata="Q284738" start="14298" end="14310" title="Spritzgebäck" label="Spritzgebäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q267877" start="14322" end="14333" title="Stroopwafel" label="Stroopwafel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301328" start="14336" end="14348" title="Sugar cookie" label="Sugar cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="14351" end="14362" title="Tea biscuit" label="Tea biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q872869" start="14365" end="14382" title="Toruń gingerbread" label="Toruń gingerbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000279" start="14385" end="14390" title="Tuile" label="Tuile"/>
<link wikidata="Q117072235" start="14393" end="14398" title="Wafer" label="Wafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107064986" start="14401" end="14416" title="Speculoos" label="Windmill cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243732" start="14472" end="14491" title="Acıbadem kurabiyesi" label="Acıbadem kurabiyesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764932" start="14494" end="14509" title="Animal crackers" label="Animal crackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152526" start="14512" end="14529" title="Berliner (pastry)" label="Berliner (pastry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377687" start="14532" end="14535" title="Bun" label="Bun"/>
<link wikidata="Q185583" start="14538" end="14543" title="Candy" label="Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13276" start="14546" end="14550" title="Cake" label="Cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q727605" start="14553" end="14559" title="Churro" label="Churro"/>
<link wikidata="Q856330" start="14562" end="14576" title="Cracker (food)" label="Cracker (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q816851" start="14579" end="14586" title="Cupcake" label="Cupcake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140186" start="14589" end="14602" title="Danish pastry" label="Danish pastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192783" start="14605" end="14613" title="Doughnut" label="Doughnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q539429" start="14616" end="14627" title="Funnel cake" label="Funnel cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q242003" start="14630" end="14637" title="Galette" label="Galette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593383" start="14640" end="14654" title="Graham cracker" label="Graham cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744487" start="14657" end="14699" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Cookies &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Creme" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Cookies &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Creme"/>
<link wikidata="Q367251" start="14702" end="14709" title="Kit Kat" label="Kit Kat"/>
<link wikidata="Q183599" start="14712" end="14718" title="Halvah" label="Halvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12494" start="14721" end="14741" title="Ladyfinger (biscuit)" label="Ladyfinger (biscuit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740122" start="14744" end="14753" title="Lebkuchen" label="Lebkuchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12491" start="14756" end="14769" title="Mille-feuille" label="Mille-feuille"/>
<link wikidata="Q106252" start="14772" end="14780" title="Marzipan" label="Marzipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12491" start="14783" end="14796" title="Mille-feuille" label="Mille-feuille"/>
<link wikidata="Q14554958" start="14810" end="14818" title="Moon pie" label="Moon pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q477248" start="14821" end="14827" title="Pastry" label="Pastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096475" start="14830" end="14837" title="Palmier" label="Palmier"/>
<link wikidata="Q940757" start="14840" end="14850" title="Petit four" label="Petit four"/>
<link wikidata="Q270997" start="14853" end="14861" title="Rum ball" label="Rum ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339814" start="14864" end="14875" title="S&amp;#x27;more" label="S&amp;#x27;more"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546879" start="14878" end="14888" title="Snack cake" label="Snack cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142483" start="14891" end="14898" title="Tartlet" label="Tartlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q556052" start="14901" end="14908" title="Teacake" label="Teacake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446491" start="14911" end="14927" title="Teething biscuit" label="Teething biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518177" start="14930" end="14941" title="Whoopie pie" label="Whoopie pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795387" start="14963" end="14985" title="Arnott&amp;#x27;s Biscuits" label="Arnott&amp;#x27;s Biscuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q315068" start="14988" end="14995" title="Bahlsen" label="Bahlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000764" start="14998" end="15017" title="Burton&amp;#x27;s Foods" label="Burton&amp;#x27;s Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q11512281" start="15020" end="15049" title="D.F. Stauffer Biscuit Company" label="D.F. Stauffer Biscuit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198081" start="15052" end="15063" title="DeBeukelaer" label="DeBeukelaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433442" start="15067" end="15078" title="Famous Amos" label="Famous Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q269792" start="15092" end="15099" title="Ferrero SpA" label="Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q996907" start="15103" end="15108" title="Fazer" label="Fazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476491" start="15111" end="15130" title="Fox&amp;#x27;s Biscuits" label="Fox&amp;#x27;s Biscuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900367" start="15133" end="15148" title="Interbake Foods" label="Interbake Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883552" start="15151" end="15167" title="Jules Destrooper" label="Jules Destrooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382670" start="15170" end="15177" title="Keebler" label="Keebler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483430" start="15180" end="15185" title="Lance Inc." label="Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684915" start="15188" end="15207" title="Lotte Confectionery" label="Lotte Confectionery"/>
<link wikidata="Q51570147" start="15221" end="15226" title="Lotte (conglomerate)" label="Lotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q590113" start="15230" end="15244" title="Lotus Bakeries" label="Lotus Bakeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801733" start="15247" end="15258" title="McKee Foods" label="McKee Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q11232923" start="15261" end="15284" title="Meiji Seika" label="Meiji Seika Kaisha Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q3866841" start="15287" end="15298" title="Mrs. Fields" label="Mrs. Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545718" start="15301" end="15308" title="Nabisco" label="Nabisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857502" start="15322" end="15344" title="Mondelēz International" label="Mondelēz International"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="15348" end="15354" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058350" start="15357" end="15371" title="Northern Foods" label="Northern Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108827" start="15374" end="15389" title="Otis Spunkmeyer" label="Otis Spunkmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q718109" start="15403" end="15409" title="Aryzta" label="Aryzta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423726" start="15413" end="15422" title="Pillsbury Company" label="Pillsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q629998" start="15436" end="15449" title="General Mills" label="General Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983587" start="15453" end="15467" title="Pinnacle Foods" label="Pinnacle Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069747" start="15470" end="15485" title="Pepperidge Farm" label="Pepperidge Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030544" start="15499" end="15520" title="Campbell Soup Company" label="Campbell Soup Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q96402924" start="15524" end="15535" title="Royal Dansk" label="Royal Dansk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15549" end="15561" title="Kelsen Group" label="Kelsen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641439" start="15565" end="15582" title="Sunshine Biscuits" label="Sunshine Biscuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178170" start="15598" end="15613" title="United Biscuits" label="United Biscuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962374" start="15616" end="15634" title="Walkers Shortbread" label="Walkers Shortbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903503" start="15637" end="15647" title="Utz Brands" label="Utz Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764932" start="15680" end="15695" title="Animal cracker" label="Animal Crackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766768" start="15743" end="15754" title="Anna&amp;#x27;s Swedish Thins" label="Anna&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787369" start="15765" end="15780" title="Archway Cookies" label="Archway Cookies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15791" end="15812" title="Barnum&amp;#x27;s Animals" label="Barnum&amp;#x27;s Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898793" start="15825" end="15838" title="Betty Crocker" label="Betty Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q107064986" start="15871" end="15878" title="Biscoff" label="Biscoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101736" start="15889" end="15900" title="Chips Ahoy!" label="Chips Ahoy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101733" start="15913" end="15925" title="Chips Deluxe" label="Chips Deluxe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15938" end="15959" title="Danish Butter Cookies" label="Danish Butter Cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041237" start="15976" end="15988" title="Duncan Hines" label="Duncan Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433442" start="16016" end="16027" title="Famous Amos" label="Famous Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108527" start="16040" end="16050" title="Fig Newton" label="Fig Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476491" start="16063" end="16082" title="Fox&amp;#x27;s Biscuits" label="Fox&amp;#x27;s Biscuits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16096" end="16108" title="Fudge Shoppe" label="Fudge Shoppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308519" start="16121" end="16138" title="Girl Scout cookie" label="Girl Scout cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708859" start="16162" end="16173" title="Hello Panda" label="Hello Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q315068" start="16189" end="16196" title="Bahlsen" label="Bahlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964512" start="16200" end="16206" title="Hydrox" label="Hydrox"/>
<link wikidata="Q29330" start="16245" end="16256" title="Jaffa Cakes" label="Jaffa Cakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q506115" start="16269" end="16283" title="Jammie Dodgers" label="Jammie Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q842187" start="16295" end="16313" title="Koala&amp;#x27;s March" label="Koala&amp;#x27;s March"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094559" start="16324" end="16336" title="Leibniz-Keks" label="Leibniz-Keks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801733" start="16349" end="16362" title="Little Debbie" label="Little Debbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042158" start="16373" end="16384" title="Lorna Doone (cookie)" label="Lorna Doone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781294" start="16397" end="16413" title="Maryland Cookies" label="Maryland Cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q557614" start="16432" end="16446" title="McVitie&amp;#x27;s" label="McVitie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116381" start="16458" end="16464" title="Milano (cookie)" label="Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108537" start="16485" end="16497" title="Nilla" label="Nilla Wafers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070573" start="16510" end="16523" title="Nutter Butter" label="Nutter Butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q138585" start="16536" end="16540" title="Oreo" label="Oreo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423726" start="16553" end="16562" title="Pillsbury Company" label="Pillsbury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16595" end="16608" title="Pecan Sandies" label="Pecan Sandies"/>
<link wikidata="Q699080" start="16621" end="16632" title="Peek Freans" label="Peek Freans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198081" start="16644" end="16653" title="Pirouline" label="Pirouline"/>
<link wikidata="Q11512281" start="16670" end="16685" title="Stauffer&amp;#x27;s" label="Stauffer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607050" start="16696" end="16713" title="Stella D&amp;#x27;Oro" label="Stella D&amp;#x27;Oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641439" start="16724" end="16732" title="Sunshine Biscuits" label="Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694018" start="16745" end="16758" title="Teddy Grahams" label="Teddy Grahams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814320" start="16771" end="16781" title="Toll House Inn" label="Toll House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342581" start="16793" end="16800" title="Tim Tam" label="Tim Tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479103" start="16819" end="16833" title="Vienna Fingers" label="Vienna Fingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660010" start="16865" end="16881" title="Christmas cookies" label="Christmas cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916202" start="16884" end="16897" title="Cookie cutter" label="Cookie cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167099" start="16900" end="16912" title="Cookie dough" label="Cookie dough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167098" start="16915" end="16930" title="Cookie exchange" label="Cookie exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q15103408" start="16933" end="16947" title="Cookie Clicker" label="Cookie Clicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="16950" end="16964" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q502335" start="16967" end="16979" title="Sheet pan" label="Cookie sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167104" start="16982" end="16994" title="Cookie table" label="Cookie table"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308312" start="16997" end="17014" title="Cookies and cream" label="Cookies and cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308519" start="17017" end="17034" title="Girl Scout cookie" label="Girl Scout cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037260" start="17051" end="17070" title="List of baked goods" label="List of baked goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192202" start="17073" end="17088" title="List of cookies" label="List of cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q29586973" start="17092" end="17131" title="List of shortbread biscuits and cookies" label="List of shortbread biscuits and cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q517211" start="17134" end="17150" title="List of desserts" label="List of desserts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7220" wikidata="Q264364" url="?curid=7220" title="Common Gateway Interface">
<text>In computing, Common Gateway Interface (CGI) is an interface specification that enables web servers to execute an external program to process HTTP or HTTPS user requests.

Such programs are often written in a scripting language and are commonly referred to as &quot;CGI scripts&quot;, but they may include compiled programs.

A typical use case occurs when a web user submits a web form on a web page that uses CGI. The form&#x27;s data is sent to the web server within a HTTP request with a URL denoting a CGI script. The web server then launches the CGI script in a new computer process, passing the form data to it. The CGI script passes its output, usually in the form of HTML, to the Web server, and the server relays it back to the browser as its response to the browser&#x27;s request.

Developed in the early 1990s, CGI was the earliest common method available that allowed a web page to be interactive. Due to a necessity to run CGI scripts in a separate process every time the request comes in from a client, various alternatives were developed.

== History ==

In 1993, the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) team wrote the specification for calling command line executables on the www-talk mailing list. The other Web server developers adopted it, and it has been a standard for Web servers ever since. A work group chaired by Ken Coar started in November 1997 to get the NCSA definition of CGI more formally defined. This work resulted in RFC 3875, which specified CGI Version 1.1. Specifically mentioned in the RFC are the following contributors:

* Rob McCool (author of the NCSA HTTPd Web server)
* John Franks (author of the GN Web server)
* Ari Luotonen (the developer of the CERN httpd Web server)
* Tony Sanders (author of the Plexus Web server)
* George Phillips (Web server maintainer at the University of British Columbia)

Historically CGI programs were often written using the C programming language. RFC 3875 &quot;The Common Gateway Interface (CGI)&quot; partially defines CGI using C, in saying that environment variables &quot;are accessed by the C library routine getenv() or variable environ&quot;.

The name CGI comes from the early days of the Web, where &quot;webmasters&quot; wanted to connect legacy information systems such as databases to their Web servers. The CGI program was executed by the server and provided a common &quot;gateway&quot; between the Web server and the legacy information system.

== Purpose ==

Traditionally a Web server has a directory which is designated as a document collection, that is, a set of files that can be sent to Web browsers connected to the server. For example, if a web server has the fully-qualified domain name codice_1, and its document collection is stored at codice_2 in the local file system (its &quot;document root&quot;), then the web server will respond to a request for codice_3 by sending to the browser a copy of the file codice_4 (if it exists).

For pages constructed on the fly, the server software may defer requests to separate programs and relay the results to the requesting client (usually, a Web browser that displays the page to the end user).

Such programs usually require some additional information to be specified with the request, such as query strings or cookies. Conversely, upon returning, the script must provide all the information required by HTTP for a response to the request: the HTTP status of the request, the document content (if available), the document type (e.g. HTML, PDF, or plain text), et cetera.

Initially, there were no standardized methods for data exchange between a browser, the HTTP server with which it was communicating and the scripts on the server that were expected to process the data and ultimately return a result to the browser. As a result, mutual incompatibilities existed between different HTTP server variants that undermined script portability.

Recognition of this problem led to the specification of how data exchange was to be carried out, resulting in the development of CGI. Web page-generating programs invoked by server software that adheres to the CGI specification are known as &quot;CGI scripts&quot;, even though they may actually have been written in a non-scripting language, such as C.

The CGI specification was quickly adopted and continues to be supported by all well-known HTTP server packages, such as Apache, Microsoft IIS, and (with an extension) Node.js-based servers.

An early use of CGI scripts was to process forms. In the beginning of HTML, HTML forms typically had an &quot;action&quot; attribute and a button designated as the &quot;submit&quot; button. When the submit button is pushed the URI specified in the &quot;action&quot; attribute would be sent to the server with the data from the form sent as a query string. If the &quot;action&quot; specifies a CGI script then the CGI script would be executed, the script in turn generating an HTML page.

== Deployment ==

A Web server that supports CGI can be configured to interpret a URL that it serves as a reference to a CGI script. A common convention is to have a codice_5 directory at the base of the directory tree and treat all executable files within this directory (and no other, for security) as CGI scripts. When a Web browser requests a URL that points to a file within the CGI directory (e.g., codice_6), then, instead of simply sending that file (codice_7) to the Web browser, the HTTP server runs the specified script and passes the output of the script to the Web browser. That is, anything that the script sends to standard output is passed to the Web client instead of being shown in the terminal window that started the web server. Another popular convention is to use filename extensions; for instance, if CGI scripts are consistently given the extension codice_8, the Web server can be configured to interpret all such files as CGI scripts. While convenient, and required by many prepackaged scripts, it opens the server to attack if a remote user can upload executable code with the proper extension.

The CGI specification defines how additional information passed with the request is passed to the script. The Web server creates a subset of the environment variables passed to it and adds details pertinent to the HTTP environment. For instance, if a slash and additional directory name(s) are appended to the URL immediately after the name of the script (in this example, codice_9), then that path is stored in the codice_10 environment variable before the script is called. If parameters are sent to the script via an HTTP GET request (a question mark appended to the URL, followed by param=value pairs; in the example, codice_11), then those parameters are stored in the codice_12 environment variable before the script is called. Request HTTP message body, such as form parameters sent via an HTTP POST request, are passed to the script&#x27;s standard input. The script can then read these environment variables or data from standard input and adapt to the Web browser&#x27;s request.

== Uses ==

CGI is often used to process input information from the user and produce the appropriate output. An example of a CGI program is one implementing a wiki. If the user agent requests the name of an entry, the Web server executes the CGI program. The CGI program retrieves the source of that entry&#x27;s page (if one exists), transforms it into HTML, and prints the result. The Web server receives the output from the CGI program and transmits it to the user agent. Then if the user agent clicks the &quot;Edit page&quot; button, the CGI program populates an HTML codice_13 or other editing control with the page&#x27;s contents. Finally if the user agent clicks the &quot;Publish page&quot; button, the CGI program transforms the updated HTML into the source of that entry&#x27;s page and saves it.

== Security ==

CGI programs run, by default, in the security context of the Web server. When first introduced a number of example scripts were provided with the reference distributions of the NCSA, Apache and CERN Web servers to show how shell scripts or C programs could be coded to make use of the new CGI. One such example script was a CGI program called PHF that implemented a simple phone book.

In common with a number of other scripts at the time, this script made use of a function: codice_14. The function was supposed to sanitize its argument, which came from user input and then pass the input to the Unix shell, to be run in the security context of the Web server. The script did not correctly sanitize all input and allowed new lines to be passed to the shell, which effectively allowed multiple commands to be run. The results of these commands were then displayed on the Web server. If the security context of the Web server allowed it, malicious commands could be executed by attackers.

This was the first widespread example of a new type of Web-based attack called code injection, where unsanitized data from Web users could lead to execution of code on a Web server. Because the example code was installed by default, attacks were widespread and led to a number of security advisories in early 1996.

== Alternatives ==

For each incoming HTTP request, a Web server creates a new CGI process for handling it and destroys the CGI process after the HTTP request has been handled. Creating and destroying a process can consume more CPU time and memory resources than the actual work of generating the output of the process, especially when the CGI program still needs to be interpreted by a virtual machine. For a high number of HTTP requests, the resulting workload can quickly overwhelm the Web server.

The computational overhead involved in CGI process creation and destruction can be reduced by the following techniques:

* CGI programs precompiled to machine code, e.g. precompiled from C or C++ programs, rather than CGI programs executed by an interpreter, e.g. Perl, PHP or Python programs.
* Web server extensions such as Apache modules (e.g. codice_15, codice_16 and codice_17), NSAPI plugins, and ISAPI plugins which allow long-running application processes handling more than one request and hosted within the Web server.
* FastCGI, SCGI, and AJP which allow long-running application processes handling more than one request to be hosted externally; i.e., separately from the Web server. Each application process listens on a socket; the Web server handles an HTTP request and sends it via another protocol (FastCGI, SCGI or AJP) to the socket only for dynamic content, while static content is usually handled directly by the Web server. This approach needs fewer application processes so consumes less memory than the Web server extension approach. And unlike converting an application program to a Web server extension, FastCGI, SCGI, and AJP application programs remain independent of the Web server.
* Jakarta EE runs Jakarta Servlet applications in a Web container to serve dynamic content and optionally static content which replaces the overhead of creating and destroying processes with the much lower overhead of creating and destroying threads. It also exposes the programmer to the library that comes with Java SE on which the version of Jakarta EE in use is based.
* Standalone HTTP Server
* Web Server Gateway Interface (WSGI) is a modern approach written in the Python programming language. It is defined by PEP 3333 and implemented via various methods like codice_18 (Apache module), Gunicorn web server (in between of Nginx &amp; Scripts/Frameworks like Django), UWSGI, etc.

The optimal configuration for any Web application depends on application-specific details, amount of traffic, and complexity of the transaction; these trade-offs need to be analyzed to determine the best implementation for a given task and time budget. Web frameworks offer an alternative to using CGI scripts to interact with user agents.

== See also ==
* 
* 

== References ==

== External links ==

* The Invention of CGI
* – The Common Gateway Interface (CGI) Version 1.1
* CGI Programming 101: Learn CGI Today!, a CGI tutorial</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="3" end="12" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="14" end="38" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="Common Gateway Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="40" end="43" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="88" end="98" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="142" end="146" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="150" end="155" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="209" end="227" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="306" end="314" title="compiler" label="compiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q287539" start="378" end="386" title="web form" label="web form"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="472" end="484" title="HTTP request" label="HTTP request"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="492" end="495" title="URL" label="URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="572" end="588" title="computer process" label="computer process"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="676" end="680" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="753" end="761" title="HTTP response" label="response"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190772" start="1085" end="1132" title="National Center for Supercomputing Applications" label="National Center for Supercomputing Applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387461" start="1359" end="1367" title="Ken Coar" label="Ken Coar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435889" start="1584" end="1594" title="Rob McCool" label="Rob McCool"/>
<link wikidata="Q970894" start="1610" end="1620" title="NCSA HTTPd" label="NCSA HTTPd"/>
<link wikidata="Q653822" start="1679" end="1691" title="Ari Luotonen" label="Ari Luotonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q570945" start="1714" end="1724" title="CERN httpd" label="CERN httpd"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="1922" end="1944" title="C programming language" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q300914" start="2096" end="2105" title="C library" label="C library"/>
<link wikidata="Q41674" start="2214" end="2223" title="webmaster" label="webmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q487365" start="2381" end="2400" title="Gateway (telecommunications)" label="&amp;quot;gateway&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="2491" end="2501" title="Web server" label="Web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q201456" start="2508" end="2517" title="directory (computing)" label="directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q849159" start="2683" end="2710" title="FQDN" label="fully-qualified domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="2784" end="2795" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q517410" start="3266" end="3278" title="query string" label="query string"/>
<link wikidata="Q178995" start="3283" end="3290" title="HTTP cookie" label="cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080428" start="3899" end="3910" title="software portability" label="portability"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="4264" end="4265" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q11354" start="4388" end="4394" title="Apache HTTP Server" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q11341" start="4396" end="4409" title="Internet Information Services" label="Microsoft IIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q756100" start="4435" end="4442" title="Node.js" label="Node.js"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="5032" end="5035" title="Uniform Resource Locator" label="URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q201456" start="5125" end="5134" title="Directory (computing)" label="directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070408" start="5580" end="5595" title="standard output" label="standard output"/>
<link wikidata="Q186157" start="5736" end="5754" title="filename extension" label="filename extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q400857" start="6217" end="6237" title="environment variable" label="environment variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q400857" start="6498" end="6518" title="environment variable" label="environment variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="6592" end="6600" title="HTTP GET" label="HTTP GET"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636138" start="6814" end="6831" title="HTTP message body" label="HTTP message body"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764521" start="6869" end="6878" title="HTTP POST" label="HTTP POST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070408" start="6920" end="6934" title="standard input" label="standard input"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="7222" end="7226" title="wiki" label="wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="7417" end="7421" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920753" start="8957" end="8971" title="code injection" label="code injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="9277" end="9284" title="process (computing)" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q210439" start="9564" end="9573" title="interpret" label="interpret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006368" start="9700" end="9722" title="computational overhead" label="computational overhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="9847" end="9859" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="9883" end="9884" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="9888" end="9891" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="9960" end="9964" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="9966" end="9969" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="9973" end="9979" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561788" start="10022" end="10036" title="Apache modules" label="Apache modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000324" start="10080" end="10085" title="Netscape Server Application Programming Interface" label="NSAPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434299" start="10099" end="10104" title="ISAPI" label="ISAPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397631" start="10227" end="10234" title="FastCGI" label="FastCGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538532" start="10236" end="10240" title="Simple Common Gateway Interface" label="SCGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q616890" start="10246" end="10249" title="Apache JServ Protocol" label="AJP"/>
<link wikidata="Q193247" start="10909" end="10919" title="Jakarta EE" label="Jakarta EE"/>
<link wikidata="Q375673" start="10925" end="10940" title="Jakarta Servlet" label="Jakarta Servlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q676683" start="10959" end="10972" title="Web container" label="Web container"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="11149" end="11156" title="Thread (computer science)" label="threads"/>
<link wikidata="Q747478" start="11220" end="11227" title="Java Platform, Standard Edition" label="Java SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q539164" start="11307" end="11335" title="Web Server Gateway Interface" label="Web Server Gateway Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="11379" end="11406" title="Python programming language" label="Python programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618801" start="11502" end="11510" title="Gunicorn" label="Gunicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q30894456" start="11582" end="11587" title="UWSGI" label="UWSGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330336" start="11848" end="11861" title="Web framework" label="Web framework"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7222" wikidata="Q324516" url="?curid=7222" title="Choctaw">
<text>The Choctaw ( ) are a Native American people originally based in the Southeastern Woodlands, in what is now Mississippi and Alabama. The Choctaw language is a Western Muskogean language. Today, Choctaw people are enrolled in four federally recognized tribes: the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma, Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, Jena Band of Choctaw Indians in Louisiana, and the Yowani Choctaws enrolled under the confederacy of the Caddo Nation. Choctaw descendants are also members of state-recognized tribes.

== Etymology ==

The Choctaw autonym is Chahta. The proper noun &quot;Choctaw&quot; is an anglization of &quot;Chahta.&quot; According to Anthropologist John R. Swanton, the Choctaw derived their name from an early leader of the Choctaw people. Swanton&#x27;s report was taken directly from the Choctaw people as they recounted a story of their early history regarding a journey to seek a new homeland. On this journey, the ancestral group of people divided into two groups over different interpretations of a totem the people were consulting on how they might proceed on their journey. A leader named &quot;Chahta&quot; proposes that the totem indicates they should proceed to the north while another leader, Chahta&#x27;s brother &quot;Chiksa&#x27;&quot;, proposes the indication is to proceed to the east. The people chose which leader they would follow which split them into two groups. Those who followed Chahta became the Chahta or Choctaw people and those who followed Chiksa&#x27; became the Chiksa&#x27; or Chickasaw people. Henry Halbert, a historian, suggests that the name is derived from the Choctaw phrase &quot;Hacha hatak&quot; (river people). This view has little support.

== Origins ==

One Choctaw origin story relates how in pre-historic times the Choctaw people lived in areas near or around what is now known as the Yucatan Peninsula. This story explains that when the ancient South American homeland of the Choctaw people became overcrowded many of them sailed across the sea to the land of present-day Alabama and Mississippi in North America. (Caitlin, Letters and Notes, 1841) A Choctaw origin in South America is supported by DNA evidence as well as the similarities between the beliefs, art, and customs of the people of the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex in North America and the Indigenous peoples of South America. The ancestral people of the Choctaw and other indigenous peoples in North America have participated in the evolution of their respective North American cultures for hundreds and even thousands of years. However, the Choctaw people as they are known today are believed to have coalesced during the 16th century. The original peoples involved in this coalescence likely formed in Alabama and were made up of populations such as the Plaquemine culture. Prior to their arrival in the Americas the founding populations of both North and South American indigenous peoples are generally explained to be Beringian populations broken down into several groups which are illuminated within the fields of Archeology, Anthropology, and Genomics. Technological advances have provided breakthroughs in the genetic history of the Indigenous peoples of North and South America. Until modern times the connection between North and South American indigenous people was unknown in modern scholarship.

==Language==


The Choctaw language is a member of the Muskogean language family. The Choctaw language was well known among the American frontiersmen of the early 19th century. In 1870, a Christian Missionary and fluent Choctaw speaker Cyrus Byington published a Choctaw Dictionary &quot;Grammar of the Choctaw Language.&quot; Revised additions include contributions from American historian Henry S. Halbert, who was also a fluent Choctaw speaker, and Anthropologist John R. Swanton.

Choctaw or Chahta, as it is called in the native language, is closely related to the Chickasaw language. Some linguists consider Choctaw and Chickasaw to be dialects of a singular original language. This idea is supported by Choctaw and Chickasaw origin stories which both state that the Choctaw and Chickasaw people arose out of a singular ancestral people.

The Choctaw language is at the heart of Choctaw tribal culture, tradition, and identity. The Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma currently offers courses in the Choctaw language. Choctaw is regularly spoken as part of daily life on the Mississippi Choctaw reservation. Although Choctaw had begun to diminish in the 20th century it remains a living language and in recent years has shown a resurgence among the people of the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma, the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, the Jena Band of Choctaw Indians, and the Yowani Choctaws.

===Orthography===
The written Choctaw language is based upon the English version of the Roman alphabet and was developed in conjunction with the &quot;civilization program&quot; of the United States in the early 19th century. Byington&#x27;s alphabet and a version modified by John Swanton is seen here.

====Byington (Original)====
====Byington/Swanton (Linguistic)====
The following table is an example of Choctaw text and its translation:

== Traditional religion ==
The traditional Choctaw belief system evolved out of the North American Southeastern Ceremonial Complex. The Choctaw believed in a good spirit and an evil spirit. They may have been sun, or &quot;Hvshtahli&quot;, worshippers. The historian John Swanton wrote,
The word &quot;nanpisa&quot; (the one who sees) expressed the reverence the Choctaw had for the sun.

Choctaw prophets were known to have addressed the sun. John Swanton wrote, &quot;an old Choctaw informed Wright that before the arrival of the missionaries, they had no conception of prayer. He added, &quot;I have indeed heard it asserted by some, that anciently their hopaii, or prophets, on some occasions were accustomed to address the sun ...&quot;

== Traditional culture ==


Choctaw culture as it&#x27;s understood today has its historical roots going back to the 16th century. Prior to this period what is known of the Choctaw culture comes from oral traditions and the obvious participation of the Choctaw people in the wider Southeastern Ceremonial Complex. From at least the 16th century until the present-day a definable Choctaw culture has been expressed through rich traditions of song, dance, dress, beading, pottery, basketry, and stickball. Choctaw people maintain their ancient traditions in their personal and daily lives as well as participating in community events. One example is the mid-summer Choctaw Indian Fair hosted by the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians. This event hosts Choctaw people from all over world and includes hospitality and events such as cooking, entertainment, dancing, and stickball. The Choctaw culture is an ancient culture that continues to thrive within the nations and communities of the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma in Oklahoma, the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians in Mississippi, the Jena Band of Choctaw Indians in Louisiana, and the Yowani Choctaws in Mississippi, Texas, Louisiana, and in Oklahoma as part of the Caddo Confederacy.

===Traditional tribal structure===
The traditional Choctaw tribal structure prioritized two distinct moieties: &quot;Imoklashas&quot; (elders) and &quot;Inhulalatas&quot; (youth). Each moiety had several iksas or clans and in rare cases a totemic clan. Identity for the Choctaw people was established first by moiety and second as part of the individuals iksa. The Choctaw people existed in a matrilineal kinship system, with children born into the iksa of their mother and the mother&#x27;s iksa conferring her children&#x27;s social status. Another tradition of this maternally oriented system was the role of the maternal uncle as an important figure in the lives of his sister&#x27;s children. Maternal uncles acted as fathers and caretakers to the children of their sisters. The Choctaw people&#x27;s adoration of woman and the Mother goddess was also reflected in their religious and spiritual reverence for the sacred mound of Nanih Waiya which is known as the &quot;Mother Mound.&quot; Nanih Waiya is a great earthwork platform mound located in central-east Mississippi. This site remains a place of female pilgrimage for prayer, song, and dance to this day.

Early American writings record some of the names of the historical Choctaw iksas. Anthropologist John R. Swanton made his contribution through his 1931 book &quot;Source material for the social and ceremonial life of the Choctaw Indians&quot;. The main iksas holding significant sway over all others at the time of his writings were the &quot;Okla Falaya&quot; meaning &quot;Long People&quot;, the eastern &quot;Okla Tannap&quot; meaning &quot;People on the Other Side&quot;, and the southern &quot;Okla Hannali&quot; meaning &quot;Six Towns People.&quot; Swanton reported from both personal contact and previous scholarship in his writings. The names of the known iksas when Swanton&#x27;s aforementioned book was published are as follows:

*&quot;Bok Chito&quot; or Bogue Chitto, meaning &quot;Big Stream&quot;
*&quot;Biasha&quot; meaning &quot;Mulberry Place&quot;
*&quot;Okla Untuklo&quot; meaning &quot;Seven Towns&quot;
*&quot;Yakan-Okani&quot; meaning &quot;Land Creek&quot;
*&quot;Haiyip Atokola&quot; meaning &quot;Second Lake&quot; or &quot;Two Lakes&quot;
*&quot;Chickashahe&quot; possibly meaning &quot;Chickasaw Potato&quot;
*&quot;Kushak&quot; meaning &quot;Reedbrake People&quot; or the name of a bird found in the reedbrakes. 
*&quot;Spani Okla&quot; meaning &quot;Spanish People&quot;
*&quot;Obala Chaha&quot; meaning may relate to the location of Turkey Creek. 
*&quot;Koe chito&quot; meaning &quot;Panther&quot; 
*&quot;Bok Falaia&quot; meaning &quot;Long Creek&quot;
*&quot;Yanabe&quot; meaning unknown
*&quot;Yashu&quot; meaning unknown
*&quot;Abeka&quot; meaning unknown
*&quot;Lukfata&quot; meaning unknown
*&quot;Haiyowani&quot;, Yowani Choctaws, meaning &quot;caterpillar of the June Bug&quot;, also the name of a village of the Yowani.

After the U.S. government had broken several treaties with the Choctaw people, and eventually when the Choctaw were forcibly removed from their traditional lands in Mississippi during the American tragedy of the Trail of Tears, the Choctaw reestablished themselves in Indian Territory according to the three most powerful districts in their lost homeland. The Choctaw named these three districts after the leading chiefs from each of those districts. Moshulatubbee was the name given for the district of the Okla Tannap, Apuckshunubbee was given for Okla Falaya, and Pushmataha was given for Okla Hannali.

===Traditional communal economy===
Early Choctaw communities worked communally and shared their harvest. They had trouble understanding why English settlers allowed their poor to suffer from hunger. In Ireland, the generosity of the Choctaw nation during their Great Famine in the mid-nineteenth century is remembered to this day and recently marked by a sculpture, &#x27;Kindred Spirits&#x27;, in a park at Midleton, Cork.

===Traditional building structures===
Both, the Chickasaw and the Choctaw Indians traditionally made three kinds of buildings, per family, consisting of 1) a summer house (made into an oblong square), 2) a corn house (also made into an oblong square), and 3) a winter house, which latter was made circular, and was also known as the &#x27;hot house&#x27;.

===Traditional clothing===

The colorful dresses worn by today&#x27;s Choctaw are made by hand. They are based on designs of their ancestors, who adapted 19th-century European-American styles to their needs. Today many Choctaw wear such traditional clothing mainly for special events. Choctaw elders, especially the women, dress in their traditional garb every day. Choctaw dresses are trimmed by full diamond, half diamond or circle, and crosses that represent stickball sticks.

=== Traditional games===
Choctaw stickball, the oldest field sport in North America, was also known as the &quot;little brother of war&quot; because of its roughness and substitution for war. When disputes arose between Choctaw communities, stickball provided a civil way to settle issues. The stickball games would involve as few as twenty or as many as 300 players. The goal posts could be from a few hundred feet apart to a few miles. Goal posts were sometimes located within each opposing team&#x27;s village. A Jesuit priest referenced stickball in 1729, and George Catlin painted the subject. The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians continue to practice the sport.

Chunkey was a game using a disk-shaped stone that was about 1–2 inches in length.
Players would throw the disk down a corridor so that it could roll past the players at great speed. As the disk rolled down the corridor, players would throw wooden shafts at it. The object of the game was to strike the disk or prevent your opponents from hitting it.

Other games included using corn, cane, and moccasins. The corn game used five to seven kernels of corn. One side was blackened and the other side white. Players won points based on each color. One point was awarded for the black side and 5–7 points for the white side. There were usually only two players.

==Treaties==

Land was the most valuable asset, which the Native Americans held in collective stewardship. The United States systematically obtained Choctaw land for conventional European-American settlement through treaties, legislation, and threats of warfare. Although the Choctaw made treaties with Great Britain, France, Spain, and the Confederate States of America; the nation signed only nine treaties with the United States. Some treaties which the US made with other nations, such as the Treaty of San Lorenzo, indirectly affected the Choctaw.

==Reservations==
Reservations can be found in Louisiana (Jena Band of Choctaw Indians), Mississippi (Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians), and Oklahoma (Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma). The Oklahoma reservation is defined by treaty. Other population centers can be found throughout the United States.

==General history==

The Choctaw coalesced as a people in the 16th century and had developed at least three distinct political and geographical divisions prior to European contact: the western Okla Falaya (&quot;Long People&quot;), the eastern Okla Tannap (&quot;People on the Other Side&quot;), and the southern Okla Hannali (&quot;Six Towns People&quot;). Eventually, these different groups would create distinct, independent alliances with nearby European powers.

The Choctaw were first noted by Europeans in French written records of the 17th century. Early Spanish explorers of the mid-16th century in the Southeast encountered ancestral Mississippian culture villages and chiefs. Eventually, the Spanish, French, and English would all, through their various explorers, governments, and peoples, discover the Choctaw as a complex society with firmly established tribal governments, alliances, religious practice, and culture.

Early contact between the Choctaw and Europeans include the French, based on the Gulf Coast and in Louisiana; the English of the Southeast; and Spain in Florida and Louisiana during the colonial era. These interactions introduced Choctaw communities to new and extensive social interactions and trade with Europeans, including more formal interactions with the governments of Spain, France, and England. These relationships with Europeans were influential in shaping the modern Choctaw people. After the United States was formed and its settlers began to move into the Southeast, the Choctaw were among the Five Civilized Tribes, who adopted many of their ways. Many Choctaw transitioned to yeoman farming methods and incorporated European Americans and African Americans (as tribal members, prisoners, and slaves) into their society.

Most Choctaw allied with the Americans during the American Revolution, War of 1812, and the Red Stick War, most notably at the Battle of New Orleans. European Americans considered the Choctaw to be one of the &quot;Five Civilized Tribes&quot; of the Southeast. The Choctaw and the United States agreed to a total of nine treaties. By the last three, the US gained vast land cessions in the Southeast. As part of Indian Removal, despite not having waged war against the United States, the majority of Choctaw were forcibly relocated to Indian Territory from 1831 to 1833. The Choctaw government in Indian Territory maintained the tri-union tradition of their homeland by having three governmental districts. Each district had its own chief, who together with the town chiefs, sat on the Choctaw National Council.

Those Choctaw who chose to stay in the state of Mississippi were considered state and U.S. citizens; they were one of the first major non-European ethnic groups to be granted citizenship. Article 14 in the 1830 treaty with the Choctaw stated Choctaws may wish to become citizens of the United States under the 14th Article of the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek on all of the combined lands which were consolidated under Article I from all previous treaties between the United States and the Choctaw.

During the American Civil War, the Choctaw in both Indian Territory and Mississippi mostly sided with the Confederate States of America. Under the late 19th-century Dawes Act and Curtis Acts, the US federal government broke up tribal land holdings and dissolved tribal governments in Indian Territory in order to extinguish Indian land claims before the admission of Oklahoma as a state in 1907. From that period, for several decades the United States Bureau of Indian Affairs appointed chiefs of the Choctaw and other tribes in the former Indian Territory.

During World War I, Choctaw soldiers served in the US military as some of the first Native American codetalkers, using the Choctaw language. Since the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, the Choctaw people in three areas have reconstituted their governments and gained federal recognition. The largest are the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma, followed by the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, and the Jena Band of Choctaw Indians, respectively.

Since the 20th century, the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians were federally recognized in 1945, the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma in 1971, and the Jena Band of Choctaw Indians in 1995. The Choctaw Apache Tribe of Ebarb (House Concurrent Resolution 2), Clifton Choctaw Band (House Concurrent Resolution 3), and Louisiana Band of Choctaw (Senate Concurrent Resolution 3), all based in Louisiana, were state-recognized in 1978. The MOWA Band of Choctaw Indians was state-recognized by the Alabama legislature in 1979, and again in 1984 during the establishment of the Alabama Indian Commission through Alabama Code 41-9-708.

== Population history ==
The highest of early estimates - possibly representing the population peak - is that of Le Page du Pratz who estimated the Choctaw at 25,000 warriors (and therefore around 125,000 people) in year 1718. Other estimates from that time period were usually lower, but it is possible that they represented only a part of the tribe. Similar figures were given by St. Denis who estimated the Choctaw at 18,000 warriors (or 90,000 people) in 1714 and by W. Bull who estimated them at 16,000 warriors (or 80,000 people) in 1738. According to B. R. Carroll the Choctaw were reckoned by the French to be the most numerous nation of Indians in America and consisted of many thousand men. John R. Swanton enumerated a total of 102 Choctaw villages and towns in his book. Robert Rogers estimated the Choctaw at 10,000 warriors in 1775 (indicating a total population of 50,000). According to Gilbert Imlay they mustered 6,000 warriors around the year 1800 (implying a total population of 30,000). Jedidiah Morse estimated the Choctaw at 25,000 people in about year 1820. A census taken in 1830, shortly before the removal, reported a total population of 19,554. A report by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs dated 25 November 1841 indicates that by then 15,177 Choctaws had already moved to Oklahoma (Indian Territory). Few thousand more emigratted to the west in subsequent years. The Indian Office in 1856 reported the number of the Choctaws as 22,707. Emmanuel Domenech estimated the Choctaw at up to 25,000 people in about 1860. Enumeration published in 1886 counted 18,000 Choctaws in Oklahoma as of year 1884. The census of 1910 counted 15,917 Choctaws. Around years 1916–1919 there were in Oklahoma 17,488 Choctaws by blood, 1,651 by intermarriage and 6,029 Freedmen, and in addition to that there were also at that time 3,099 Mississippi Choctaws and around 200 Choctaws living elsewhere.

In the 20th and 21st centuries Choctaw population has rebounded, in 2020 they numbered 254,154 (including 90,973 in Oklahoma).

==Influential leaders==

* Tuscaloosa (died October 1540) retaliated against Hernando de Soto at the Battle of Mabilia. The battle was the first major conflict in North America between Native Americans and Europeans.
* Franchimastabe (died 19th century) was a transitional benefactor and a contemporary of Taboca. To some Americans he was the &quot;leading chief of the Choctaws.&quot; He led a war party with British forces against American rebels. Franchasmatabe attended the treaty talks of 1801 near Mobile, Alabama.
* Taboca (died 19th century) was a traditional &quot;prophet-chief&quot; who led a delegation starting in October 1785 to Hopewell, South Carolina.
* Apuckshunubbee (–1824) was chief of the Okla Falaya (Tall People) district in old Choctaw nation. He died in Kentucky on his way to Washington D.C. to conduct negotiations.
* Pushmataha (Apushmataha) (1760s–December 24, 1824) was a chief in old Choctaw nation. He negotiated treaties with the United States and fought on the American&#x27;s side in the War of 1812. He died in Washington D.C. and is buried in the Congressional Cemetery in Washington D.C.
* Mosholatubbee (1770–1836) was a chief in the Choctaw nation before the removal and after. He went to Washington City to negotiate for the tribe in 1824 and was the only major leader to return. In the summer of 1830, he ran for a seat in the Congress of the United States to represent the state of Mississippi.
* Greenwood LeFlore (June 3, 1800 – August 31, 1865) was a District Chief of the Choctaws in Mississippi. He was an influential state representative and senator in Mississippi.
* George W. Harkins (1810–1890) was a district Choctaw chief in Indian Territory (1850–1857) prior to the Civil War and author of the &quot;Farewell Letter to the American People&quot;.
* Peter Pitchlynn (January 30, 1806 – January 17, 1881) was a highly influential leader during the removal era and long after. He represented the Choctaws in Washington, D.C., for some years and is buried in the Congressional Cemetery. Charles Dickens described him &quot;as stately and complete a gentleman of nature&#x27;s making as ever I beheld.&quot;
* Wesley Johnson ( – 1925) was elected chief on May 10, 1913, in Meridian, Mississippi. He would lead the Mississippi, Alabama, and Louisiana Choctaw Council&#x27;s delegation to Washington, D. C. in February 1914 where he met President Woodrow Wilson and many members of congress. There he expressed the dire situation of the Mississippi Choctaws. Wesley Johnson represented the Alabama Delegation from Southwest Alabama in Mobile and Washington Counties. Wesley Johnson was also known as Wesley Wakatubee.
* Phillip Martin (March 13, 1926 – February 4, 2010) was the Chief of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians from 1979 to 2007 and worked in tribal government for over fifty years. He encouraged outside investment and reduced unemployment to nearly 0% on the reservation.

==See also==
* William Bartram
* Chacato
* Choctaw culture
* Choctaw mythology
* Choctaw Trail of Tears
* Cyrus Byington
* Gideon Lincecum
* Steven Charleston
* List of Choctaw Treaties
* List of sites and peoples visited by the Hernando de Soto Expedition
* okay (&quot;okeh&quot;, etymology)
* Bulbancha
* Sarah Sense, Chitimacha/Choctaw artist

== References==
== Bibliography ==

* Patricia Galloway and Clara Sue Kidwell. &quot;Choctaw in the East.&quot; In &quot;Handbook of North American Indians: Vol. 14, Southeast.&quot; Raymond D. Fogelson, volume editor. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 2004: 499–519.
* Akers, Donna L. &quot;Living in the Land of Death: The Choctaw Nation, 1830–1860&quot;, Lansing: Michigan State University, 2004.
* Barnett Jr., James F. &quot;Mississippi&#x27;s American Indians.&quot; Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi, 2012.
* Bartram, William. &quot;Travels Through...Country of the Chactaws...&quot;, Florida: printed by James &amp; Johnson, 1791.
* Bushnell, David I. &quot;Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 48: The Choctaw of Bayou Lacomb, St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana.&quot; Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1909.
* Byington, Cyrus. &quot;Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 46: A Dictionary of the Choctaw Language.&quot; Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1915.
* Carson, James Taylor. &quot;Searching for the Bright Path: The Mississippi Choctaws from Prehistory to Removal&quot;. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1999.
* 
* Haag, Marcia and Henry Willis. &quot;Choctaw Language &amp; Culture: Chahta Anumpa&quot;. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 2001.
* Hurley, Patrick J.(1883). National Atty. for Choctaw Nation &quot;Choctaw Citizenship Litigation.
* Jimmie, Randy and Jimmie, Leonard. &quot;NANIH WAIYA Magazine, 1974, Vol I, Number 3&quot;.
* Kidwell, Clara Sue. &quot;Choctaws and Missionaries in Mississippi, 1818–1918&quot;. University of Oklahoma Press: Norman and London, 1995.
* Kidwell, Clara Sue. &quot;The Choctaws in Oklahoma: From Tribe to Nation, 1855–1970&quot; 2007.
* Lambert, Valerie. &quot;Choctaw Nation: A Story of American Indian Resurgence.&quot; U. of Nebraska Press, 2007.
* Lincecum, Gideon. &quot;Pushmataha: A Choctaw Leader and His People&quot;. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2004.
* Lincecum, Gideon. &quot;Traditional History of the Chahta Nation, Translated from the Chahta by Gideon Lincecum, 1861&quot;. University of Texas Library, March 1932.
* 
* O&#x27;Brien, Greg. &quot;Choctaws in a Revolutionary Age, 1750–1830&quot;. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2002.
* O&#x27;Brien, Greg, ed. &quot;Pre-removal Choctaw History: Exploring New Paths&quot;. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 2008.
* O&#x27;Brien, Greg. &quot;Mushulatubbee and Choctaw Removal: Chiefs Confront a Changing World.&quot; 2001.
* O&#x27;Brien, Greg. &quot;Pushmataha: Choctaw Warrior, Diplomat, and Chief.&quot; 2001.
* Pesantubbee, Michelene E. &quot;Choctaw Women in a Chaotic World: The Clash of Cultures in the Colonial Southeast.&quot; Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico, 2005.
* 
* Wells, Samuel J., and Tubby, Roseanna (Editors). &quot;After Removal, The Choctaw in Mississippi.&quot; Jackson and London: University Press of Mississippi, 1986. .
* Mississippi Choctaw Reservation and Off-Reservation Trust Land, Mississippi United States Census Bureau
==External links==
=== Choctaw governments ===
* Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma (official site)
* Jena Band of Choctaw Indians (official site)
* Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians (official site)

=== History and culture ===
* Choctaw Indian Fair
* &quot;Choctaws&quot; by Dr. D.L. Birchfield
* Choctaw, Oklahoma Historical Society
* . Yale Collection of Western Americana, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="4" end="11" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="22" end="44" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American people"/>
<link wikidata="Q905014" start="69" end="91" title="Indigenous peoples of the Southeastern Woodlands" label="Southeastern Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="108" end="119" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="124" end="131" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979" start="137" end="153" title="Choctaw language" label="Choctaw language"/>
<link wikidata="Q902978" start="159" end="185" title="Western Muskogean language" label="Western Muskogean language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="230" end="257" title="federally recognized tribes" label="federally recognized tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103726" start="263" end="289" title="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma" label="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879061" start="291" end="326" title="Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians" label="Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177350" start="328" end="356" title="Jena Band of Choctaw Indians" label="Jena Band of Choctaw Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059409" start="379" end="394" title="Yowani Choctaws" label="Yowani Choctaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q35170" start="433" end="445" title="Caddo" label="Caddo Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="542" end="549" title="endonym and exonym" label="autonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="651" end="665" title="Anthropologist" label="Anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500127" start="666" end="681" title="John R. Swanton" label="John R. Swanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q263443" start="1023" end="1028" title="totem" label="totem"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="1529" end="1538" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="1852" end="1869" title="Yucatan Peninsula" label="Yucatan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1913" end="1926" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2067" end="2080" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2167" end="2170" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492313" start="2267" end="2298" title="Southeastern Ceremonial Complex" label="Southeastern Ceremonial Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479328" start="2324" end="2359" title="Indigenous peoples of South America" label="Indigenous peoples of South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017" start="2658" end="2670" title="16th century" label="16th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q59648" start="2791" end="2809" title="Plaquemine culture" label="Plaquemine culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="2957" end="2965" title="Beringia" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="3054" end="3064" title="Archeology" label="Archeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="3066" end="3078" title="Anthropology" label="Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q222046" start="3084" end="3092" title="Genomics" label="Genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532907" start="3152" end="3220" title="Genetic history of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="genetic history of the Indigenous peoples of North and South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979" start="3362" end="3378" title="Choctaw language" label="Choctaw language"/>
<link wikidata="Q902978" start="3398" end="3407" title="Muskogean" label="Muskogean"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="3471" end="3488" title="American frontier" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955" start="3506" end="3518" title="19th century" label="19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q956784" start="3579" end="3593" title="Cyrus Byington" label="Cyrus Byington"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053939" start="3734" end="3750" title="Henry S. Halbert" label="Henry S. Halbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="3913" end="3922" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927" start="4494" end="4506" title="20th century" label="20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500127" start="5009" end="5021" title="John Swanton" label="John Swanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="5707" end="5719" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492313" start="6199" end="6230" title="Southeastern Ceremonial Complex" label="Southeastern Ceremonial Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103721" start="6581" end="6600" title="Choctaw Indian Fair" label="Choctaw Indian Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103726" start="6905" end="6931" title="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma" label="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879061" start="6949" end="6984" title="Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians" label="Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177350" start="7005" end="7033" title="Jena Band of Choctaw Indians" label="Jena Band of Choctaw Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059409" start="7056" end="7071" title="Yowani Choctaws" label="Yowani Choctaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q35170" start="7137" end="7142" title="Caddo" label="Caddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942993" start="7258" end="7266" title="moiety (kinship)" label="moieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="7550" end="7561" title="matrilineal" label="matrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q334486" start="7990" end="8004" title="Mother goddess" label="Mother goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963605" start="8091" end="8102" title="Nanih Waiya" label="Nanih Waiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880367" start="8174" end="8183" title="earthworks (engineering)" label="earthwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="8407" end="8421" title="Anthropologist" label="Anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500127" start="8422" end="8437" title="John R. Swanton" label="John R. Swanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059409" start="9979" end="9994" title="Yowani Choctaws" label="Yowani Choctaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="10253" end="10264" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="10300" end="10314" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="10356" end="10372" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q437306" start="10539" end="10552" title="Moshulatubbee" label="Moshulatubbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782285" start="10609" end="10623" title="Apuckshunubbee" label="Apuckshunubbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360194" start="10655" end="10665" title="Pushmataha" label="Pushmataha"/>
<link wikidata="Q23490309" start="11067" end="11082" title="Kindred Spirits (sculpture)" label="Kindred Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="11168" end="11177" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868046" start="11983" end="12000" title="History of lacrosse" label="Choctaw stickball"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="12474" end="12480" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507077" start="12630" end="12637" title="Chunkey" label="Chunkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095499" start="13785" end="13806" title="Treaty of San Lorenzo" label="Treaty of San Lorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177350" start="13899" end="13927" title="Jena Band of Choctaw Indians" label="Jena Band of Choctaw Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879061" start="13943" end="13978" title="Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians" label="Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103726" start="13995" end="14021" title="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma" label="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="14703" end="14720" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="14784" end="14805" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990219" start="15133" end="15139" title="French colonization of the Americas" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="15187" end="15194" title="English colonization of the Americas" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="15217" end="15222" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="15449" end="15454" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="15456" end="15462" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="15468" end="15475" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q319421" start="15680" end="15701" title="Five Civilized Tribes" label="Five Civilized Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="15764" end="15770" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="15804" end="15821" title="European American" label="European American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="15827" end="15843" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="15959" end="15978" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="15980" end="15991" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186260" start="16001" end="16014" title="Red Stick War" label="Red Stick War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="16036" end="16057" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q319421" start="16124" end="16145" title="Five Civilized Tribes" label="Five Civilized Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="16321" end="16335" title="Indian Removal" label="Indian Removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="16422" end="16440" title="Trail of Tears" label="forcibly relocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="16444" end="16460" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="17234" end="17252" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="17274" end="17290" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="17329" end="17358" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q763104" start="17388" end="17397" title="Dawes Act" label="Dawes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007791" start="17402" end="17412" title="Curtis Act" label="Curtis Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="17507" end="17523" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="17675" end="17699" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17789" end="17800" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q912310" start="17882" end="17893" title="codetalkers" label="codetalkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979" start="17905" end="17921" title="Choctaw language" label="Choctaw language"/>
<link wikidata="Q897793" start="17933" end="17958" title="Indian Reorganization Act" label="Indian Reorganization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879061" start="18253" end="18288" title="Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians" label="Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103726" start="18328" end="18354" title="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma" label="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177350" start="18372" end="18400" title="Jena Band of Choctaw Indians" label="Jena Band of Choctaw Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17492840" start="18414" end="18443" title="Choctaw-Apache Tribe of Ebarb" label="Choctaw Apache Tribe of Ebarb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717185" start="18654" end="18682" title="MOWA Band of Choctaw Indians" label="MOWA Band of Choctaw Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775422" start="18961" end="18977" title="Antoine-Simon Le Page du Pratz" label="Le Page du Pratz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262382" start="19230" end="19239" title="Louis Juchereau de St. Denis" label="St. Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500127" start="19549" end="19564" title="John R. Swanton" label="John R. Swanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q186571" start="19631" end="19644" title="Robert Rogers (British Army officer)" label="Robert Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371964" start="19750" end="19763" title="Gilbert Imlay" label="Gilbert Imlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686158" start="19855" end="19869" title="Jedidiah Morse" label="Jedidiah Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="19972" end="19979" title="Trail of Tears" label="removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="20160" end="20176" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165816" start="20314" end="20331" title="Emmanuel Domenech" label="Emmanuel Domenech"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879061" start="20693" end="20713" title="Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians" label="Mississippi Choctaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323725" start="20912" end="20922" title="Chief Tuscaloosa" label="Tuscaloosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="21104" end="21118" title="Franchimastabe" label="Franchimastabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="21408" end="21414" title="Taboca" label="Taboca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782285" start="21556" end="21570" title="Apuckshunubbee" label="Apuckshunubbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360194" start="21731" end="21741" title="Pushmataha" label="Pushmataha"/>
<link wikidata="Q437306" start="22014" end="22027" title="Mosholatubbee" label="Mosholatubbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544844" start="22326" end="22343" title="Greenwood LeFlore" label="Greenwood LeFlore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545635" start="22503" end="22520" title="George W. Harkins" label="George W. Harkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435030" start="22641" end="22679" title="Farewell Letter to the American People" label="Farewell Letter to the American People"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113731" start="22689" end="22704" title="Peter Pitchlynn" label="Peter Pitchlynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="22923" end="22938" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085275" start="23553" end="23567" title="Phillip Martin" label="Phillip Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18243" start="23840" end="23855" title="William Bartram" label="William Bartram"/>
<link wikidata="Q56186" start="23858" end="23865" title="Chacato" label="Chacato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193669" start="23868" end="23883" title="Choctaw culture" label="Choctaw culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103733" start="23886" end="23903" title="Choctaw mythology" label="Choctaw mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103728" start="23906" end="23928" title="Choctaw Trail of Tears" label="Choctaw Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q956784" start="23931" end="23945" title="Cyrus Byington" label="Cyrus Byington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559620" start="23948" end="23963" title="Gideon Lincecum" label="Gideon Lincecum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058923" start="23966" end="23983" title="Steven Charleston" label="Steven Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567140" start="23986" end="24010" title="List of Choctaw Treaties" label="List of Choctaw Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833897" start="24013" end="24081" title="List of sites and peoples visited by the Hernando de Soto Expedition" label="List of sites and peoples visited by the Hernando de Soto Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24084" end="24088" title="OK#Choctaw" label="okay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865615" start="24121" end="24130" title="Bulbancha" label="Bulbancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q121344548" start="24133" end="24144" title="Sarah Sense" label="Sarah Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574739" start="24294" end="24328" title="Handbook of North American Indians" label="Handbook of North American Indians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7224" wikidata="Q108930" url="?curid=7224" title="Calypso">
<text>Calypso, Calipso, Kalypso, Kalipso, may refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
===Mythological and fictional entities===
* Calypso (mythology), a nymph who imprisoned Odysseus for seven years
* Calypso (nymphs), various other nymphs
* Calypso (comics), a Marvel Comics character
* Calypso, a character in mythology novels by Rick Riordan
* Calypso, or Tia Dalma, a &quot;Pirates of the Caribbean&quot; movie character
* Calypso (dog), a dog from the animated TV show &quot;Bluey&quot;
* Calypso, a character from the &quot;Twisted Metal&quot; video game series
* Planet Calypso, a location in &quot;Entropia Universe&quot;
* UNS &quot;Calypso&quot;, a starship in &quot;Alien Legacy&quot;

=== Literature ===
* &quot;Calypso&quot;, an episode in James Joyce&#x27;s novel &quot;Ulysses&quot;
* &quot;Calypso&quot; (book), a 2018 essay collection by David Sedaris

=== Music ===
* Calypso music, a genre of Trinidadian folk music
* &quot;Calypso&quot; (album), by Harry Belafonte
* &quot;Calypso&quot; (John Denver song), 1975
* &quot;Calypso&quot; (Luis Fonsi and Stefflon Don song), 2018
* &quot;Calypso&quot; (Spiderbait song), 1997
* &quot;Calypso&quot;, a song by France Gall from the 1984 album &quot;Débranche!&quot;
* &quot;Calypso&quot;, a song by Jean-Michel Jarre from &quot;Waiting for Cousteau&quot;
* &quot;Calypso&quot;, a song by Suzanne Vega from the 1987 album &quot;Solitude Standing&quot;
* &quot;Calypso&quot;, a song by Bryson Tiller from the 2024 album &quot;Bryson Tiller&quot;
* &quot;Calipso&quot; (song), by Charlie Charles and Dardust, 2019

=== Television ===
* &quot;Calypso&quot; (TV series), a Venezuelan telenovela
* &quot;Calypso&quot;, an episode of &quot;Star Trek: Short Treks&quot;
* &quot;Calypso&quot;, an episode of &quot;Bluey&quot;
* Calipso TV, Venezuela TV channel

==People==
* Calypso (painter), 3rd century BC Greek painter
* Calypso Rose (born 1940), Trinidadan musician
* Kalypso Nicolaïdis (born 1962), a Franco-Grecian academic
* Kalipso Chalkidou (born 1976), a Greek physician
* Juno Calypso (born 1989), UK photographer
* Charlotte Di Calypso (born 1990), French fashion model

==Places==
* Calypso Cliffs, Bowman Inlet, Antarctica
* Calypso Deep, the deepest point of the Mediterranean Sea
* Calypso, North Carolina, a town in the United States
* Calypso Park, Limoges, Ontario, Canada; a Canadian theme waterpark
* Calypso (moon), a moon of Saturn

== Science and technology ==
* Calypso (electronic ticketing system)
* Calypso (email client), later called Courier
* Kalypso (software), an open source modelling program
* HP &quot;Calypso&quot;, a PDA from Hewlett-Packard
* &quot;Calypso&quot; (plant), an orchid genus containing a single species &quot;Calypso bulbosa&quot;
* Calypso bean, a bean cultivar of the species &quot;Phaseolus vulgaris&quot;

== Transportation==
* Boeing Starliner &quot;Calypso&quot;, a space capsule 
* Ultracraft Calypso, a Belgian light aircraft design
* Calypso (ship), the name of several ships
* M/S &quot;Kalypso&quot;, a cruiseferry
* Greek ship &quot;Kalypso&quot; (M64), a Greek minehunter
* Italian torpedo boat &quot;Calipso&quot;

== Other uses ==
* CALIPSO, a satellite
* Calypso (camera), an underwater camera
* Calypso (typeface)
* Calypso Technology, later Adenza
* Calypso Lemonade, a lemonade company
* Kalypso Media, a video game developer

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* List of calypso musicians
* Calypso&#x27;s Cave, a cave in Gozo, Malta
* Chalypso, a dance
* 53 Kalypso, an asteroid
* Calypso Rupes, a ridgeline on Mercury</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q108930" start="0" end="7" title="Calypso" label="Calypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q108930" start="9" end="16" title="Calypso" label="Calipso"/>
<link wikidata="Q108930" start="18" end="25" title="Calypso" label="Kalypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q108930" start="27" end="34" title="Calypso" label="Kalipso"/>
<link wikidata="Q48961" start="121" end="140" title="Calypso (mythology)" label="Calypso (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106311126" start="192" end="208" title="Calypso (nymphs)" label="Calypso (nymphs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934584" start="233" end="249" title="Calypso (comics)" label="Calypso (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="288" end="335" title="List of characters in mythology novels by Rick Riordan#Calypso" label="a character in mythology novels by Rick Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278783" start="350" end="359" title="Tia Dalma" label="Tia Dalma"/>
<link wikidata="Q124811398" start="418" end="431" title="Calypso (dog)" label="Calypso (dog)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995061" start="521" end="534" title="Twisted Metal" label="Twisted Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345246" start="597" end="614" title="Entropia Universe" label="Entropia Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033714" start="668" end="680" title="Alien Legacy" label="Alien Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="775" end="782" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q56015330" start="791" end="817" title="Calypso (book)" label="&amp;quot;Calypso&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q752785" start="877" end="890" title="Calypso music" label="Calypso music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403177" start="928" end="955" title="Calypso (album)" label="&amp;quot;Calypso&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024675" start="978" end="1016" title="Calypso (John Denver song)" label="&amp;quot;Calypso&amp;quot; (John Denver song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55773501" start="1025" end="1079" title="Calypso (Luis Fonsi and Stefflon Don song)" label="&amp;quot;Calypso&amp;quot; (Luis Fonsi and Stefflon Don song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85750205" start="1088" end="1125" title="Calypso (Spiderbait song)" label="&amp;quot;Calypso&amp;quot; (Spiderbait song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042398" start="1203" end="1213" title="Débranche!" label="Débranche!"/>
<link wikidata="Q368315" start="1282" end="1302" title="Waiting for Cousteau" label="Waiting for Cousteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626709" start="1381" end="1398" title="Solitude Standing" label="Solitude Standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293651" start="1478" end="1491" title="Bryson Tiller (album)" label="Bryson Tiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q63361565" start="1500" end="1526" title="Calipso (song)" label="&amp;quot;Calipso&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q587271" start="1587" end="1618" title="Calypso (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Calypso&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1687" end="1709" title="Star Trek: Short Treks" label="Star Trek: Short Treks"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777222" start="1739" end="1770" title="List of Bluey episodes" label="an episode of &amp;quot;Bluey&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021383" start="1773" end="1783" title="Calipso TV" label="Calipso TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722785" start="1820" end="1837" title="Calypso (painter)" label="Calypso (painter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356602" start="1870" end="1882" title="Calypso Rose" label="Calypso Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6355046" start="1918" end="1936" title="Kalypso Nicolaïdis" label="Kalypso Nicolaïdis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57327023" start="1978" end="1995" title="Kalipso Chalkidou" label="Kalipso Chalkidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q56043268" start="2029" end="2041" title="Juno Calypso" label="Juno Calypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666767" start="2073" end="2093" title="Charlotte Di Calypso" label="Charlotte Di Calypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q285380" start="2142" end="2156" title="Calypso Cliffs" label="Calypso Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027846" start="2185" end="2197" title="Calypso Deep" label="Calypso Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025103" start="2244" end="2267" title="Calypso, North Carolina" label="Calypso, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934577" start="2299" end="2311" title="Calypso Park" label="Calypso Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17869" start="2368" end="2382" title="Calypso (moon)" label="Calypso (moon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651075" start="2433" end="2470" title="Calypso (electronic ticketing system)" label="Calypso (electronic ticketing system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178135" start="2473" end="2495" title="Calypso (email client)" label="Calypso (email client)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722787" start="2520" end="2538" title="Kalypso (software)" label="Kalypso (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362061" start="2575" end="2597" title="HP Calypso" label="HP &amp;quot;Calypso&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141063" start="2628" end="2655" title="Calypso (plant)" label="&amp;quot;Calypso&amp;quot; (plant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26856855" start="2731" end="2743" title="Calypso bean" label="Calypso bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q87412988" start="2830" end="2866" title="Boeing Starliner Calypso" label="Boeing Starliner &amp;quot;Calypso&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148743" start="2887" end="2905" title="Ultracraft Calypso" label="Ultracraft Calypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q115633006" start="2941" end="2955" title="Calypso (ship)" label="Calypso (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63746" start="2985" end="3008" title="M/S Kalypso" label="M/S &amp;quot;Kalypso&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469596" start="3026" end="3062" title="Greek ship Kalypso (M64)" label="Greek ship &amp;quot;Kalypso&amp;quot; (M64)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55063703" start="3085" end="3125" title="Italian torpedo boat Calipso" label="Italian torpedo boat &amp;quot;Calipso&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q35494" start="3146" end="3153" title="CALIPSO" label="CALIPSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024671" start="3169" end="3185" title="Calypso (camera)" label="Calypso (camera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q361753" start="3210" end="3228" title="Calypso (typeface)" label="Calypso (typeface)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934581" start="3231" end="3249" title="Calypso Technology" label="Calypso Technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3266" end="3282" title="Calypso Lemonade" label="Calypso Lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q26188" start="3305" end="3318" title="Kalypso Media" label="Kalypso Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608711" start="3373" end="3398" title="List of calypso musicians" label="List of calypso musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q20925929" start="3401" end="3420" title="Calypso&amp;#x27;s Cave" label="Calypso&amp;#x27;s Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069100" start="3446" end="3454" title="Chalypso" label="Chalypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q155238" start="3466" end="3476" title="53 Kalypso" label="53 Kalypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418769" start="3492" end="3505" title="Calypso Rupes" label="Calypso Rupes"/>
</links>
</doc>
