<doc id="7023" wikidata="Q81931" url="?curid=7023" title="Confederate States of America">
<text>The Confederate States of America (CSA), commonly referred to as the Confederate States (C.S.), the Confederacy, or the South, was an unrecognized breakaway republic in the Southern United States that existed from February 8, 1861, to May 5, 1865. It was composed of eleven U.S. states that declared secession; South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Texas, Virginia, Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina. These states warred against the United States during the American Civil War.

With Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s election as President of the United States in 1860, eleven southern states believed their slavery-dependent plantation economies were threatened, and began to secede from the United States. The Confederacy was formed on February 8, 1861, by South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas. They adopted a new constitution establishing a confederation government of &quot;sovereign and independent states&quot;. The federal government in Washington D.C. and states under its control were known as the Union.

The Civil War began on April 12, 1861, when South Carolina&#x27;s militia attacked Fort Sumter. Four slave states of the Upper South—Virginia, Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina—then seceded and joined the Confederacy. On February 22, 1862, Confederate States Army leaders installed a centralized federal government in Richmond, Virginia, and enacted the first Confederate draft on April 16, 1862. By 1865, the Confederacy&#x27;s federal government dissolved into chaos, and the Confederate States Congress adjourned, effectively ceasing to exist as a legislative body on March 18. After four years of heavy fighting, most Confederate land and naval forces either surrendered or otherwise ceased hostilities by May 1865. The most significant capitulation was Confederate general Robert E. Lee&#x27;s surrender on April 9, after which any doubt about the war&#x27;s outcome or the Confederacy&#x27;s survival was extinguished. Confederate President Davis&#x27;s administration declared the Confederacy dissolved on May 5.

After the war, during the Reconstruction era, the Confederate states were readmitted to Congress after each ratified the 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which outlawed slavery. Lost Cause mythology, an idealized view of the Confederacy valiantly fighting for a just cause, emerged in the decades after the war among former Confederate generals and politicians, and in organizations such as the United Daughters of the Confederacy and the Sons of Confederate Veterans. Intense periods of Lost Cause activity developed around the turn of the 20th century and during the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s in reaction to growing support for racial equality. Advocates sought to ensure future generations of Southern whites would continue to support white supremacist policies such as the Jim Crow laws through activities such as building Confederate monuments and influencing the authors of textbooks. The modern display of the Confederate battle flag primarily started during the 1948 presidential election, when the battle flag was used by the pro-segregationist and white supremacist Dixiecrat Party. During the civil rights movement, racial segregationists used it for demonstrations.

==Origins==

A consensus of historians who address the origins of the American Civil War agree that the preservation of the institution of slavery was the principal aim of the eleven Southern states (seven states before the onset of the war and four states after the onset) that declared their secession from the United States (the Union) and united to form the Confederate States of America (known as the &quot;Confederacy&quot;). While historians in the 21st century agree on the centrality of slavery in the conflict, they disagree sharply on which aspects of this conflict (ideological, economic, political, or social) were most important, and on the North&#x27;s reasons for refusing to allow the Southern states to secede. Proponents of the pseudo-historical Lost Cause ideology have denied that slavery was the principal cause of the secession, a view that has been disproven by the overwhelming historical evidence against it, notably some of the seceding states&#x27; own secession documents.

The principal political battle leading to Southern secession was over whether slavery would be permitted to expand into the Western territories destined to become states. Initially Congress had admitted new states into the Union in pairs, one slave and one free. This had kept a sectional balance in the Senate but not in the House of Representatives, as free states outstripped slave states in numbers of eligible voters. Thus, at mid-19th century, the free-versus-slave status of the new territories was a critical issue, both for the North, where anti-slavery sentiment had grown, and for the South, where the fear of slavery&#x27;s abolition had grown. Another factor leading to secession and the formation of the Confederacy was the development of white Southern nationalism in the preceding decades. The primary reason for the North to reject secession was to preserve the Union, a cause based on American nationalism.

Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 presidential election. His victory triggered declarations of secession by seven slave states of the Deep South, all of whose riverfront or coastal economies were based on cotton that was cultivated by slave labor. They formed the Confederate States of America after Lincoln was elected in November 1860 but before he took office in March 1861. Nationalists in the North and &quot;Unionists&quot; in the South refused to accept the declarations of secession. No foreign government ever recognized the Confederacy. The U.S. government, under President James Buchanan, refused to relinquish its forts that were in territory claimed by the Confederacy. The war itself began on April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces bombarded the Union&#x27;s Fort Sumter, in the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina.

Background factors in the run up to the Civil War were partisan politics, abolitionism, nullification versus secession, Southern and Northern nationalism, expansionism, economics, and modernization in the antebellum period. As a panel of historians emphasized in 2011, &quot;while slavery and its various and multifaceted discontents were the primary cause of disunion, it was disunion itself that sparked the war.&quot; Historian David M. Potter wrote: &quot;The problem for Americans who, in the age of Lincoln, wanted slaves to be free was not simply that southerners wanted the opposite, but that they themselves cherished a conflicting value: they wanted the Constitution, which protected slavery, to be honored, and the Union, which was a fellowship with slaveholders, to be preserved. Thus they were committed to values that could not logically be reconciled.&quot;

==Secession==
The first secession state conventions from the Deep South sent representatives to the Montgomery Convention in Alabama on February 4, 1861. A provisional government was established. The new provisional Confederate President Jefferson Davis issued a call for 100,000 men from the states&#x27; militias to defend the newly formed Confederacy. All Federal property was seized, including gold bullion and coining dies at the U.S. mints. The Confederate capital was moved from Montgomery to Richmond, Virginia, in May 1861. On February 22, 1862, Davis was inaugurated as president with a term of six years.

The Confederate administration pursued a policy of national territorial integrity, continuing earlier state efforts in 1860–1861 to remove U.S. government presence. This included taking possession of U.S. courts, custom houses, post offices, and most notably, arsenals and forts. After the Confederate attack and capture of Fort Sumter in April 1861, Lincoln called up 75,000 of the states&#x27; militia to muster under his command. The stated purpose was to re-occupy U.S. properties throughout the South, as the U.S. Congress had not authorized their abandonment. The resistance at Fort Sumter signaled his change of policy from that of the Buchanan Administration. Lincoln&#x27;s response ignited a firestorm of emotion. The people of both North and South demanded war, with soldiers rushing to their colors in the hundreds of thousands.

Secessionists argued that the United States Constitution was a contract among sovereign states that could be abandoned without consultation and each state had a right to secede. After intense debates and statewide votes, seven Deep South states passed secession ordinances by February 1861, while secession efforts failed in the other eight slave states.

The Confederacy expanded in May–July 1861 (with Virginia, Arkansas, Tennessee, North Carolina), and disintegrated in April–May 1865. It was formed by delegations from seven slave states of the Lower South that had proclaimed their secession. After the fighting began in April, four additional slave states seceded and were admitted. Later, two slave states (Missouri and Kentucky) and two territories were given seats in the Confederate Congress.

Its establishment flowed from and deepened Southern nationalism, which prepared men to fight for &quot;The Southern Cause&quot;. This &quot;Cause&quot; included support for states&#x27; rights, tariff policy, and internal improvements, but above all, cultural and financial dependence on the South&#x27;s slavery-based economy. The convergence of race and slavery, politics, and economics raised South-related policy questions to the status of moral questions over, way of life, merging love of things Southern and hatred of things Northern. As the war approached, political parties split, and national churches and interstate families divided along sectional lines. According to historian John M. Coski:
Following South Carolina&#x27;s unanimous 1860 secession vote, no other Southern states considered the question until 1861; when they did, none had a unanimous vote. All had residents who cast significant numbers of Unionist votes. Voting to remain in the Union did not necessarily mean individuals were sympathizers with the North. Once fighting began, many who voted to remain in the Union accepted the majority decision, and supported the Confederacy. Many writers have evaluated the War as an American tragedy—a &quot;Brothers&#x27; War&quot;, pitting &quot;brother against brother, father against son, kin against kin of every degree&quot;.

===States===
Initially, some secessionists hoped for a peaceful departure. Moderates in the Confederate Constitutional Convention included a provision against importation of slaves from Africa to appeal to the Upper South. Non-slave states might join, but the radicals secured a two-thirds requirement in both houses of Congress to accept them.

Seven states declared their secession from the United States before Lincoln took office on March 4, 1861. After the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter April 12, 1861, and Lincoln&#x27;s subsequent call for troops, four more states declared their secession.

Kentucky declared neutrality, but after Confederate troops moved in, the state legislature asked for Union troops to drive them out. Delegates from 68 Kentucky counties were sent to the Russellville Convention that signed an Ordinance of Secession. Kentucky was admitted into the Confederacy on December 10, 1861, with Bowling Green as its first capital. Early in the war, the Confederacy controlled more than half of Kentucky but largely lost control in 1862. The splinter Confederate government of Kentucky relocated to accompany western Confederate armies and never controlled the state population after 1862. By the end of the war, 90,000 Kentuckians had fought for the Union, compared to 35,000 for the Confederacy.

In Missouri, a constitutional convention was approved and delegates elected. The convention rejected secession 89–1 on March 19, 1861. The governor maneuvered to take control of the St. Louis Arsenal and restrict Federal movements. This led to a confrontation, and in June federal forces drove him and the General Assembly from Jefferson City. The executive committee of the convention called the members together in July, and declared the state offices vacant and appointed a Unionist interim state government. The exiled governor called a rump session of the former General Assembly together in Neosho and, on October 31, 1861, it passed an ordinance of secession. The Confederate state government was unable to control substantial parts of Missouri territory, effectively only controlling southern Missouri early in the war. It had its capital at Neosho, then Cassville, before being driven out of the state. For the remainder of the war, it operated as a government in exile at Marshall, Texas.

Not having seceded, neither Kentucky nor Missouri was declared in rebellion in Lincoln&#x27;s Emancipation Proclamation. The Confederacy recognized the pro-Confederate claimants in Kentucky (December 10, 1861) and Missouri (November 28, 1861) and laid claim to those states, granting them Congressional representation and adding two stars to the Confederate flag. Voting for the representatives was mostly done by Confederate soldiers from Kentucky and Missouri.

Some southern unionists blamed Lincoln&#x27;s call for troops as the precipitating event for the second wave of secessions. Historian James McPherson argues such claims have &quot;a self-serving quality&quot; and regards them as misleading:

Historian Daniel W. Crofts disagrees with McPherson:

The order of secession resolutions and dates are:
:1. South Carolina (December 20, 1860)
:2. Mississippi (January 9, 1861)
:3. Florida (January 10)
:4. Alabama (January 11)
:5. Georgia (January 19)
:6. Louisiana (January 26)
:7. Texas (February 1; referendum February 23)
:* Inauguration of President Lincoln, March 4
:* Bombardment of Fort Sumter (April 12) and President Lincoln&#x27;s call-up (April 15)

:8. Virginia (April 17; referendum May 23, 1861)
:9. Arkansas (May 6)
:10. Tennessee (May 7; referendum June 8)
:11. North Carolina (May 20)

In Virginia, the populous counties along the Ohio and Pennsylvania borders rejected the Confederacy. Unionists held a Convention in Wheeling in June 1861, establishing a &quot;restored government&quot; with a rump legislature, but sentiment in the region remained deeply divided. In the 50 counties that would make up the state of West Virginia, voters from 24 counties had voted for disunion in Virginia&#x27;s May 23 referendum on the ordinance of secession. In the 1860 election &quot;Constitutional Democrat&quot; Breckenridge had outpolled &quot;Constitutional Unionist&quot; Bell in the 50 counties by 1,900 votes, 44% to 42%. The counties simultaneously supplied over 20,000 soldiers to each side of the conflict. Representatives for most counties were seated in both state legislatures at Wheeling and at Richmond for the duration of the war.

Attempts to secede from the Confederacy by counties in East Tennessee were checked by martial law. Although slaveholding Delaware and Maryland did not secede, citizens exhibited divided loyalties. Regiments of Marylanders fought in Lee&#x27;s Army of Northern Virginia. Overall, 24,000 men from Maryland joined Confederate forces, compared to 63,000 who joined Union forces. Delaware never produced a full regiment for the Confederacy, but neither did it emancipate slaves as did Missouri and West Virginia. District of Columbia citizens made no attempts to secede and through the war, referendums sponsored by Lincoln approved compensated emancipation and slave confiscation from &quot;disloyal citizens&quot;.

===Territories===

Citizens at Mesilla and Tucson in the southern part of New Mexico Territory formed a secession convention, which voted to join the Confederacy on March 16, 1861, and appointed Dr. Lewis S. Owings as the new territorial governor. They won the Battle of Mesilla and established a territorial government with Mesilla serving as its capital. The Confederacy proclaimed the Confederate Arizona Territory on February 14, 1862, north to the 34th parallel. Marcus H. MacWillie served in both Confederate Congresses as Arizona&#x27;s delegate. In 1862, the Confederate New Mexico campaign to take the northern half of the U.S. territory failed and the Confederate territorial government in exile relocated to San Antonio, Texas.

Confederate supporters in the trans-Mississippi west claimed portions of the Indian Territory after the US evacuated the federal forts and installations. Over half of the American Indian troops participating in the War from the Indian Territory supported the Confederacy. On July 12, 1861, the Confederate government signed a treaty with both the Choctaw and Chickasaw Indian nations. After several battles, Union armies took control of the territory.

The Indian Territory never formally joined the Confederacy, but did receive representation in the Congress. Many Indians from the Territory were integrated into regular Confederate Army units. After 1863, the tribal governments sent representatives to the Confederate Congress: Elias Cornelius Boudinot representing the Cherokee and Samuel Benton Callahan representing the Seminole and Creek. The Cherokee Nation aligned with the Confederacy. They practiced and supported slavery, opposed abolition, and feared their lands would be seized by the Union. After the war, the Indian territory was disestablished, their black slaves were freed, and the tribes lost some of their lands.

===Capitals===

Montgomery, Alabama, served as capital of the Confederate States from February 4 until May 29, 1861, in the Alabama State Capitol. Six states created the Confederacy there on February 8, 1861. The Texas delegation was seated at the time, so it is counted in the &quot;original seven&quot; states of the Confederacy; it had no roll call vote until after its referendum made secession &quot;operative&quot;. The Permanent Constitution was adopted there on March 12, 1861.

The permanent capital provided for in the Confederate Constitution called for a state cession of a 100 square mile district to the central government. Atlanta, which had not yet supplanted Milledgeville, Georgia, as its state capital, put in a bid noting its central location and rail connections, as did Opelika, Alabama, noting its strategically interior situation, rail connections and deposits of coal and iron.

Richmond, Virginia, was chosen for the interim capital at the Virginia State Capitol. The move was used by Vice President Stephens and others to encourage other border states to follow Virginia into the Confederacy. In the political moment it was a show of &quot;defiance and strength&quot;. The war for Southern independence was surely to be fought in Virginia, but it also had the largest Southern military-aged white population, with infrastructure, resources, and supplies. The Davis Administration&#x27;s policy was that &quot;It must be held at all hazards.&quot;

The naming of Richmond as the new capital took place on May 30, 1861, and the last two sessions of the Provisional Congress were held there. As war dragged on, Richmond became crowded with training and transfers, logistics and hospitals. Prices rose dramatically despite government efforts at price regulation. A movement in Congress argued for moving the capital from Richmond. At the approach of Federal armies in mid-1862, the government&#x27;s archives were readied for removal. As the Wilderness Campaign progressed, Congress authorized Davis to remove the executive department and call Congress to session elsewhere in 1864 and again in 1865. Shortly before the end of the war, the Confederate government evacuated Richmond, planning to relocate further south. Little came of these plans before Lee&#x27;s surrender. Davis and most of his cabinet fled to Danville, Virginia, which served as their headquarters for eight days.

==Diplomacy==
During its four years, the Confederacy asserted its independence and appointed dozens of diplomatic agents abroad. None were recognized by a foreign government. The US government regarded the Southern states as being in rebellion or insurrection and so refused any formal recognition of their status.

The US government never declared war on those &quot;kindred and countrymen&quot; in the Confederacy but conducted its military efforts beginning with a presidential proclamation issued April 15, 1861. It called for troops to recapture forts and suppress what Lincoln later called an &quot;insurrection and rebellion&quot;. Mid-war parleys between the two sides occurred without formal political recognition, though the laws of war predominantly governed military relationships on both sides of uniformed conflict.

Once war with the United States began, the Confederacy pinned its hopes for survival on military intervention by the UK or France. The Confederate government sent James M. Mason to London and John Slidell to Paris. On their way in 1861, the U.S. Navy intercepted their ship, the &quot;Trent,&quot; and took them to Boston, an international episode known as the &quot;Trent&quot; Affair. The diplomats were eventually released and continued their voyage. However, their mission was unsuccessful; historians judge their diplomacy as poor. Neither secured diplomatic recognition for the Confederacy, much less military assistance.

The Confederates who had believed that &quot;cotton is king&quot;, that is, that Britain had to support the Confederacy to obtain cotton, proved mistaken. The British had stocks to last over a year and been developing alternative sources. The United Kingdom took pride leading the end of transatlantic enslavement of Africans; by 1833, the Royal Navy patrolled middle passage waters to prevent additional slave ships from reaching the Western Hemisphere. It was in London that the first World Anti-Slavery Convention had been held in 1840. Black abolitionist speakers toured England, Scotland, and Ireland, exposing the reality of America&#x27;s chattel slavery and rebutting the Confederate position that blacks were &quot;unintellectual, timid, and dependent&quot;, and &quot;not equal to the white man...the superior race.&quot; Frederick Douglass, Henry Highland Garnet, Sarah Parker Remond, her brother Charles Lenox Remond, James W. C. Pennington, Martin Delany, Samuel Ringgold Ward, and William G. Allen all spent years in Britain, where fugitive slaves were safe and, as Allen said, there was an &quot;absence of prejudice against color. Here the colored man feels himself among friends, and not among enemies&quot;. Most British public opinion was against the practice, with Liverpool seen as the primary base of Southern support.

Throughout the early years of the war, British foreign secretary Lord John Russell, Emperor Napoleon III of France, and, to a lesser extent, British Prime Minister Lord Palmerston, showed interest in recognition of the Confederacy or at least mediation of the war. Chancellor of the Exchequer William Gladstone attempted unsuccessfully to convince Palmerston to intervene. By September 1862 the Union victory at the Battle of Antietam, Lincoln&#x27;s preliminary Emancipation Proclamation and abolitionist opposition in Britain put an end to these possibilities. The cost to Britain of a war with the U.S. would have been high: the immediate loss of American grain-shipments, the end of British exports to the U.S., and seizure of billions of pounds invested in American securities. War would have meant higher taxes in Britain, another invasion of Canada, and attacks on the British merchant fleet. In mid-1862, fears of a race war (like the Haitian Revolution of 1791–1804) led to the British considering intervention for humanitarian reasons.

John Slidell, the Confederate States emissary to France, succeeded in negotiating a loan of $15,000,000 from Erlanger and other French capitalists for ironclad warships and military supplies. The British government did allow the construction of blockade runners in Britain; they were owned and operated by British financiers and shipowners; a few were owned and operated by the Confederacy. The British investors&#x27; goal was to acquire highly profitable cotton.

Several European nations maintained diplomats in place who had been appointed to the U.S., but no country appointed any diplomat to the Confederacy. Those nations recognized the Union and Confederate sides as belligerents. In 1863, the Confederacy expelled European diplomatic missions for advising their resident subjects to refuse to serve in the Confederate army. Both Confederate and Union agents were allowed to work openly in British territories. The Confederacy appointed Ambrose Dudley Mann as special agent to the Holy See in September 1863, but the Holy See never released a statement supporting or recognizing the Confederacy. In November 1863, Mann met Pope Pius IX and received a letter supposedly addressed &quot;to the Illustrious and Honorable Jefferson Davis, President of the Confederate States of America&quot;; Mann had mistranslated the address. In his report to Richmond, Mann claimed a great diplomatic achievement for himself, but Confederate Secretary of State Judah P. Benjamin told Mann it was &quot;a mere inferential recognition, unconnected with political action or the regular establishment of diplomatic relations&quot; and thus did not assign it the weight of formal recognition.

Nevertheless, the Confederacy was seen internationally as a serious attempt at nationhood, and European governments sent military observers to assess whether there had been a &quot;de facto&quot; establishment of independence. These observers included Arthur Lyon Fremantle of the British Coldstream Guards, who entered the Confederacy via Mexico, Fitzgerald Ross of the Austrian Hussars, and Justus Scheibert of the Prussian Army. European travelers visited and wrote accounts for publication. Importantly in 1862, the Frenchman Charles Girard&#x27;s &quot;Seven months in the rebel states during the North American War&quot; testified &quot;this government ... is no longer a trial government ... but really a normal government, the expression of popular will&quot;. Fremantle went on to write in his book &quot;Three Months in the Southern States&quot; that he had:

French Emperor Napoleon III assured Confederate diplomat John Slidell that he would make &quot;direct proposition&quot; to Britain for joint recognition. The Emperor made the same assurance to British Members of Parliament John A. Roebuck and John A. Lindsay. Roebuck in turn publicly prepared a bill to submit to Parliament supporting joint Anglo-French recognition of the Confederacy. &quot;Southerners had a right to be optimistic, or at least hopeful, that their revolution would prevail, or at least endure.&quot; Following the disasters at Vicksburg and Gettysburg in July 1863, the Confederates &quot;suffered a severe loss of confidence in themselves&quot; and withdrew into an interior defensive position. By December 1864, Davis considered sacrificing slavery in order to enlist recognition and aid from Paris and London; he secretly sent Duncan F. Kenner to Europe with a message that the war was fought solely for &quot;the vindication of our rights to self-government and independence&quot; and that &quot;no sacrifice is too great, save that of honor&quot;. The message stated that if the French or British governments made their recognition conditional on anything at all, the Confederacy would consent to such terms. European leaders all saw that the Confederacy was on the verge of defeat.

The Confederacy&#x27;s biggest foreign policy successes were with Brazil and Cuba. Militarily this meant little. Brazil represented the &quot;peoples most identical to us in Institutions&quot;, in which slavery remained legal until the 1880s and the abolitionist movement was small. Confederate ships were welcome in Brazilian ports. After the war, Brazil was the primary destination of those Southerners who wanted to continue living in a slave society, where, as one immigrant remarked, &quot;Confederado&quot; slaves were cheap. The Captain–General of Cuba declared in writing that Confederate ships were welcome, and would be protected in Cuban ports. Historians speculate that if the Confederacy had achieved independence, it probably would have tried to acquire Cuba as a base of expansion.

==At war==

===Motivations of soldiers===
Most soldiers who joined Confederate national or state military units joined voluntarily. Perman (2010) says historians are of two minds on why millions of soldiers seemed so eager to fight, suffer and die over four years:

===Military strategy===
Civil War historian E. Merton Coulter wrote that for those who would secure its independence, &quot;The Confederacy was unfortunate in its failure to work out a general strategy for the whole war&quot;. Aggressive strategy called for offensive force concentration. Defensive strategy sought dispersal to meet demands of locally minded governors. The controlling philosophy evolved into a combination &quot;dispersal with a defensive concentration around Richmond&quot;. The Davis administration considered the war purely defensive, a &quot;simple demand that the people of the United States would cease to war upon us&quot;. Historian James M. McPherson is a critic of Lee&#x27;s offensive strategy: &quot;Lee pursued a faulty military strategy that ensured Confederate defeat&quot;.

As the Confederate government lost control of territory in campaign after campaign, it was said that &quot;the vast size of the Confederacy would make its conquest impossible&quot;. The enemy would be struck down by the same elements which so often debilitated or destroyed visitors and transplants in the South. Heat exhaustion, sunstroke, endemic diseases such as malaria and typhoid would match the destructive effectiveness of the Moscow winter on the invading armies of Napoleon.

Early in the war, both sides believed that one great battle would decide the conflict; the Confederates won a surprise victory at the First Battle of Bull Run, also known as First Manassas (the name used by Confederate forces). It drove the Confederate people &quot;insane with joy&quot;; the public demanded a forward movement to capture Washington, relocate the Confederate capital there, and admit Maryland to the Confederacy. A council of war by the victorious Confederate generals decided not to advance against larger numbers of fresh Federal troops in defensive positions. Davis did not countermand it. Following the Confederate incursion into Maryland halted at the Battle of Antietam in October 1862, generals proposed concentrating forces from state commands to re-invade the north. Nothing came of it. Again in mid-1863 at his incursion into Pennsylvania, Lee requested of Davis that Beauregard simultaneously attack Washington with troops taken from the Carolinas. But the troops there remained in place during the Gettysburg Campaign.

The eleven states of the Confederacy were outnumbered by the North about four-to-one in military manpower. It was overmatched far more in military equipment, industrial facilities, railroads for transport, and wagons supplying the front.

Confederates slowed the Yankee invaders, at heavy cost to the Southern infrastructure. The Confederates burned bridges, laid land mines in the roads, and made harbors inlets and inland waterways unusable with sunken mines (called &quot;torpedoes&quot; at the time). Coulter reports:

The Confederacy relied on external sources for war materials. The first came from trade with the enemy. &quot;Vast amounts of war supplies&quot; came through Kentucky, and thereafter, western armies were &quot;to a very considerable extent&quot; provisioned with illicit trade via Federal agents and northern private traders. But that trade was interrupted in the first year of war by Admiral Porter&#x27;s river gunboats as they gained dominance along navigable rivers north–south and east–west. Overseas blockade running then came to be of &quot;outstanding importance&quot;. On April 17, President Davis called on privateer raiders, the &quot;militia of the sea&quot;, to wage war on U.S. seaborne commerce. Despite noteworthy effort, over the course of the war the Confederacy was found unable to match the Union in ships and seamanship, materials and marine construction.

An inescapable obstacle to success in the warfare of mass armies was the Confederacy&#x27;s lack of manpower, and sufficient numbers of disciplined, equipped troops in the field at the point of contact with the enemy. During the winter of 1862–63, Lee observed that none of his famous victories had resulted in the destruction of the opposing army. He lacked reserve troops to exploit an advantage on the battlefield as Napoleon had done. Lee explained, &quot;More than once have most promising opportunities been lost for want of men to take advantage of them, and victory itself had been made to put on the appearance of defeat, because our diminished and exhausted troops have been unable to renew a successful struggle against fresh numbers of the enemy.&quot;

===Armed forces===

The military armed forces of the Confederacy comprised three branches: Army, Navy and Marine Corps.

On February 28, 1861, the Provisional Confederate Congress established a provisional volunteer army and gave control over military operations and authority for mustering state forces and volunteers to the newly chosen Confederate president, Jefferson Davis. On March 1, 1861, on behalf of the Confederate government, Davis assumed control of the military situation at Charleston, South Carolina, where South Carolina state militia besieged Fort Sumter in Charleston harbor, held by a small U.S. Army garrison. By March 1861, the Provisional Confederate Congress expanded the provisional forces and established a more permanent Confederate States Army.

The total population of the Confederate Army is unknowable due to incomplete and destroyed Confederate records but estimates are between 750,000 and 1,000,000 troops. This does not include an unknown number of slaves pressed into army tasks, such as the construction of fortifications and defenses or driving wagons. Confederate casualty figures also are incomplete and unreliable, estimated at 94,000 killed or mortally wounded, 164,000 deaths from disease, and between 26,000 and 31,000 deaths in Union prison camps. One incomplete estimate is 194,026.

The Confederate military leadership included many veterans from the United States Army and United States Navy who had resigned their Federal commissions and were appointed to senior positions. Many had served in the Mexican–American War (including Robert E. Lee and Jefferson Davis), but some such as Leonidas Polk (who graduated from West Point but did not serve in the Army) had little or no experience.

The Confederate officer corps consisted of men from both slave-owning and non-slave-owning families. The Confederacy appointed junior and field grade officers by election from the enlisted ranks. Although no Army service academy was established for the Confederacy, some colleges (such as The Citadel and Virginia Military Institute) maintained cadet corps that trained Confederate military leadership. A naval academy was established at Drewry&#x27;s Bluff, Virginia in 1863, but no midshipmen graduated before the Confederacy&#x27;s end.

Most soldiers were white males aged between 16 and 28. The median year of birth was 1838, so half the soldiers were 23 or older by 1861. The Confederate Army was permitted to disband for two months in early 1862 after its short-term enlistments expired. The majority of those in uniform would not re-enlist after their one-year commitment, thus on April 16, 1862, the Confederate Congress imposed the first mass conscription on North American territory. (A year later, on March 3, 1863, the United States Congress passed the Enrollment Act.) Rather than a universal draft, the first program was a selective one with physical, religious, professional, and industrial exemptions. These became narrower as the battle progressed. Initially substitutes were permitted, but by December 1863 these were disallowed. In September 1862 the age limit was increased from 35 to 45 and by February 1864, all men under 18 and over 45 were conscripted to form a reserve for state defense inside state borders. By March 1864, the Superintendent of Conscription reported that all across the Confederacy, every officer in constituted authority, man and woman, &quot;engaged in opposing the enrolling officer in the execution of his duties&quot;. Although challenged in the state courts, the Confederate State Supreme Courts routinely rejected legal challenges to conscription.

Many thousands of slaves served as personal servants to their owner, or were hired as laborers, cooks, and pioneers. Some freed blacks and men of color served in local state militia units of the Confederacy, primarily in Louisiana and South Carolina, but their officers deployed them for &quot;local defense, not combat&quot;. Depleted by casualties and desertions, the military suffered chronic manpower shortages. In early 1865, the Confederate Congress, influenced by the public support by General Lee, approved the recruitment of black infantry units. Contrary to Lee&#x27;s and Davis&#x27;s recommendations, the Congress refused &quot;to guarantee the freedom of black volunteers&quot;. No more than two hundred black combat troops were ever raised.

====Raising troops====
The immediate onset of war meant that it was fought by the &quot;Provisional&quot; or &quot;Volunteer Army&quot;. State governors resisted concentrating a national effort. Several wanted a strong state army for self-defense. Others feared large &quot;Provisional&quot; armies answering only to Davis. When filling the Confederate government&#x27;s call for 100,000 men, another 200,000 were turned away by accepting only those enlisted &quot;for the duration&quot; or twelve-month volunteers who brought their own arms or horses.

It was important to raise troops; it was just as important to provide capable officers to command them. With few exceptions the Confederacy secured excellent general officers. Efficiency in the lower officers was &quot;greater than could have been reasonably expected&quot;. As with the Federals, political appointees could be indifferent. Otherwise, the officer corps was governor-appointed or elected by unit enlisted. Promotion to fill vacancies was made internally regardless of merit, even if better officers were immediately available.

Anticipating the need for more &quot;duration&quot; men, in January 1862 Congress provided for company level recruiters to return home for two months, but their efforts met little success on the heels of Confederate battlefield defeats in February. Congress allowed for Davis to require numbers of recruits from each governor to supply the volunteer shortfall. States responded by passing their own draft laws.

The veteran Confederate army of early 1862 was mostly twelve-month volunteers with terms about to expire. Enlisted reorganization elections disintegrated the army for two months. Officers pleaded with the ranks to re-enlist, but a majority did not. Those remaining elected majors and colonels whose performance led to officer review boards in October. The boards caused a &quot;rapid and widespread&quot; thinning out of 1,700 incompetent officers. Troops thereafter would elect only second lieutenants.

In early 1862, the popular press suggested the Confederacy required a million men under arms. But veteran soldiers were not re-enlisting, and earlier secessionist volunteers did not reappear to serve in war. One Macon, Georgia, newspaper asked how two million brave fighting men of the South were about to be overcome by four million northerners who were said to be cowards.

====Conscription====

The Confederacy passed the first American law of national conscription on April 16, 1862. The white males of the Confederate States from 18 to 35 were declared members of the Confederate army for three years, and all men then enlisted were extended to a three-year term. They would serve only in units and under officers of their state. Those under 18 and over 35 could substitute for conscripts, in September those from 35 to 45 became conscripts. The cry of &quot;rich man&#x27;s war and a poor man&#x27;s fight&quot; led Congress to abolish the substitute system altogether in December 1863. All principals benefiting earlier were made eligible for service. By February 1864, the age bracket was made 17 to 50, those under eighteen and over forty-five to be limited to in-state duty.

Confederate conscription was not universal; it was a selective service. The First Conscription Act of April 1862 exempted occupations related to transportation, communication, industry, ministers, teaching and physical fitness. The Second Conscription Act of October 1862 expanded exemptions in industry, agriculture and conscientious objection. Exemption fraud proliferated in medical examinations, army furloughs, churches, schools, apothecaries and newspapers.

Rich men&#x27;s sons were appointed to the socially outcast &quot;overseer&quot; occupation, but the measure was received in the country with &quot;universal odium&quot;. The legislative vehicle was the controversial Twenty Negro Law that specifically exempted one white overseer or owner for every plantation with at least 20 slaves. Backpedaling six months later, Congress provided overseers under 45 could be exempted only if they held the occupation before the first Conscription Act. The number of officials under state exemptions appointed by state Governor patronage expanded significantly.

The Conscription Act of February 1864 &quot;radically changed the whole system&quot; of selection. It abolished industrial exemptions, placing detail authority in President Davis. As the shame of conscription was greater than a felony conviction, the system brought in &quot;about as many volunteers as it did conscripts.&quot; Many men in otherwise &quot;bombproof&quot; positions were enlisted in one way or another, nearly 160,000 additional volunteers and conscripts in uniform. Still there was shirking. To administer the draft, a Bureau of Conscription was set up to use state officers, as state Governors would allow. It had a checkered career of &quot;contention, opposition and futility&quot;. Armies appointed alternative military &quot;recruiters&quot; to bring in the out-of-uniform 17–50-year-old conscripts and deserters. Nearly 3,000 officers were tasked with the job. By late 1864, Lee was calling for more troops. &quot;Our ranks are constantly diminishing by battle and disease, and few recruits are received; the consequences are inevitable.&quot; By March 1865 conscription was to be administered by generals of the state reserves calling out men over 45 and under 18 years old. All exemptions were abolished. These regiments were assigned to recruit conscripts ages 17–50, recover deserters, and repel enemy cavalry raids. The service retained men who had lost but one arm or a leg in home guards. Ultimately, conscription was a failure, and its main value was in goading men to volunteer.

The survival of the Confederacy depended on a strong base of civilians and soldiers devoted to victory. The soldiers performed well, though increasing numbers deserted in the last year of fighting, and the Confederacy never succeeded in replacing casualties as the Union could. The civilians, although enthusiastic in 1861–62, seem to have lost faith in the future of the Confederacy by 1864, and instead looked to protect their homes and communities. As Rable explains, &quot;This contraction of civic vision was more than a crabbed libertarianism; it represented an increasingly widespread disillusionment with the Confederate experiment.&quot;

===Victories: 1861===
The American Civil War broke out in April 1861 with a Confederate victory at the Battle of Fort Sumter in Charleston.

In January, President James Buchanan had attempted to resupply the garrison with the steamship, &quot;Star of the West&quot;, but Confederate artillery drove it away. In March, President Lincoln notified South Carolina Governor Pickens that without Confederate resistance to the resupply there would be no military reinforcement without further notice, but Lincoln prepared to force resupply if it were not allowed. Confederate President Davis, in cabinet, decided to seize Fort Sumter before the relief fleet arrived, and on April 12, 1861, General Beauregard forced its surrender.

Following Sumter, Lincoln directed states to provide 75,000 troops for three months to recapture the Charleston Harbor forts and all other federal property. This emboldened secessionists in Virginia, Arkansas, Tennessee and North Carolina to secede rather than provide troops to march into neighboring Southern states. In May, Federal troops crossed into Confederate territory along the entire border from the Chesapeake Bay to New Mexico. The first battles were Confederate victories at Big Bethel (Bethel Church, Virginia), First Bull Run (First Manassas) in Virginia July and in August, Wilson&#x27;s Creek (Oak Hills) in Missouri. At all three, Confederate forces could not follow up their victory due to inadequate supply and shortages of fresh troops to exploit their successes. Following each battle, Federals maintained a military presence and occupied Washington, DC; Fort Monroe, Virginia; and Springfield, Missouri. Both North and South began training up armies for major fighting the next year. Union General George B. McClellan&#x27;s forces gained possession of much of northwestern Virginia in mid-1861, concentrating on towns and roads; the interior was too large to control and became the center of guerrilla activity. General Robert E. Lee was defeated at Cheat Mountain in September and no serious Confederate advance in western Virginia occurred until the next year.

Meanwhile, the Union Navy seized control of much of the Confederate coastline from Virginia to South Carolina. It took over plantations and the abandoned slaves. Federals there began a war-long policy of burning grain supplies up rivers into the interior wherever they could not occupy. The Union Navy began a blockade of the major southern ports and prepared an invasion of Louisiana to capture New Orleans in early 1862.

===Incursions: 1862===
The victories of 1861 were followed by a series of defeats east and west in early 1862. To restore the Union by military force, the Federal strategy was to (1) secure the Mississippi River, (2) seize or close Confederate ports, and (3) march on Richmond. To secure independence, the Confederate intent was to (1) repel the invader on all fronts, costing him blood and treasure, and (2) carry the war into the North by two offensives in time to affect the mid-term elections.

Much of northwestern Virginia was under Federal control. In February and March, most of Missouri and Kentucky were Union &quot;occupied, consolidated, and used as staging areas for advances further South&quot;. Following the repulse of a Confederate counterattack at the Battle of Shiloh, Tennessee, permanent Federal occupation expanded west, south and east. Confederate forces repositioned south along the Mississippi River to Memphis, Tennessee, where at the naval Battle of Memphis, its River Defense Fleet was sunk. Confederates withdrew from northern Mississippi and northern Alabama. New Orleans was captured on April 29 by a combined Army-Navy force under U.S. Admiral David Farragut, and the Confederacy lost control of the mouth of the Mississippi River. It had to concede extensive agricultural resources that had supported the Union&#x27;s sea-supplied logistics base.

Although Confederates had suffered major reverses everywhere, as of the end of April the Confederacy still controlled territory holding 72% of its population. Federal forces disrupted Missouri and Arkansas; they had broken through in western Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee and Louisiana. Along the Confederacy&#x27;s shores, Union forces had closed ports and made garrisoned lodgments on every coastal Confederate state except Alabama and Texas. Although scholars sometimes assess the Union blockade as ineffectual under international law until the last few months of the war, from the first months it disrupted Confederate privateers, making it &quot;almost impossible to bring their prizes into Confederate ports&quot;. British firms developed small fleets of blockade running companies, such as John Fraser and Company and S. Isaac, Campbell &amp; Company while the Ordnance Department secured its own blockade runners for dedicated munitions cargoes.

During the Civil War fleets of armored warships were deployed for the first time in sustained blockades at sea. After some success against the Union blockade, in March the ironclad CSS &quot;Virginia&quot; was forced into port and burned by Confederates at their retreat. Despite several attempts mounted from their port cities, CSA naval forces were unable to break the Union blockade. Attempts were made by Commodore Josiah Tattnall III&#x27;s ironclads from Savannah in 1862 with the CSS &quot;Atlanta&quot;. Secretary of the Navy Stephen Mallory placed his hopes in a European-built ironclad fleet, but they were never realized. On the other hand, four new English-built commerce raiders served the Confederacy, and several fast blockade runners were sold in Confederate ports. They were converted into commerce-raiding cruisers, and manned by their British crews.

In the east, Union forces could not close on Richmond. General McClellan landed his army on the Lower Peninsula of Virginia. Lee subsequently ended that threat from the east, then Union General John Pope attacked overland from the north only to be repulsed at Second Bull Run (Second Manassas). Lee&#x27;s strike north was turned back at Antietam MD, then Union Major General Ambrose Burnside&#x27;s offensive was disastrously ended at Fredericksburg VA in December. Both armies then turned to winter quarters to recruit and train for the coming spring.

In an attempt to seize the initiative, reprove, protect farms in mid-growing season and influence U.S. Congressional elections, two major Confederate incursions into Union territory had been launched in August and September 1862. Both Braxton Bragg&#x27;s invasion of Kentucky and Lee&#x27;s invasion of Maryland were decisively repulsed, leaving Confederates in control of but 63% of its population. Civil War scholar Allan Nevins argues that 1862 was the strategic high-water mark of the Confederacy. The failures of the two invasions were attributed to the same irrecoverable shortcomings: lack of manpower at the front, lack of supplies including serviceable shoes, and exhaustion after long marches without adequate food. Also in September Confederate General William W. Loring pushed Federal forces from Charleston, Virginia, and the Kanawha Valley in western Virginia, but lacking reinforcements Loring abandoned his position and by November the region was back in Federal control.

===Anaconda: 1863–1864===
The failed Middle Tennessee campaign was ended January 2, 1863, at the inconclusive Battle of Stones River (Murfreesboro), both sides losing the largest percentage of casualties suffered during the war. It was followed by another strategic withdrawal by Confederate forces. The Confederacy won a significant victory April 1863, repulsing the Federal advance on Richmond at Chancellorsville, but the Union consolidated positions along the Virginia coast and the Chesapeake Bay.

Without an effective answer to Federal gunboats, river transport and supply, the Confederacy lost the Mississippi River following the capture of Vicksburg, Mississippi, and Port Hudson in July, ending Southern access to the trans-Mississippi West. July brought short-lived counters, Morgan&#x27;s Raid into Ohio and the New York City draft riots. Robert E. Lee&#x27;s strike into Pennsylvania was repulsed at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania despite Pickett&#x27;s famous charge and other acts of valor. Southern newspapers assessed the campaign as &quot;The Confederates did not gain a victory, neither did the enemy.&quot;

September and November left Confederates yielding Chattanooga, Tennessee, the gateway to the lower south. For the remainder of the war fighting was restricted inside the South, resulting in a slow but continuous loss of territory. In early 1864, the Confederacy still controlled 53% of its population, but it withdrew further to reestablish defensive positions. Union offensives continued with Sherman&#x27;s March to the Sea to take Savannah and Grant&#x27;s Wilderness Campaign to encircle Richmond and besiege Lee&#x27;s army at Petersburg.

In April 1863, the C.S. Congress authorized a uniformed Volunteer Navy, many of whom were British. The Confederacy had altogether eighteen commerce-destroying cruisers, which seriously disrupted Federal commerce at sea and increased shipping insurance rates 900%. Commodore Tattnall again unsuccessfully attempted to break the Union blockade on the Savannah River in Georgia with an ironclad in 1863. Beginning in April 1864 the ironclad CSS &quot;Albemarle&quot; engaged Union gunboats for six months on the Roanoke River in North Carolina. The Federals closed Mobile Bay by sea-based amphibious assault in August, ending Gulf coast trade east of the Mississippi River. In December, the Battle of Nashville ended Confederate operations in the western theater.

Large numbers of families relocated to safer places, usually remote rural areas, bringing along household slaves if they had any. Mary Massey argues these elite exiles introduced an element of defeatism into the southern outlook.

===Collapse: 1865===
The first three months of 1865 saw the Federal Carolinas Campaign, devastating a wide swath of the remaining Confederate heartland. The &quot;breadbasket of the Confederacy&quot; in the Great Valley of Virginia was occupied by Philip Sheridan. The Union Blockade captured Fort Fisher in North Carolina, and Sherman finally took Charleston, South Carolina, by land attack.

The Confederacy controlled no ports, harbors or navigable rivers. Railroads were captured or had ceased operating. Its major food-producing regions had been war-ravaged or occupied. Its administration survived in only three pockets of territory holding only one-third of its population. Its armies were defeated or disbanding. At the February 1865 Hampton Roads Conference with Lincoln, senior Confederate officials rejected his invitation to restore the Union with compensation for emancipated slaves. The three pockets of unoccupied Confederacy were southern Virginia—North Carolina, central Alabama—Florida, and Texas, the latter two areas less from any notion of resistance than from the disinterest of Federal forces to occupy them. The Davis policy was independence or nothing, while Lee&#x27;s army was wracked by disease and desertion, barely holding the trenches defending Jefferson Davis&#x27; capital.

The Confederacy&#x27;s last remaining blockade-running port, Wilmington, North Carolina, was lost. When the Union broke through Lee&#x27;s lines at Petersburg, Richmond fell immediately. Lee surrendered a remnant of 50,000 from the Army of Northern Virginia at Appomattox Court House, Virginia, on April 9, 1865. &quot;The Surrender&quot; marked the end of the Confederacy. The CSS &quot;Stonewall&quot; sailed from Europe to break the Union blockade in March; on making Havana, Cuba, it surrendered. Some high officials escaped to Europe, but President Davis was captured May 10; all remaining Confederate land forces surrendered by June 1865. The U.S. Army took control of the Confederate areas without post-surrender insurgency or guerrilla warfare against them, but peace was subsequently marred by a great deal of local violence, feuding and revenge killings. The last confederate military unit, the commerce raider CSS &quot;Shenandoah&quot;, surrendered on November 6, 1865, in Liverpool.

Historian Gary Gallagher concluded that the Confederacy capitulated in early 1865 because northern armies crushed &quot;organized southern military resistance&quot;. The Confederacy&#x27;s population, soldier and civilian, had suffered material hardship and social disruption. Jefferson Davis&#x27; assessment in 1890 determined, &quot;With the capture of the capital, the dispersion of the civil authorities, the surrender of the armies in the field, and the arrest of the President, the Confederate States of America disappeared ... their history henceforth became a part of the history of the United States.&quot;

==Government and politics==

===Political divisions===

===Constitution===

In February, 1861, Southern leaders met in Montgomery, Alabama to adopt their first constitution, establishing a confederation of &quot;sovereign and independent states&quot;, guaranteeing states the right to a republican form of government. Prior to adopting to the first Confederate constitution, the independent states were sovereign republics.

A second Confederate constitution was written in March, 1861, which sought to replace the confederation with a federal government; much of this constitution replicated the United States Constitution verbatim, but contained several explicit protections of the institution of slavery including provisions for the recognition and protection of slavery in any territory of the Confederacy. It maintained the ban on international slave-trading, though it made the ban&#x27;s application explicit to &quot;Negroes of the African race&quot; in contrast to the U.S. Constitution&#x27;s reference to &quot;such Persons as any of the States now existing shall think proper to admit&quot;. It protected the existing internal trade of slaves among slaveholding states.

In certain areas, the second Confederate Constitution gave greater powers to the states (or curtailed the powers of the central government more) than the U.S. Constitution of the time did, but in other areas, the states lost rights they had under the U.S. Constitution. Although the Confederate Constitution, like the U.S. Constitution, contained a commerce clause, the Confederate version prohibited the central government from using revenues collected in one state for funding internal improvements in another state. The Confederate Constitution&#x27;s equivalent to the U.S. Constitution&#x27;s general welfare clause prohibited protective tariffs (but allowed tariffs for providing domestic revenue). State legislatures had the power to impeach officials of the Confederate government in some cases. On the other hand, the Confederate Constitution contained a Necessary and Proper Clause and a Supremacy Clause that essentially duplicated the respective clauses of the U.S. Constitution. The Confederate Constitution also incorporated each of the 12 amendments to the U.S. Constitution that had been ratified up to that point.

The second Confederate Constitution was adopted on February 22, 1862, one year into the American Civil War, and did not specifically include a provision allowing states to secede; the Preamble spoke of each state &quot;acting in its sovereign and independent character&quot; but also of the formation of a &quot;permanent federal government&quot;. During the debates on drafting the Confederate Constitution, one proposal would have allowed states to secede from the Confederacy. The proposal was tabled with only the South Carolina delegates voting in favor of considering the motion. The Confederate Constitution also explicitly denied States the power to bar slaveholders from other parts of the Confederacy from bringing their slaves into any state of the Confederacy or to interfere with the property rights of slave owners traveling between different parts of the Confederacy. In contrast with the secular language of the United States Constitution, the Confederate Constitution overtly asked God&#x27;s blessing (&quot;... invoking the favor and guidance of Almighty God ...&quot;).

Some historians have referred to the Confederacy as a form of Herrenvolk democracy.

====Executive====
The Montgomery Convention to establish the Confederacy and its executive met on February 4, 1861. Each state as a sovereignty had one vote, with the same delegation size as it held in the U.S. Congress, and generally 41 to 50 members attended. Offices were &quot;provisional&quot;, limited to a term not to exceed one year. One name was placed in nomination for president, one for vice president. Both were elected unanimously, 6–0.

Jefferson Davis was elected provisional president. His U.S. Senate resignation speech greatly impressed with its clear rationale for secession and his pleading for a peaceful departure from the Union to independence. Although he had made it known that he wanted to be commander-in-chief of the Confederate armies, when elected, he assumed the office of Provisional President. Three candidates for provisional Vice President were under consideration the night before the February 9 election. All were from Georgia, and the various delegations meeting in different places determined two would not do, so Alexander H. Stephens was elected unanimously provisional Vice President, though with some privately held reservations. Stephens was inaugurated February 11, Davis February 18.

Davis and Stephens were elected president and vice president, unopposed on November 6, 1861. They were inaugurated on February 22, 1862.

Coulter stated, &quot;No president of the U.S. ever had a more difficult task.&quot; Washington was inaugurated in peacetime. Lincoln inherited an established government of long standing. The creation of the Confederacy was accomplished by men who saw themselves as fundamentally conservative. Although they referred to their &quot;Revolution&quot;, it was in their eyes more a counter-revolution against changes away from their understanding of U.S. founding documents. In Davis&#x27; inauguration speech, he explained the Confederacy was not a French-like revolution, but a transfer of rule. The Montgomery Convention had assumed all the laws of the United States until superseded by the Confederate Congress.

The Permanent Constitution provided for a President of the Confederate States of America, elected to serve a six-year term but without the possibility of re-election. Unlike the United States Constitution, the Confederate Constitution gave the president the ability to subject a bill to a line item veto, a power also held by some state governors.

The Confederate Congress could overturn either the general or the line item vetoes with the same two-thirds votes required in the U.S. Congress. In addition, appropriations not specifically requested by the executive branch required passage by a two-thirds vote in both houses of Congress. The only person to serve as president was Jefferson Davis, as the Confederacy was defeated before the completion of his term.
=====Administration and cabinet=====

====Legislative====

The only two &quot;formal, national, functioning, civilian administrative bodies&quot; in the Civil War South were the Jefferson Davis administration and the Confederate Congresses. The Confederacy was begun by the Provisional Congress in Convention at Montgomery, Alabama on February 28, 1861. The Provisional Confederate Congress was a unicameral assembly; each state received one vote.

The Permanent Confederate Congress was elected and began its first session February 18, 1862. The Permanent Congress for the Confederacy followed the United States forms with a bicameral legislature. The Senate had two per state, twenty-six Senators. The House numbered 106 representatives apportioned by free and slave populations within each state. Two Congresses sat in six sessions until March 18, 1865.

The political influences of the civilian, soldier vote and appointed representatives reflected divisions of political geography of a diverse South. These in turn changed over time relative to Union occupation and disruption, the war impact on the local economy, and the course of the war. Without political parties, key candidate identification related to adopting secession before or after Lincoln&#x27;s call for volunteers to retake Federal property. Previous party affiliation played a part in voter selection, predominantly secessionist Democrat or unionist Whig.

The absence of political parties made individual roll call voting all the more important, as the Confederate &quot;freedom of roll-call voting [was] unprecedented in American legislative history.&quot; Key issues throughout the life of the Confederacy related to (1) suspension of habeas corpus, (2) military concerns such as control of state militia, conscription and exemption, (3) economic and fiscal policy including impressment of slaves, goods and scorched earth, and (4) support of the Jefferson Davis administration in its foreign affairs and negotiating peace.

;Provisional Congress
For the first year, the unicameral Provisional Confederate Congress functioned as the Confederacy&#x27;s legislative branch.

;President of the Provisional Congress
* Howell Cobb, Sr. of Georgia, February 4, 1861 – February 17, 1862

;Presidents pro tempore of the Provisional Congress
* Robert Woodward Barnwell of South Carolina, February 4, 1861
* Thomas Stanhope Bocock of Virginia, December 10–21, 1861 and January 7–8, 1862
* Josiah Abigail Patterson Campbell of Mississippi, December 23–24, 1861 and January 6, 1862

;Sessions of the Confederate Congress
* Provisional Congress
* 1st Congress
* 2nd Congress

;Tribal Representatives to Confederate Congress
* Elias Cornelius Boudinot 1862–65, Cherokee
* Samuel Benton Callahan Unknown years, Creek, Seminole
* Burton Allen Holder 1864–65, Chickasaw
* Robert McDonald Jones 1863–65, Choctaw
====Judicial====
The Confederate Constitution outlined a judicial branch of the government, but the ongoing war and resistance from states-rights advocates, particularly on the question of whether it would have appellate jurisdiction over the state courts, prevented the creation or seating of the &quot;Supreme Court of the Confederate States&quot;. Thus, the state courts generally continued to operate as they had done, simply recognizing the Confederate States as the national government.

Confederate district courts were authorized by Article III, Section 1, of the Confederate Constitution, and President Davis appointed judges within the individual states of the Confederate States of America. In many cases, the same US Federal District Judges were appointed as Confederate States District Judges. Confederate district courts began reopening in early 1861, handling many of the same type cases as had been done before. Prize cases, in which Union ships were captured by the Confederate Navy or raiders and sold through court proceedings, were heard until the blockade of southern ports made this impossible. After a Sequestration Act was passed by the Confederate Congress, the Confederate district courts heard many cases in which enemy aliens (typically Northern absentee landlords owning property in the South) had their property sequestered (seized) by Confederate Receivers.

Supreme Court – not established.

District Courts – judges
* Alabama William Giles Jones 1861–1865
* Arkansas Daniel Ringo 1861–1865
* Florida Jesse J. Finley 1861–1862
* Georgia Henry R. Jackson 1861, Edward J. Harden 1861–1865
* Louisiana Edwin Warren Moise 1861–1865
* Mississippi Alexander Mosby Clayton 1861–1865
* North Carolina Asa Biggs 1861–1865

* South Carolina Andrew G. Magrath 1861–1864, Benjamin F. Perry 1865
* Tennessee West H. Humphreys 1861–1865
* Texas-East William Pinckney Hill 1861–1865
* Texas-West Thomas J. Devine 1861–1865
* Virginia-East James D. Halyburton 1861–1865
* Virginia-West John W. Brockenbrough 1861–1865
===Post office===


The Confederacy established the Confederate Post Office for mail delivery. One of the first undertakings in establishing the office was the appointment of John H. Reagan as Postmaster General, by Jefferson Davis in 1861. Writing in 1906, historian Walter Flavius McCaleb praised Reagan&#x27;s &quot;energy and intelligence... in a degree scarcely matched by any of his associates&quot;.

When the war began, the US Post Office briefly delivered mail from the secessionist states. Mail that was postmarked after the date of a state&#x27;s admission into the Confederacy through May 31, 1861, and bearing US postage was still delivered. After this time, private express companies still managed to carry some of the mail across enemy lines. Later, mail that crossed lines had to be sent by &#x27;Flag of Truce&#x27; and was allowed to pass at only two specific points. Mail sent from the Confederacy to the U.S. was received, opened and inspected at Fortress Monroe on the Virginia coast before being passed on into the U.S. mail stream. Mail sent from the North to the South passed at City Point, also in Virginia, where it was also inspected before being sent on.

With the chaos of the war, a working postal system was more important than ever for the Confederacy. The Civil War had divided family members and friends and consequently letter writing increased dramatically across the entire divided nation, especially to and from the men who were away serving in an army. Mail delivery was also important for the Confederacy for a myriad of business and military reasons. Because of the Union blockade, basic supplies were always in demand and so getting mailed correspondence out of the country to suppliers was imperative to the successful operation of the Confederacy. Volumes of material have been written about the Blockade runners who evaded Union ships on blockade patrol, usually at night, and who moved cargo and mail in and out of the Confederate States throughout the course of the war. Of particular interest to students and historians of the American Civil War is &quot;Prisoner of War mail&quot; and &quot;Blockade mail&quot; as these items were often involved with a variety of military and other war time activities. The postal history of the Confederacy along with surviving Confederate mail has helped historians document the various people, places and events that were involved in the American Civil War as it unfolded.
===Civil liberties===
The Confederacy actively used the army to arrest people suspected of loyalty to the United States. Historian Mark Neely found 4,108 names of men arrested and estimated a much larger total. The Confederacy arrested pro-Union civilians in the South at about the same rate as the Union arrested pro-Confederate civilians in the North. Neely argues:

==Economy==
===Slaves===
Across the South, widespread rumors predicted the slaves were planning insurrection, causing panic. Patrols were stepped up. The slaves did become increasingly independent and resistant to punishment, but historians agree there were no insurrections. Many slaves became spies for the North, and large numbers ran away to federal lines.

According to the 1860 United States census, about 31% of free households in the eleven states that would join the Confederacy owned slaves. The 11 states that seceded had the highest percentage of slaves as a proportion of their population, representing 39% of their total population. The proportions ranged from a majority in South Carolina (57.2%) and Mississippi (55.2%) to about a quarter in Tennessee (24.8%).

Lincoln&#x27;s Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 1863, legally freed three million slaves in designated areas of the Confederacy. The long-term effect was that the Confederacy could not preserve the institution of slavery and lost the use of the core element of its plantation labor force. Over 200,000 freed slaves were hired by the federal army as teamsters, cooks, launderers and laborers, and eventually as soldiers. Plantation owners, realizing that emancipation would destroy their economic system, sometimes moved their slaves as far as possible out of reach of the Union army.

Though the concept was promoted within certain circles of the Union hierarchy during and immediately following the war, no program of reparations for freed slaves was ever attempted. Unlike other Western countries, such as Britain and France, the U.S. government never paid compensation to Southern slave owners for their &quot;lost property&quot;. The only place compensated emancipation was carried out was the District of Columbia.

===Political economy===
The plantations of the South, with white ownership and an enslaved labor force, produced substantial wealth from cash crops. It supplied two-thirds of the world&#x27;s cotton, which was in high demand for textiles, along with tobacco, sugar, and naval stores (such as turpentine). These raw materials were exported to factories in Europe and the Northeast. Planters reinvested their profits in more slaves and fresh land, as cotton and tobacco depleted the soil. There was little manufacturing or mining; shipping was controlled by non-southerners.

The plantations that enslaved over three million black people were the principal source of wealth. Most were concentrated in &quot;black belt&quot; plantation areas (because few white families in the poor regions owned slaves). For decades, there had been widespread fear of slave revolts. During the war, extra men were assigned to &quot;home guard&quot; patrol duty and governors sought to keep militia units at home for protection. Historian William Barney reports, &quot;no major slave revolts erupted during the Civil War.&quot; Nevertheless, slaves took the opportunity to enlarge their sphere of independence, and when union forces were nearby, many ran off to join them.

Slave labor was applied in industry in a limited way in the Upper South and in a few port cities. One reason for the regional lag in industrial development was top-heavy income distribution. Mass production requires mass markets, and slaves living in small cabins, using self-made tools and outfitted with one suit of work clothes each year of inferior fabric, did not generate consumer demand to sustain local manufactures of any description in the same way as did a mechanized family farm of free labor in the North. The Southern economy was &quot;pre-capitalist&quot; in that slaves were put to work in the largest revenue-producing enterprises, not free labor markets. That labor system as practiced in the American South encompassed paternalism, whether abusive or indulgent, and that meant labor management considerations apart from productivity.

Approximately 85% of both the North and South white populations lived on family farms, both regions were predominantly agricultural, and mid-century industry in both was mostly domestic. But the Southern economy was pre-capitalist in its overwhelming reliance on the agriculture of cash crops to produce wealth, while the great majority of farmers fed themselves and supplied a small local market. Southern cities and industries grew faster than ever before, but the thrust of the rest of the country&#x27;s exponential growth elsewhere was toward urban industrial development along transportation systems of canals and railroads. The South was following the dominant currents of the American economic mainstream, but at a &quot;great distance&quot; as it lagged in the all-weather modes of transportation that brought cheaper, speedier freight shipment and forged new, expanding inter-regional markets.

A third count of the pre-capitalist Southern economy relates to the cultural setting. White southerners did not adopt a work ethic, nor the habits of thrift that marked the rest of the country. It had access to the tools of capitalism, but it did not adopt its culture. The Southern Cause as a national economy in the Confederacy was grounded in &quot;slavery and race, planters and patricians, plain folk and folk culture, cotton and plantations&quot;.

====National production====
The Confederacy started its existence as an agrarian economy with exports, to a world market, of cotton, and, to a lesser extent, tobacco and sugarcane. Local food production included grains, hogs, cattle, and gardens. The cash came from exports but the Southern people spontaneously stopped exports in early 1861 to hasten the impact of &quot;King Cotton&quot;, a failed strategy to coerce international support for the Confederacy through its cotton exports. When the blockade was announced, commercial shipping practically ended (the ships could not get insurance), and only a trickle of supplies came via blockade runners. The cutoff of exports was an economic disaster for the South, rendering useless its most valuable properties, its plantations and their enslaved workers. Many planters kept growing cotton, which piled up everywhere, but most turned to food production. All across the region, the lack of repair and maintenance wasted away the physical assets.

The eleven states had produced $155 million (~$ in ) in manufactured goods in 1860, chiefly from local gristmills, and lumber, processed tobacco, cotton goods and naval stores such as turpentine. The main industrial areas were border cities such as Baltimore, Wheeling, Louisville and St. Louis, that were never under Confederate control. The government did set up munitions factories in the Deep South. Combined with captured munitions and those coming via blockade runners, the armies were kept minimally supplied with weapons. The soldiers suffered from reduced rations, lack of medicines, and the growing shortages of uniforms, shoes and boots. Shortages were much worse for civilians, and the prices of necessities steadily rose.

The Confederacy adopted a tariff or tax on imports of 15%, and imposed it on all imports from other countries, including the United States. The tariff mattered little; the Union blockade minimized commercial traffic through the Confederacy&#x27;s ports, and very few people paid taxes on goods smuggled from the North. The Confederate government in its entire history collected only $3.5 million in tariff revenue. The lack of adequate financial resources led the Confederacy to finance the war through printing money, which led to high inflation. The Confederacy underwent an economic revolution by centralization and standardization, but it was too little too late as its economy was systematically strangled by blockade and raids.

===Transportation systems===


In peacetime, the South&#x27;s extensive and connected systems of navigable rivers and coastal access allowed for cheap and easy transportation of agricultural products. The railroad system in the South had developed as a supplement to the navigable rivers to enhance the all-weather shipment of cash crops to market. Railroads tied plantation areas to the nearest river or seaport and so made supply more dependable, lowered costs and increased profits. In the event of invasion, the vast geography of the Confederacy made logistics difficult for the Union. Wherever Union armies invaded, they assigned many of their soldiers to garrison captured areas and to protect rail lines.

At the onset of the Civil War the South had a rail network disjointed and plagued by changes in track gauge as well as lack of interchange. Locomotives and freight cars had fixed axles and could not use tracks of different gauges (widths). Railroads of different gauges leading to the same city required all freight to be off-loaded onto wagons for transport to the connecting railroad station, where it had to await freight cars and a locomotive before proceeding. Centers requiring off-loading included Vicksburg, New Orleans, Montgomery, Wilmington and Richmond. In addition, most rail lines led from coastal or river ports to inland cities, with few lateral railroads. Because of this design limitation, the relatively primitive railroads of the Confederacy were unable to overcome the Union naval blockade of the South&#x27;s crucial intra-coastal and river routes.

The Confederacy had no plan to expand, protect or encourage its railroads. Southerners&#x27; refusal to export the cotton crop in 1861 left railroads bereft of their main source of income. Many lines had to lay off employees; many critical skilled technicians and engineers were permanently lost to military service. In the early years of the war the Confederate government had a hands-off approach to the railroads. Only in mid-1863 did the Confederate government initiate a national policy, and it was confined solely to aiding the war effort. Railroads came under the &quot;de facto&quot; control of the military. In contrast, the U.S. Congress had authorized military administration of Union-controlled railroad and telegraph systems in January 1862, imposed a standard gauge, and built railroads into the South using that gauge. Confederate armies successfully reoccupying territory could not be resupplied directly by rail as they advanced. The C.S. Congress formally authorized military administration of railroads in February 1865.

In the last year before the end of the war, the Confederate railroad system stood permanently on the verge of collapse. There was no new equipment and raids on both sides systematically destroyed key bridges, as well as locomotives and freight cars. Spare parts were cannibalized; feeder lines were torn up to get replacement rails for trunk lines, and rolling stock wore out through heavy use.

====Horses and mules====
The Confederate army experienced a persistent shortage of horses and mules and requisitioned them with dubious promissory notes given to local farmers and breeders. Union forces paid in real money and found ready sellers in the South. Both armies needed horses for cavalry and for artillery. Mules pulled the wagons. The supply was undermined by an unprecedented epidemic of glanders, a fatal disease that baffled veterinarians. After 1863 the invading Union forces had a policy of shooting all the local horses and mules that they did not need, in order to keep them out of Confederate hands. The Confederate armies and farmers experienced a growing shortage of horses and mules, which hurt the Southern economy and the war effort. The South lost half of its 2.5 million horses and mules; many farmers ended the war with none left. Army horses were used up by hard work, malnourishment, disease and battle wounds; they had a life expectancy of about seven months.

===Financial instruments===
Both the individual Confederate states and later the Confederate government printed Confederate States of America dollars as paper currency in various denominations, with a total face value of $1.5 billion. Much of it was signed by Treasurer Edward C. Elmore. Inflation became rampant as the paper money depreciated and eventually became worthless. The state governments and some localities printed their own paper money, adding to the runaway inflation. Many bills still exist, although in recent years counterfeit copies have proliferated.

The Confederate government initially wanted to finance its war mostly through tariffs on imports, export taxes, and voluntary donations of gold. After the spontaneous imposition of an embargo on cotton sales to Europe in 1861, these sources of revenue dried up and the Confederacy increasingly turned to issuing debt and printing money to pay for war expenses. The Confederate States politicians were worried about angering the general population with hard taxes. A tax increase might disillusion many Southerners, so the Confederacy resorted to printing more money. As a result, inflation increased and remained a problem for the southern states throughout the rest of the war. By April 1863, for example, the cost of flour in Richmond had risen to $100 (~$ in ) a barrel and housewives were rioting.

The Confederate government took over the three national mints in its territory: the Charlotte Mint in North Carolina, the Dahlonega Mint in Georgia, and the New Orleans Mint in Louisiana. During 1861 all of these facilities produced small amounts of gold coinage, and the latter half dollars as well. Since the mints used the current dies on hand, all appear to be U.S. issues. However, by comparing slight differences in the dies specialists can distinguish 1861-O half dollars that were minted either under the authority of the U.S. government, the State of Louisiana, or finally the Confederate States. Unlike the gold coins, this issue was produced in significant numbers (over 2.5 million) and is inexpensive in lower grades, although fakes have been made for sale to the public. However, before the New Orleans Mint ceased operation in May 1861, the Confederate government used its own reverse design to strike four half dollars. This made one of the great rarities of American numismatics. A lack of silver and gold precluded further coinage. The Confederacy apparently also experimented with issuing one cent coins, although only 12 were produced by a jeweler in Philadelphia, who was afraid to send them to the South. Like the half dollars, copies were later made as souvenirs.

US coinage was hoarded and did not have any general circulation. U.S. coinage was admitted as legal tender up to $10, as were British sovereigns, French Napoleons and Spanish and Mexican doubloons at a fixed rate of exchange. Confederate money was paper and postage stamps.

===Food shortages and riots===

By mid-1861, the Union naval blockade virtually shut down the export of cotton and the import of manufactured goods. Food that formerly came overland was cut off.

As women were the ones who remained at home, they had to make do with the lack of food and supplies. They cut back on purchases, used old materials, and planted more flax and peas to provide clothing and food. They used ersatz substitutes when possible, but there was no real coffee, only okra and chicory substitutes. The households were severely hurt by inflation in the cost of everyday items like flour, and the shortages of food, fodder for the animals, and medical supplies for the wounded.

State governments requested that planters grow less cotton and more food, but most refused. When cotton prices soared in Europe, expectations were that Europe would soon intervene to break the blockade and make them rich, but Europe remained neutral. The Georgia legislature imposed cotton quotas, making it a crime to grow an excess. But food shortages only worsened, especially in the towns.

The overall decline in food supplies, made worse by the inadequate transportation system, led to serious shortages and high prices in urban areas. When bacon reached a dollar a pound in 1863, the poor women of Richmond, Atlanta and many other cities began to riot; they broke into shops and warehouses to seize food, as they were angry at ineffective state relief efforts, speculators, and merchants. As wives and widows of soldiers, they were hurt by the inadequate welfare system.

===Devastation by 1865===
By the end of the war deterioration of the Southern infrastructure was widespread. The number of civilian deaths is unknown. Every Confederate state was affected, but most of the war was fought in Virginia and Tennessee, while Texas and Florida saw the least military action. Much of the damage was caused by direct military action, but most was caused by lack of repairs and upkeep, and by deliberately using up resources. Historians have recently estimated how much of the devastation was caused by military action. Paul Paskoff calculates that Union military operations were conducted in 56% of 645 counties in nine Confederate states (excluding Texas and Florida). These counties contained 63% of the 1860 white population and 64% of the slaves. By the time the fighting took place, undoubtedly some people had fled to safer areas, so the exact population exposed to war is unknown.

The eleven Confederate States in the 1860 United States census had 297 towns and cities with 835,000 people; of these 162 with 681,000 people were at one point occupied by Union forces. Eleven were destroyed or severely damaged by war action, including Atlanta (with an 1860 population of 9,600), Charleston, Columbia, and Richmond (with prewar populations of 40,500, 8,100, and 37,900, respectively); the eleven contained 115,900 people in the 1860 census, or 14% of the urban South. Historians have not estimated what their actual population was when Union forces arrived. The number of people (as of 1860) who lived in the destroyed towns represented just over 1% of the Confederacy&#x27;s 1860 population. In addition, 45 court houses were burned (out of 830). The South&#x27;s agriculture was not highly mechanized. The value of farm implements and machinery in the 1860 Census was $81 million; by 1870, there was 40% less, worth just $48 million. Many old tools had broken through heavy use; new tools were rarely available; even repairs were difficult.

The economic losses affected everyone. Banks and insurance companies were mostly bankrupt. Confederate currency and bonds were worthless. The billions of dollars invested in slaves vanished. Most debts were also left behind. Most farms were intact, but most had lost their horses, mules and cattle; fences and barns were in disrepair. Paskoff shows the loss of farm infrastructure was about the same whether or not fighting took place nearby. The loss of infrastructure and productive capacity meant that rural widows throughout the region faced not only the absence of able-bodied men, but a depleted stock of material resources that they could manage and operate themselves. During four years of warfare, disruption, and blockades, the South used up about half its capital stock. The North, by contrast, absorbed its material losses so effortlessly that it appeared richer at the end of the war than at the beginning.

The rebuilding took years and was hindered by the low price of cotton after the war. Outside investment was essential, especially in railroads. One historian has summarized the collapse of the transportation infrastructure needed for economic recovery:

===Effect on women and families===
More than 250,000 Confederate soldiers died during the war. Some widows abandoned their family farms and merged into the households of relatives, or even became refugees living in camps with high rates of disease and death. In the Old South, being an &quot;old maid&quot; was an embarrassment to the woman and her family, but after the war, it became almost a norm. Some women welcomed the freedom of not having to marry. Divorce, while never fully accepted, became more common. The concept of the &quot;New Woman&quot; emerged – she was self-sufficient and independent, and stood in sharp contrast to the &quot;Southern Belle&quot; of antebellum lore.

==National flags==


The first official flag of the Confederate States of America—called the &quot;Stars and Bars&quot;—originally had seven stars, representing the first seven states that initially formed the Confederacy. As more states joined, more stars were added, until the total was 13 (two stars were added for the divided states of Kentucky and Missouri). During the First Battle of Bull Run, (First Manassas) it sometimes proved difficult to distinguish the Stars and Bars from the Union flag. To rectify the situation, a separate &quot;Battle Flag&quot; was designed for use by troops in the field. Also known as the &quot;Southern Cross&quot;, many variations sprang from the original square configuration.

Although it was never officially adopted by the Confederate government, the popularity of the Southern Cross among both soldiers and the civilian population was a primary reason why it was made the main color feature when a new national flag was adopted in 1863. This new standard—known as the &quot;Stainless Banner&quot;—consisted of a lengthened white field area with a Battle Flag canton. This flag too had its problems when used in military operations as, on a windless day, it could easily be mistaken for a flag of truce or surrender. Thus, in 1865, a modified version of the Stainless Banner was adopted. This final national flag of the Confederacy kept the Battle Flag canton, but shortened the white field and added a vertical red bar to the fly end.

Because of its depiction in the 20th-century and popular media, many people consider the rectangular battle flag with the dark blue bars as being synonymous with &quot;the Confederate Flag&quot;, but this flag was never adopted as a Confederate national flag.

The &quot;Confederate Flag&quot; has a color scheme similar to that of the most common Battle Flag design, but is rectangular, not square. The &quot;Confederate Flag&quot; is a highly recognizable symbol of the South in the United States today and continues to be a controversial icon.

==Southern Unionism==

Unionism—opposition to the Confederacy—was strong in certain areas within the Confederate States. Southern Unionists were widespread in the mountain regions of Appalachia and the Ozarks. Unionists, led by Parson Brownlow and Senator Andrew Johnson, took control of East Tennessee in 1863. Unionists also attempted control over western Virginia, but never effectively held more than half of the counties that formed the new state of West Virginia. Union forces captured parts of coastal North Carolina, and at first were largely welcomed by local unionists. The occupiers became perceived as oppressive, callous, radical and favorable to Freedmen. Occupiers pillaged, freed slaves, and evicted those who refused to swear loyalty oaths to the Union.

In Texas, local officials harassed and murdered Unionists. In Cooke County, Texas, 150 suspected Unionists were arrested; 25 were lynched without trial and 40 more were hanged after a summary trial. Draft resistance was widespread especially among Texans of German or Mexican descent, many of the latter leaving for Mexico. Confederate officials attempted to hunt down and kill potential draftees who had gone into hiding. Over 4,000 suspected Unionists were imprisoned in the Confederate States without trial.

Up to 100,000 men living in states under Confederate control served in the Union Army or pro-Union guerilla groups. Although Southern Unionists came from all classes, most differed socially, culturally, and economically from the region&#x27;s dominant pre-war planter class.

==Geography==

===Region and climate===
The Confederate States of America claimed a total of of coastline, thus a large part of its territory lay on the seacoast with level and often sandy or marshy ground. Most of the interior portion consisted of arable farmland, though much was also hilly and mountainous, and the far western territories were deserts. The southern reaches of the Mississippi River bisected the country, and the western half was often referred to as the Trans-Mississippi. The highest point (excluding Arizona and New Mexico) was Guadalupe Peak in Texas at .
Much of the area had a humid subtropical climate with mild winters and long, hot, humid summers. The climate and terrain varied from vast swamps to semi-arid steppes and arid deserts. The subtropical climate made winters mild but allowed infectious diseases to flourish; on both sides more soldiers died from disease than were killed in combat.

==Demographics==
===Population===

The 1860 United States census gives a picture of the population for the areas that had joined the Confederacy. The population numbers exclude non-assimilated Indian tribes.

In 1860, the areas that later formed the eleven Confederate states (and including the future West Virginia) had 132,760 (2%) free blacks. Males made up 49% of the total population and females 51%.

===Rural and urban population===
The CSA was overwhelmingly rural. Few towns had populations of more than 1,000—the typical county seat had a population under 500. Of the twenty largest U.S. cities in the 1860 census, only New Orleans lay in Confederate territory. Only 13 Confederate-controlled cities ranked among the top 100 U.S. cities in 1860, most of them ports whose economic activities vanished or suffered severely in the Union blockade. The population of Richmond swelled after it became the Confederate capital, reaching an estimated 128,000 in 1864.

The cities of the Confederacy included (by size of population):

===Religion===

The CSA was overwhelmingly Protestant. Both free and enslaved populations identified with evangelical Protestantism. Baptists and Methodists together formed majorities of both the white and the slave population, becoming the Black church. Freedom of religion and separation of church and state were fully ensured by Confederate laws. Church attendance was very high and chaplains played a major role in the Army.

Most large denominations experienced a North–South split in the prewar era on the issue of slavery. The creation of a new country necessitated independent structures. For example, the Presbyterian Church in the United States split, with much of the new leadership provided by Joseph Ruggles Wilson. Baptists and Methodists both broke off from their Northern coreligionists over the slavery issue, forming the Southern Baptist Convention and the Methodist Episcopal Church, South. Elites in the southeast favored the Protestant Episcopal Church in the Confederate States of America, which had reluctantly split from the Episcopal Church in 1861. Other elites were Presbyterians belonging to the 1861-founded Presbyterian Church in the United States. Catholics included an Irish working-class element in coastal cities and an old French element in southern Louisiana.

The southern churches met the shortage of Army chaplains by sending missionaries. One result was wave after wave of revivals in the Army.

==Legacy and assessment==
===Amnesty and treason issue===
When the war ended over 14,000 Confederates petitioned President Johnson for a pardon; he was generous in giving them out. He issued a general amnesty to all Confederate participants in the &quot;late Civil War&quot; in 1868. Congress passed additional Amnesty Acts in May 1866 with restrictions on office holding, and the Amnesty Act in May 1872 lifting those restrictions. There was a great deal of discussion in 1865 about bringing treason trials, especially against Jefferson Davis. There was no consensus in President Johnson&#x27;s cabinet, and no one was charged with treason. An acquittal of Davis would have been humiliating for the government.

Davis was indicted for treason but never tried; he was released from prison on bail in May 1867. The amnesty of December 25, 1868, eliminated any possibility of Davis standing trial for treason.

Henry Wirz, the commandant of a notorious prisoner-of-war camp near Andersonville, Georgia, was tried and convicted by a military court, and executed on November 10, 1865. The charges against him involved conspiracy and cruelty, not treason.

The U.S. government began a decade-long process known as Reconstruction which attempted to resolve the political and constitutional issues of the Civil War. The priorities were: to guarantee that Confederate nationalism and slavery were ended, to ratify and enforce the Thirteenth Amendment which outlawed slavery; the Fourteenth which guaranteed dual U.S. and state citizenship to all native-born residents, regardless of race; the Fifteenth, which made it illegal to deny the right to vote because of race; and repeal each state&#x27;s ordinance of secession.

By 1877, the Compromise of 1877 ended Reconstruction in the former Confederate states. Federal troops were withdrawn from the South, where conservative white Democrats had already regained political control of state governments, often through extreme violence and fraud to suppress black voting. The war left the entire region economically devastated by military action, ruined infrastructure, and exhausted resources. Still dependent on an agricultural economy and resisting investment in infrastructure, it remained dominated by the planter elite into the next century. Confederate veterans had been temporarily disenfranchised by Reconstruction policy, and Democrat-dominated legislatures passed new constitutions and amendments to now exclude most blacks and many poor whites. This exclusion and a weakened Republican Party remained the norm until the Voting Rights Act of 1965. The Solid South of the early 20th century did not achieve national levels of prosperity until long after World War II.

===Supreme Court rulings===
In &quot;Texas v. White&quot; (1869), the Supreme Court ruled by a 5–3 majority that Texas had remained a state ever since it first joined the Union, despite claims that it joined the Confederate States of America. The Court held that the Constitution did not permit a state to unilaterally secede. In declaring that no state could leave the Union, &quot;except through revolution or through consent of the States&quot;, it was &quot;explicitly repudiating the position of the Confederate states that the United States was a voluntary compact between sovereign states&quot;.

In &quot;Sprott v. United States&quot; (1874), the Supreme Court ruled 8–1 to reaffirm its conclusion in &quot;White&quot; and held that the Confederate States of America was little more than a briefly existing breakaway state which totally perished upon being overthrown. Specifically, declaring that its &quot;foundation was treason&quot; and &quot;single purpose, so long as it lasted, was to make that treason successful.&quot; 

===Theories regarding downfall===

Historian Frank Lawrence Owsley argued that the Confederacy &quot;died of states&#x27; rights&quot;. The central government was denied requisitioned soldiers and money by governors and state legislatures because they feared that Richmond would encroach on the rights of the states. Georgia&#x27;s governor Joseph Brown warned of a secret conspiracy by Jefferson Davis to destroy states&#x27; rights and individual liberty. The first conscription act in North America, authorizing Davis to draft soldiers, was said to be the &quot;essence of military despotism&quot;. Roger Lowenstein argued in &quot;Ways and Means: Lincoln and His Cabinet and the Financing of the Civil War&quot; (2022) that the Confederacy&#x27;s failure to raise adequate revenue led to hyperinflation and being unable to win a war of attrition, despite the prowess of its military leadership such as Robert E. Lee.

Though political differences were within the Confederacy, no national political parties were formed because they were seen as illegitimate. &quot;Anti-partyism became an article of political faith.&quot; Without a system of political parties building alternate sets of national leaders, electoral protests tended to be narrowly state-based, &quot;negative, carping and petty&quot;. The 1863 mid-term elections became mere expressions of futile and frustrated dissatisfaction. According to historian David M. Potter, the lack of a functioning two-party system caused &quot;real and direct damage&quot; to the Confederate war effort since it prevented the formulation of any effective alternatives to the conduct of the war by the Davis administration.

The enemies of President Davis proposed that the Confederacy &quot;died of Davis&quot;. He was unfavorably compared to George Washington by critics such as Edward Alfred Pollard, editor of the most influential newspaper in the Confederacy, the &quot;Daily Richmond Examiner&quot;. Beyond the early honeymoon period, Davis was never popular. Ellis Merton Coulter, viewed by historians as a Confederate apologist, argues that Davis was unable to mobilize Confederate nationalism in support of his government effectively, and especially failed to appeal to the small farmers who made up the bulk of the population. Escott also emphasizes that the widespread opposition to any strong central government combined with the vast difference in wealth between the slave-owning class and the small farmers created insolvable dilemmas when the Confederate survival presupposed a strong central government backed by a united populace. The prewar claim that white solidarity was necessary to provide a unified Southern voice in Washington no longer held. Davis failed to build a network of supporters who would speak up when he came under criticism, and he repeatedly alienated governors and other state-based leaders by demanding centralized control of the war effort.

==See also==

* American Civil War prison camps
* Cabinet of the Confederate States of America
* Commemoration of the American Civil War
* Commemoration of the American Civil War on postage stamps
* Confederate colonies
* Confederate Patent Office
* Confederate war finance
* &quot;C.S.A.: The Confederate States of America&quot;
* History of the Southern United States
* Knights of the Golden Circle
* List of Confederate arms manufacturers
* List of Confederate arsenals and armories
* List of Confederate monuments and memorials
* List of treaties of the Confederate States of America
* List of historical separatist movements
* List of civil wars
* National Civil War Naval Museum

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===

* Bowman, John S. (ed), &quot;The Civil War Almanac&quot;, New York: Bison Books, 1983
* Eicher, John H., &amp; Eicher, David J., &quot;Civil War High Commands&quot;, Stanford University Press, 2001, 
* Martis, Kenneth C. &quot;The Historical Atlas of the Congresses of the Confederate States of America 1861–1865&quot; (1994) 
==Further reading==
==External links==

* Civil War Research &amp; Discussion Group – &quot;Confederate States of Am. Army and Navy Uniforms&quot;, 1861
* &quot;The Countryman&quot;, 1862–1866, published weekly by Turnwold, Ga., edited by J.A. Turner
* &quot;The Federal and the Confederate Constitution Compared&quot;
* Photographs of the original Confederate Constitution and other Civil War documents owned by the Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript Library at the University of Georgia Libraries.
* &quot;Photographic History of the Civil War&quot;, 10 vols., 1912.
* DocSouth: Documenting the American South – numerous online text, image, and audio collections.
* The Boston Athenæum has over 4000 Confederate imprints, including rare books, pamphlets, government documents, manuscripts, serials, broadsides, maps, and sheet music that have been conserved and digitized.
* Oklahoma Digital Maps: Digital Collections of Oklahoma and Indian Territory
* Confederate States of America Collection at the Library of Congress
* Religion in the CSA: &quot;Confederate Veteran Magazine&quot;, May, 1922</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="4" end="33" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="35" end="38" title="Confederate States of America" label="CSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="69" end="87" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="89" end="93" title="Confederate States of America" label="C.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="96" end="111" title="Confederate States of America" label="the Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="116" end="125" title="Confederate States of America" label="the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818345" start="134" end="146" title="List of historical unrecognized states and dependencies" label="unrecognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="157" end="165" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="173" end="195" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="274" end="284" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="300" end="309" title="Secession in the United States" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566712" start="311" end="325" title="South Carolina in the American Civil War" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061900" start="327" end="338" title="Mississippi in the American Civil War" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491163" start="340" end="347" title="Florida in the American Civil War" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060371" start="349" end="356" title="Alabama in the American Civil War" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314469" start="358" end="365" title="Georgia in the American Civil War" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364312" start="367" end="376" title="Louisiana in the American Civil War" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489844" start="378" end="383" title="Texas in the American Civil War" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112015" start="385" end="393" title="Virginia in the American Civil War" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151872" start="395" end="403" title="Arkansas in the American Civil War" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700256" start="405" end="414" title="Tennessee in the American Civil War" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412058" start="420" end="434" title="North Carolina in the American Civil War" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="493" end="511" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="519" end="534" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="542" end="550" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="554" end="584" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578694" start="650" end="670" title="plantation economy" label="plantation economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="701" end="730" title="Secession in the United States" label="secede from the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="908" end="932" title="confederation" label="confederation government"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="986" end="1004" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1008" end="1023" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="1071" end="1076" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q543165" start="1123" end="1173" title="Battle of Fort Sumter" label="South Carolina&amp;#x27;s militia attacked Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="1200" end="1211" title="Upper South" label="Upper South"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112015" start="1212" end="1220" title="Virginia in the American Civil War" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151872" start="1222" end="1230" title="Arkansas in the American Civil War" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700256" start="1232" end="1241" title="Tennessee in the American Civil War" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412058" start="1247" end="1261" title="North Carolina in the American Civil War" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="1325" end="1348" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999471" start="1369" end="1399" title="President of the Confederate States of America" label="centralized federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331053" start="1403" end="1421" title="Richmond in the American Civil War" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375394" start="1445" end="1462" title="Confederate Conscription Acts 1862–1864" label="Confederate draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q628728" start="1563" end="1590" title="Confederate States Congress" label="Confederate States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961717" start="1591" end="1600" title="adjournment sine die" label="adjourned"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="1863" end="1876" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1884" end="1904" title="Battle of Appomattox Court House#Surrender" label="surrender on April 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="2132" end="2150" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction era"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="2227" end="2266" title="13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution" label="13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="2292" end="2312" title="Lost Cause of the Confederacy" label="Lost Cause mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="2403" end="2424" title="Reconstruction era" label="decades after the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887679" start="2509" end="2544" title="United Daughters of the Confederacy" label="United Daughters of the Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562301" start="2553" end="2581" title="Sons of Confederate Veterans" label="Sons of Confederate Veterans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="2683" end="2704" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="2731" end="2739" title="Reactionary" label="reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279580" start="2763" end="2778" title="racial equality" label="racial equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071188" start="2829" end="2844" title="White Southerners" label="Southern whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="2910" end="2923" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159760" start="2960" end="2981" title="Confederate monuments and memorials" label="Confederate monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q83790" start="3013" end="3021" title="textbook" label="textbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q20644256" start="3028" end="3073" title="modern display of the Confederate battle flag" label="modern display of the Confederate battle flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="3103" end="3129" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231756" start="3209" end="3224" title="Dixiecrat Party" label="Dixiecrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="3237" end="3258" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="3260" end="3278" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3382" end="3400" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="3436" end="3458" title="Slavery in the United States" label="institution of slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="3495" end="3510" title="Southern United States" label="Southern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3625" end="3638" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="3644" end="3649" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q316748" start="3781" end="3786" title="Scholarly consensus" label="agree"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="3967" end="3972" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146759" start="4059" end="4076" title="pseudohistory" label="pseudo-historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="4077" end="4087" title="Lost Cause of the Confederacy" label="Lost Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042941" start="4293" end="4312" title="Ordinance of Secession" label="secession documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4496" end="4504" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="4554" end="4576" title="Slave states and free states" label="one slave and one free"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4619" end="4625" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4641" end="4665" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="4951" end="4960" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071188" start="5068" end="5082" title="white Southerners" label="white Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q381255" start="5218" end="5238" title="American nationalism" label="American nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="5241" end="5256" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="5265" end="5291" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="1860 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="5331" end="5340" title="secession in the United States" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="5370" end="5380" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454179" start="5584" end="5598" title="First inauguration of Abraham Lincoln" label="he took office"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="5820" end="5834" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q543165" start="5964" end="6021" title="Battle of Fort Sumter" label="Confederate forces bombarded the Union&amp;#x27;s Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="6040" end="6066" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q859488" start="6124" end="6141" title="Second Party System" label="partisan politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="6143" end="6155" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q779359" start="6157" end="6170" title="Nullification (U.S. Constitution)" label="nullification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="6178" end="6187" title="Secession in the United States" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="6224" end="6236" title="Manifest destiny" label="expansionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000158" start="6238" end="6247" title="Panic of 1857" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="6274" end="6291" title="Antebellum South" label="antebellum period"/>
<link wikidata="Q526331" start="6500" end="6515" title="David M. Potter" label="David M. Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783221" start="7043" end="7064" title="Montgomery Convention" label="Montgomery Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="7181" end="7196" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q737517" start="7884" end="7895" title="Fort Sumter" label="Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241234" start="7929" end="7963" title="75,000 volunteers" label="75,000 of the states&amp;#x27; militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="8432" end="8458" title="Constitution of the United States" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112015" start="8806" end="8814" title="Virginia in the Civil War" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151872" start="8816" end="8824" title="Arkansas in the Civil War" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700256" start="8826" end="8835" title="Tennessee in the Civil War" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412058" start="8837" end="8851" title="North Carolina in the Civil War" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="8951" end="8962" title="Lower South" label="Lower South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="9116" end="9124" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="9129" end="9137" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="9379" end="9398" title="states&amp;#x27; rights" label="states&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="9400" end="9413" title="Tariff" label="tariff policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392449" start="11161" end="11169" title="Kentucky in the American Civil War" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112525" start="11635" end="11669" title="Confederate government of Kentucky" label="Confederate government of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952344" start="11886" end="11894" title="Missouri in the American Civil War" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879516" start="11898" end="11923" title="Missouri Constitutional Convention (1861–63)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589559" start="12065" end="12082" title="St. Louis Arsenal" label="St. Louis Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="12189" end="12205" title="Missouri General Assembly" label="General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000065" start="12480" end="12486" title="Neosho, Missouri" label="Neosho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879903" start="12526" end="12548" title="Missouri secession" label="ordinance of secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q967185" start="12746" end="12755" title="Cassville, Missouri" label="Cassville"/>
<link wikidata="Q52996" start="12865" end="12880" title="Marshall, Texas" label="Marshall, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="12977" end="13002" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566712" start="13697" end="13711" title="South Carolina in the American Civil War" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061900" start="13736" end="13747" title="Mississippi in the American Civil War" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491163" start="13770" end="13777" title="Florida in the American Civil War" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060371" start="13795" end="13802" title="Alabama in the American Civil War" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314469" start="13820" end="13827" title="Georgia in the American Civil War" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364312" start="13845" end="13854" title="Louisiana in the American Civil War" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489844" start="13872" end="13877" title="Texas in the American Civil War" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454179" start="13918" end="13951" title="First inauguration of Abraham Lincoln" label="Inauguration of President Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q543165" start="13964" end="13990" title="Battle of Fort Sumter" label="Bombardment of Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241234" start="14006" end="14038" title="President Lincoln&amp;#x27;s 75,000 volunteers" label="President Lincoln&amp;#x27;s call-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112015" start="14055" end="14063" title="Virginia in the American Civil War" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151872" start="14104" end="14112" title="Arkansas in the American Civil War" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700256" start="14126" end="14135" title="Tennessee in the American Civil War" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412058" start="14168" end="14182" title="North Carolina in the American Civil War" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993105" start="14311" end="14321" title="Wheeling Convention" label="Convention"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14325" end="14333" title="Wheeling, West Virginia#Industrialization and anti-secession sentiment" label="Wheeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q24694" start="14402" end="14418" title="Restored government of Virginia" label="rump legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986950" start="14524" end="14537" title="West Virginia in the American Civil War" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329493" start="15100" end="15114" title="East Tennessee" label="East Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15166" end="15174" title="Delaware in the American Civil War#State of Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781554" start="15179" end="15187" title="Maryland in the American Civil War" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="15288" end="15313" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059659" start="15789" end="15796" title="Mesilla, New Mexico" label="Mesilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="15801" end="15807" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="15832" end="15852" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340256" start="15957" end="15972" title="Lewis S. Owings" label="Lewis S. Owings"/>
<link wikidata="Q859988" start="16019" end="16036" title="First Battle of Mesilla" label="Battle of Mesilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135123" start="16211" end="16224" title="34th parallel north" label="34th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758202" start="16226" end="16245" title="Marcus H. MacWillie" label="Marcus H. MacWillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739881" start="16337" end="16356" title="New Mexico campaign" label="New Mexico campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200684" start="16575" end="16591" title="Indian Territory in the American Civil War" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="16845" end="16852" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="16857" end="16866" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="16955" end="16971" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q628728" start="17207" end="17227" title="Congress of the Confederate States" label="Confederate Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360472" start="17229" end="17253" title="Elias Cornelius Boudinot" label="Elias Cornelius Boudinot"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="17271" end="17279" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410912" start="17284" end="17306" title="Samuel Benton Callahan" label="Samuel Benton Callahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="17324" end="17332" title="Seminole" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="17337" end="17342" title="Muscogee" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092177" start="17348" end="17363" title="Cherokee Nation (19th century)" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17649" end="17668" title="History of Montgomery, Alabama#Montgomery in the Civil War" label="Montgomery, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q473393" start="17757" end="17778" title="Alabama State Capitol" label="Alabama State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18309" end="18322" title="Milledgeville, Georgia#Life in the antebellum capital" label="Milledgeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q80073" start="18425" end="18441" title="Opelika, Alabama" label="Opelika, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331053" start="18537" end="18555" title="Richmond in the American Civil War" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537798" start="18599" end="18621" title="Virginia State Capitol" label="Virginia State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q739644" start="19598" end="19617" title="Overland Campaign" label="Wilderness Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q511922" start="19969" end="19987" title="Danville, Virginia" label="Danville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833880" start="20776" end="20787" title="laws of war" label="laws of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="20989" end="20991" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="20995" end="21001" title="Second French Empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q167795" start="21035" end="21049" title="James M. Mason" label="James M. Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182472" start="21064" end="21076" title="John Slidell" label="John Slidell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166330" start="21233" end="21257" title="Trent Affair" label="&amp;quot;Trent&amp;quot; Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058726" start="21425" end="21447" title="diplomatic recognition" label="diplomatic recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197048" start="21546" end="21560" title="King Cotton" label="cotton is king"/>
<link wikidata="Q487420" start="21831" end="21835" title="Slavery Abolition Act 1833" label="1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035357" start="21988" end="22017" title="World Anti-Slavery Convention" label="World Anti-Slavery Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q215562" start="22333" end="22351" title="Frederick Douglass" label="Frederick Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132833" start="22353" end="22374" title="Henry Highland Garnet" label="Henry Highland Garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794162" start="22376" end="22395" title="Sarah Parker Remond" label="Sarah Parker Remond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080196" start="22409" end="22429" title="Charles Lenox Remond" label="Charles Lenox Remond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161465" start="22431" end="22453" title="James W. C. Pennington" label="James W. C. Pennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046980" start="22455" end="22468" title="Martin Delany" label="Martin Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946640" start="22470" end="22490" title="Samuel Ringgold Ward" label="Samuel Ringgold Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525707" start="22496" end="22512" title="William G. Allen" label="William G. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="22908" end="22925" title="John Russell, 1st Earl Russell" label="Lord John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="22935" end="22947" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="23007" end="23022" title="Henry Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="23108" end="23135" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="23136" end="23153" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q719252" start="23259" end="23277" title="Battle of Antietam" label="Battle of Antietam"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="23306" end="23331" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="23786" end="23804" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q827152" start="23999" end="24007" title="Frédéric Émile d&amp;#x27;Erlanger" label="Erlanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927238" start="24135" end="24151" title="Blockade runners of the American Civil War" label="blockade runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363432" start="24565" end="24576" title="belligerent" label="belligerent"/>
<link wikidata="Q459207" start="24835" end="24854" title="Ambrose Dudley Mann" label="Ambrose Dudley Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="24879" end="24887" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="25021" end="25033" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q466115" start="25342" end="25359" title="Judah P. Benjamin" label="Judah P. Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865103" start="25822" end="25843" title="Arthur Lyon Fremantle" label="Arthur Lyon Fremantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="25859" end="25876" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q191713" start="25950" end="25957" title="Hussars" label="Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318582" start="25963" end="25979" title="Justus Scheibert" label="Justus Scheibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="25987" end="26000" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q94016" start="26100" end="26114" title="Charles Frédéric Girard" label="Charles Girard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219504" start="26663" end="26678" title="John A. Roebuck" label="John A. Roebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265383" start="27289" end="27305" title="Duncan F. Kenner" label="Duncan F. Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="27814" end="27820" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039931" start="27825" end="27829" title="Captaincy General of Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649877" start="27951" end="27973" title="Slavery in Brazil" label="slavery remained legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347579" start="28243" end="28254" title="Confederados" label="Confederado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322062" start="28856" end="28873" title="E. Merton Coulter" label="E. Merton Coulter"/>
<link wikidata="Q709723" start="29471" end="29489" title="James M. McPherson" label="James M. McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="30077" end="30092" title="French invasion of Russia" label="invading armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="30241" end="30265" title="First Battle of Bull Run" label="First Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="30281" end="30295" title="First Manassas" label="First Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781554" start="30508" end="30516" title="Maryland in the Civil War" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q719252" start="30781" end="30799" title="Battle of Antietam" label="Battle of Antietam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377639" start="31134" end="31153" title="Gettysburg Campaign" label="Gettysburg Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="31520" end="31529" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q387130" start="32064" end="32078" title="David Dixon Porter" label="Admiral Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="33414" end="33418" title="Confederate States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124986" start="33420" end="33424" title="Confederate States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124953" start="33429" end="33441" title="Confederate States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783221" start="33470" end="33502" title="Provisional Confederate Congress" label="Provisional Confederate Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="33685" end="33700" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="33812" end="33838" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q737517" start="33884" end="33895" title="Fort Sumter" label="Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="33934" end="33943" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="34721" end="34739" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="34744" end="34762" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="34869" end="34889" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368292" start="34954" end="34967" title="Leonidas Polk" label="Leonidas Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="34988" end="34998" title="United States Military Academy" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806300" start="35349" end="35360" title="The Citadel (military college)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q785357" start="35365" end="35392" title="Virginia Military Institute" label="Virginia Military Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307324" start="35498" end="35517" title="Drewry&amp;#x27;s Bluff" label="Drewry&amp;#x27;s Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="36013" end="36025" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379883" start="36126" end="36140" title="Enrollment Act" label="Enrollment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q219656" start="39942" end="39956" title="Macon, Georgia" label="Macon, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375394" start="40992" end="41014" title="Confederate Conscription Acts 1862–1864" label="First Conscription Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857802" start="41598" end="41614" title="Twenty Negro Law" label="Twenty Negro Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="44026" end="44040" title="libertarianism" label="libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q543165" start="44243" end="44264" title="Battle of Fort Sumter" label="Battle of Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084087" start="44268" end="44278" title="Charleston, South Carolina in the American Civil War" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="44303" end="44317" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601279" start="44383" end="44399" title="Star of the West" label="Star of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q362186" start="44509" end="44516" title="Francis W. Pickens" label="Pickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241234" start="44883" end="44931" title="President Lincoln&amp;#x27;s 75,000 Volunteers" label="Lincoln directed states to provide 75,000 troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q794695" start="45365" end="45388" title="Battle of Big Bethel" label="Bethel Church, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="45407" end="45421" title="First Battle of Bull Run" label="First Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q180659" start="45476" end="45485" title="Battle of Wilson&amp;#x27;s Creek" label="Oak Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q310192" start="45886" end="45905" title="George B. McClellan" label="George B. McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="46109" end="46122" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088912" start="46139" end="46153" title="Cheat Mountain" label="Cheat Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q943277" start="47447" end="47463" title="Battle of Shiloh" label="Battle of Shiloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="47605" end="47623" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387983" start="47644" end="47661" title="First Battle of Memphis" label="Battle of Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700708" start="47767" end="47803" title="Capture of New Orleans" label="New Orleans was captured on April 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q315607" start="47853" end="47867" title="David Farragut" label="David Farragut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927238" start="48819" end="48835" title="Blockade runners of the American Civil War" label="blockade running"/>
<link wikidata="Q711966" start="48855" end="48878" title="George Trenholm" label="John Fraser and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403667" start="48883" end="48915" title="S. Isaac, Campbell &amp;amp; Company" label="S. Isaac, Campbell &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="49044" end="49060" title="Ironclad warship" label="armored warships"/>
<link wikidata="Q667163" start="49194" end="49218" title="CSS Virginia" label="CSS &amp;quot;Virginia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039839" start="49432" end="49451" title="Josiah Tattnall III" label="Josiah Tattnall III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867480" start="49500" end="49523" title="USS Atlanta (1861)" label="CSS &amp;quot;Atlanta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q594906" start="49547" end="49562" title="Stephen Mallory" label="Stephen Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="49979" end="49994" title="Peninsula Campaign" label="Lower Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q233343" start="50160" end="50175" title="Second Battle of Bull Run" label="Second Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q355444" start="50245" end="50282" title="Ambrose Burnside" label="Major General Ambrose Burnside&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q751186" start="50319" end="50333" title="Battle of Fredericksburg" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q380562" start="50673" end="50686" title="Braxton Bragg" label="Braxton Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q719252" start="50719" end="50738" title="Battle of Antietam" label="Lee&amp;#x27;s invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380712" start="50857" end="50869" title="Allan Nevins" label="Allan Nevins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622444" start="50905" end="50920" title="Ordinary high water mark" label="high-water mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356926" start="51203" end="51220" title="William W. Loring" label="William W. Loring"/>
<link wikidata="Q44564" start="51248" end="51268" title="Charleston, West Virginia" label="Charleston, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700256" start="51472" end="51481" title="Tennessee in the Civil War" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272132" start="51562" end="51574" title="Battle of Stones River" label="Murfreesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q745979" start="51827" end="51843" title="Battle of Chancellorsville" label="Chancellorsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066253" start="52077" end="52086" title="Siege of Vicksburg" label="Vicksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q860295" start="52105" end="52116" title="Siege of Port Hudson" label="Port Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310964" start="52215" end="52233" title="Morgan&amp;#x27;s Raid" label="Morgan&amp;#x27;s Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q220497" start="52252" end="52277" title="New York City draft riots" label="New York City draft riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q33132" start="52341" end="52351" title="Battle of Gettysburg" label="Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477050" start="52600" end="52611" title="Chattanooga Campaign" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="52944" end="52975" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea" label="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q739644" start="53010" end="53029" title="Overland Campaign" label="Wilderness Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q815195" start="53082" end="53092" title="Siege of Petersburg" label="Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841788" start="53533" end="53558" title="CSS Albemarle" label="CSS &amp;quot;Albemarle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519203" start="53657" end="53667" title="Battle of Mobile Bay" label="Mobile Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752689" start="53783" end="53802" title="Battle of Nashville" label="Battle of Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q886842" start="54156" end="54174" title="Carolinas Campaign" label="Carolinas Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q355452" start="54336" end="54351" title="Philip Sheridan" label="Philip Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q256931" start="54381" end="54392" title="Fort Fisher" label="Fort Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910850" start="54432" end="54463" title="Second Battle of Charleston Harbor" label="took Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646292" start="54830" end="54854" title="Hampton Roads Conference" label="Hampton Roads Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="55457" end="55483" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872738" start="55485" end="55493" title="Battle of Wilmington" label="was lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331053" start="55556" end="55564" title="Richmond in the American Civil War" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="55628" end="55653" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744652" start="55657" end="55679" title="Appomattox Court House National Historical Park" label="Appomattox Court House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55774" end="55799" title="Japanese ironclad Kōtetsu#American career as CSS Stonewall" label="CSS &amp;quot;Stonewall&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="56130" end="56147" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932018" start="56317" end="56343" title="CSS Shenandoah" label="CSS &amp;quot;Shenandoah&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="56381" end="56390" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q28036945" start="56403" end="56417" title="Gary Gallagher" label="Gary Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="57200" end="57213" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q343039" start="57840" end="57874" title="Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves" label="ban on international slave-trading"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58132" end="58155" title="Slavery in the United States#Internal slave trade" label="existing internal trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="58543" end="58558" title="commerce clause" label="commerce clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="58673" end="58693" title="internal improvement" label="internal improvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157085" start="58792" end="58814" title="General Welfare clause" label="general welfare clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660368" start="58826" end="58843" title="protective tariff" label="protective tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q480498" start="58935" end="58942" title="impeachment" label="impeach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985427" start="59058" end="59085" title="Necessary and Proper Clause" label="Necessary and Proper Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644794" start="59092" end="59108" title="Supremacy Clause" label="Supremacy Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="59648" end="59666" title="Federalism" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023307" start="60479" end="60499" title="Herrenvolk democracy" label="Herrenvolk democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159748" start="61806" end="61825" title="Confederate States presidential election, 1861" label="on November 6, 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553022" start="62874" end="62888" title="line item veto" label="line item veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="63064" end="63077" title="Congress of the United States" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="63266" end="63281" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783221" start="65406" end="65438" title="Provisional Confederate Congress" label="Provisional Confederate Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q878291" start="65538" end="65554" title="Howell Cobb" label="Howell Cobb, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q357725" start="65659" end="65683" title="Robert Woodward Barnwell" label="Robert Woodward Barnwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734209" start="65722" end="65744" title="Thomas Stanhope Bocock" label="Thomas Stanhope Bocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708615" start="65803" end="65836" title="Josiah Abigail Patterson Campbell" label="Josiah Abigail Patterson Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783221" start="65935" end="65955" title="Provisional Congress of the Confederate States" label="Provisional Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q162926" start="65958" end="65970" title="1st Confederate States Congress" label="1st Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q210235" start="65973" end="65985" title="2nd Confederate States Congress" label="2nd Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360472" start="66037" end="66061" title="Elias Cornelius Boudinot" label="Elias Cornelius Boudinot"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="66071" end="66079" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410912" start="66082" end="66104" title="Samuel Benton Callahan" label="Samuel Benton Callahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="66120" end="66125" title="Creek (people)" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="66127" end="66135" title="Seminole" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000807" start="66138" end="66157" title="Burton Allen Holder" label="Burton Allen Holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="66167" end="66176" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347501" start="66179" end="66200" title="Robert McDonald Jones" label="Robert McDonald Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="66210" end="66217" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009881" start="67677" end="67696" title="William Giles Jones" label="William Giles Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218582" start="67718" end="67730" title="Daniel Ringo" label="Daniel Ringo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323685" start="67751" end="67766" title="Jesse J. Finley" label="Jesse J. Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727301" start="67787" end="67803" title="Henry R. Jackson" label="Henry R. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858037" start="67849" end="67867" title="Edwin Warren Moise" label="Edwin Warren Moise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642708" start="67892" end="67915" title="Alexander Mosby Clayton" label="Alexander Mosby Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q720065" start="67943" end="67952" title="Asa Biggs" label="Asa Biggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q504871" start="67981" end="67998" title="Andrew G. Magrath" label="Andrew G. Magrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q817491" start="68010" end="68027" title="Benjamin F. Perry" label="Benjamin F. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985425" start="68045" end="68062" title="West H. Humphreys" label="West H. Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063466" start="68174" end="68193" title="James D. Halyburton" label="James D. Halyburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346697" start="68220" end="68241" title="John W. Brockenbrough" label="John W. Brockenbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q953749" start="68427" end="68441" title="John H. Reagan" label="John H. Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="68468" end="68483" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69059" end="69084" title="Postage stamps and postal history of the Confederate States#Covers" label="&amp;#x27;Flag of Truce&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438639" start="69219" end="69234" title="Fortress Monroe" label="Fortress Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123368" start="69355" end="69365" title="City Point, Virginia" label="City Point"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70092" end="70108" title="Postage stamps and postal history of the Confederate States#Blockade mail" label="Blockade runners"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70355" end="70375" title="Postage stamps and postal history of the Confederate States#Prisoner of war mail" label="Prisoner of War mail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70392" end="70405" title="Postage stamps and postal history of the Confederate States#Blockade mail" label="Blockade mail"/>
<link wikidata="" start="70554" end="70580" title=":File:Pow cover 19May1865.jpg" label="surviving Confederate mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767464" start="70842" end="70852" title="Mark E. Neely, Jr." label="Mark Neely"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539196" start="71205" end="71212" title="Slave patrol" label="Patrols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975563" start="71459" end="71484" title="1860 United States census" label="1860 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="71873" end="71898" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299355" start="72461" end="72504" title="Forty acres and a mule" label="concept was promoted within certain circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156250" start="72814" end="72838" title="compensated emancipation" label="compensated emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283407" start="72863" end="72883" title="District of Columbia Compensated Emancipation Act" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201382" start="73178" end="73188" title="turpentine" label="turpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="73197" end="73209" title="raw material" label="raw material"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850272" start="73591" end="73601" title="Black Belt (geological formation)" label="black belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="74374" end="74380" title="Economics of slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500274" start="74634" end="74644" title="free labor" label="free labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426207" start="76019" end="76029" title="work ethic" label="work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="76524" end="76533" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197048" start="76726" end="76737" title="King Cotton" label="King Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982026" start="77516" end="77528" title="naval stores" label="naval stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="78115" end="78121" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q214519" start="79633" end="79644" title="track gauge" label="track gauge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79973" end="79983" title="locomotive#Motive power" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q327005" start="82246" end="82254" title="glanders" label="glanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q686163" start="82949" end="82985" title="Confederate States of America dollar" label="Confederate States of America dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342135" start="83107" end="83123" title="Edward C. Elmore" label="Edward C. Elmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="83712" end="83724" title="Government debt" label="issuing debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086075" start="84295" end="84309" title="Charlotte Mint" label="Charlotte Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208915" start="84333" end="84347" title="Dahlonega Mint" label="Dahlonega Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q195919" start="84368" end="84384" title="New Orleans Mint" label="New Orleans Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q733369" start="85645" end="85661" title="Napoléon (coin)" label="French Napoleons"/>
<link wikidata="Q253506" start="90789" end="90797" title="Spinster" label="old maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="91588" end="91602" title="First Battle of Bull Run" label="First Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91677" end="91687" title="Flag of the United States#Historical progression of designs" label="Union flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559605" start="92290" end="92296" title="Canton (flag)" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570565" start="93336" end="93353" title="Southern Unionist" label="Southern Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="93398" end="93408" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="93417" end="93423" title="Ozarks" label="Ozarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q181727" start="93443" end="93458" title="Parson Brownlow" label="Parson Brownlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="93471" end="93485" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329493" start="93503" end="93517" title="East Tennessee" label="East Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93670" end="93683" title="History of West Virginia#Civil War and split" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330337" start="93716" end="93738" title="Eastern North Carolina" label="coastal North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="93875" end="93883" title="Freedman" label="Freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q109636" start="94049" end="94068" title="Cooke County, Texas" label="Cooke County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="94574" end="94584" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="94759" end="94772" title="planter class" label="planter class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="95159" end="95176" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496537" start="95249" end="95266" title="Trans-Mississippi Theater of the American Civil War" label="Trans-Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32793" start="95325" end="95339" title="Guadalupe Peak" label="Guadalupe Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="95377" end="95402" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="95492" end="95497" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="95512" end="95519" title="steppe climate" label="steppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="95529" end="95536" title="desert climate" label="deserts"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="95592" end="95610" title="infectious disease" label="infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="96231" end="96242" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="96330" end="96341" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493703" start="96538" end="96552" title="Union blockade" label="Union blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="96778" end="96788" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="96841" end="96866" title="evangelical Protestantism" label="evangelical Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="96868" end="96876" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="96881" end="96891" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922295" start="96976" end="96988" title="Black church" label="Black church"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="96990" end="97009" title="Freedom of religion" label="Freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="97014" end="97044" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188412" start="97085" end="97102" title="Church attendance" label="Church attendance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="97256" end="97263" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268181" start="97349" end="97389" title="Presbyterian Church in the United States" label="Presbyterian Church in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286693" start="97441" end="97462" title="Joseph Ruggles Wilson" label="Joseph Ruggles Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="97574" end="97601" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q839112" start="97610" end="97643" title="Methodist Episcopal Church, South" label="Methodist Episcopal Church, South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251603" start="97681" end="97745" title="Protestant Episcopal Church in the Confederate States of America" label="Protestant Episcopal Church in the Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="97784" end="97800" title="Episcopal Church (USA)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="97828" end="97841" title="Presbyterians" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268181" start="97872" end="97912" title="Presbyterian Church in the United States" label="Presbyterian Church in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184866" start="98552" end="98563" title="Amnesty Act" label="Amnesty Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q124334" start="99080" end="99090" title="Henry Wirz" label="Henry Wirz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054507" start="99096" end="99106" title="commandant" label="commandant"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="99122" end="99137" title="prisoner-of-war" label="prisoner-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488496" start="99148" end="99170" title="Andersonville, Georgia" label="Andersonville, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="99380" end="99394" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="99593" end="99613" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Thirteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="99642" end="99652" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q191614" start="99756" end="99765" title="Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983570" start="99899" end="99917" title="Compromise of 1877" label="Compromise of 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="100618" end="100632" title="Disfranchisement after Reconstruction era" label="to now exclude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="100742" end="100767" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538559" start="100773" end="100784" title="Solid South" label="Solid South"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="100874" end="100886" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407695" start="100926" end="100940" title="Texas v. White" label="Texas v. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="101184" end="101191" title="United States states" label="a state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487881" start="101972" end="101993" title="Frank Lawrence Owsley" label="Frank Lawrence Owsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q357506" start="102268" end="102280" title="Joseph E. Brown" label="Joseph Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358550" start="102529" end="102545" title="Roger Lowenstein" label="Roger Lowenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="102719" end="102733" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="102760" end="102776" title="war of attrition" label="war of attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="102833" end="102846" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058050" start="103235" end="103258" title="1863 Confederate States House of Representatives elections" label="1863 mid-term elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="103720" end="103737" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341473" start="103757" end="103778" title="Edward Alfred Pollard" label="Edward Alfred Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230837" start="103851" end="103874" title="Richmond Examiner" label="Daily Richmond Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322062" start="103942" end="103962" title="E. Merton Coulter" label="Ellis Merton Coulter"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="103990" end="104011" title="Lost Cause of the Confederacy" label="Confederate apologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000441" start="104875" end="104906" title="American Civil War prison camps" label="American Civil War prison camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837109" start="104909" end="104953" title="Cabinet of the Confederate States of America" label="Cabinet of the Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950500" start="104956" end="104995" title="Commemoration of the American Civil War" label="Commemoration of the American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958985" start="104998" end="105055" title="Commemoration of the American Civil War on postage stamps" label="Commemoration of the American Civil War on postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159754" start="105058" end="105078" title="Confederate colonies" label="Confederate colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159723" start="105081" end="105106" title="Confederate Patent Office" label="Confederate Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159764" start="105109" end="105132" title="Confederate war finance" label="Confederate war finance"/>
<link wikidata="" start="105141" end="105182" title="C.S.A.: The Confederate States of America" label="C.S.A.: The Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11285118" start="105191" end="105228" title="History of the Southern United States" label="History of the Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298015" start="105231" end="105259" title="Knights of the Golden Circle" label="Knights of the Golden Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567707" start="105262" end="105300" title="List of Confederate arms manufacturers" label="List of Confederate arms manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567708" start="105303" end="105344" title="List of Confederate arsenals and armories" label="List of Confederate arsenals and armories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159760" start="105347" end="105390" title="List of Confederate monuments and memorials" label="List of Confederate monuments and memorials"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209462" start="105393" end="105446" title="List of treaties of the Confederate States of America" label="List of treaties of the Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q24836931" start="105449" end="105488" title="List of historical separatist movements" label="List of historical separatist movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q941002" start="105491" end="105509" title="List of civil wars" label="List of civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971523" start="105512" end="105543" title="National Civil War Naval Museum" label="National Civil War Naval Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479937" start="105752" end="105777" title="Stanford University Press" label="Stanford University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7025" wikidata="Q13181" url="?curid=7025" title="Cranberry">
<text>Cranberries are a group of evergreen dwarf shrubs or trailing vines in the subgenus Oxycoccus of the genus &quot;Vaccinium&quot;. Cranberries are low, creeping shrubs or vines up to long and in height; they have slender stems that are not thickly woody and have small evergreen leaves. The flowers are dark pink. The fruit is a berry that is larger than the leaves of the plant; it is initially light green, turning red when ripe. It is edible, but has an acidic taste.

In Britain, &quot;cranberry&quot; may refer to the native species &quot;Vaccinium oxycoccos&quot;, while in North America, &quot;cranberry&quot; may refer to &quot;V. macrocarpon&quot;. &quot;Vaccinium oxycoccos&quot; is cultivated in central and northern Europe, while &quot;V. macrocarpon&quot; is cultivated throughout the northern United States, Canada and Chile. In some methods of classification, &quot;Oxycoccus&quot; is regarded as a genus in its own right. Cranberries can be found in acidic bogs throughout the cooler regions of the Northern Hemisphere.

In 2020, the U.S., Canada, and Chile accounted for 97% of the world production of cranberries. Most cranberries are processed into products such as juice, sauce, jam, and sweetened dried cranberries, with the remainder sold fresh to consumers. Cranberry sauce is a traditional accompaniment to turkey at Christmas and Thanksgiving dinners in the U.S. and Canada, and at Christmas dinner in the United Kingdom.

== Description and species ==
Cranberries are low, creeping shrubs or vines up to long and in height; they have slender, wiry stems that are not thickly woody and have small evergreen leaves. The flowers are dark pink, with very distinct reflexed petals, leaving the style and stamens fully exposed and pointing forward. They are pollinated by bees. The fruit is a berry that is larger than the leaves of the plant; it is initially light green, turning red when ripe. It has an acidic taste which usually overwhelms its sweetness.

There are 4–5 species of cranberry, classified by subgenus:

===Subgenus &quot;Oxycoccus&quot;===
===Subgenus &quot;Oxycoccus&quot;, sect. &quot;Oxycoccoides&quot;===
=== Similar species ===
Cranberries are related to bilberries, blueberries, and huckleberries, all in &quot;Vaccinium&quot; subgenus &quot;Vaccinium&quot;. These differ in having bell-shaped flowers, petals that are not reflexed, and woodier stems, forming taller shrubs.

== Etymology ==

The name &quot;cranberry&quot; derives from the Middle Low German &quot;kraanbere&quot; (English translation, &quot;craneberry&quot;), first named as &quot;cranberry&quot; in English by the missionary John Eliot in 1647. Around 1694, German and Dutch colonists in New England used the word, cranberry, to represent the expanding flower, stem, calyx, and petals resembling the neck, head, and bill of a crane. The traditional English name for the plant more common in Europe, &quot;Vaccinium oxycoccos&quot;, fenberry, originated from plants with small red berries found growing in fen (marsh) lands of England.

==Cultivation==

American Revolutionary War veteran Henry Hall first cultivated cranberries in the Cape Cod town of Dennis around 1816. In the 1820s, Hall was shipping cranberries to New York City and Boston from which shipments were also sent to Europe. In 1843, Eli Howes planted his own crop of cranberries on Cape Cod, using the &quot;Howes&quot; variety. In 1847, Cyrus Cahoon planted a crop of &quot;Early Black&quot; variety near Pleasant Lake, Harwich, Massachusetts.
By 1900, were under cultivation in the New England region. In 2021, the total output of cranberries harvested in the United States was , with Wisconsin as the largest state producer (59% of total), followed by Massachusetts, New Jersey, and Oregon.
Cranberries have had two major breeding events. The first occurred in the 1920s, with aims to create a crop that was more insect resistant, specifically to blunt-nosed leafhopper (&quot;Limotettix vaccini&quot;) the vector of cranberry false blossom disease. This resulted in cultivars such as &quot;Stevens&quot; and &quot;Franklin&quot;. As such, cultivars like &quot;Howes&quot; tend to be more susceptible to insects as opposed to &quot;Stevens&quot;. However, with the introduction of many broad-spectrum pesticides in the 1940s and 1950s, breeders eventually stopped breeding for pest resistance. Instead, beginning in the 1980s, cranberries were begun to be bred for high yielding varieties, leading to cultivars such as &quot;Crimson Queen&quot; and &quot;Mullica Queen&quot;. Many of these varieties were spearheaded and bred by Dr. Nicholi Vorsa of Rutgers University. In more recent years, there have been heavier restrictions on pesticides due to environmental safety concerns, leading to a larger emphasis of high yield-high resistance varieties.

=== Geography and bog method ===
Historically, cranberry beds were constructed in wetlands. Today&#x27;s cranberry beds are constructed in upland areas with a shallow water table. The topsoil is scraped off to form dykes around the bed perimeter. Clean sand is hauled in and spread to a depth of . The surface is laser leveled flat to provide even drainage. Beds are frequently drained with socked tile in addition to the perimeter ditch. In addition to making it possible to hold water, the dykes allow equipment to service the beds without driving on the vines. Irrigation equipment is installed in the bed to provide irrigation for vine growth and for spring and autumn frost protection.

A common misconception about cranberry production is that the beds remain flooded throughout the year. During the growing season cranberry beds are not flooded, but are irrigated regularly to maintain soil moisture. Beds are flooded in the autumn to facilitate harvest and again during the winter to protect against low temperatures. In cold climates like Wisconsin, New England, and eastern Canada, the winter flood typically freezes into ice, while in warmer climates the water remains liquid. When ice forms on the beds, trucks can be driven onto the ice to spread a thin layer of sand to control pests and rejuvenate the vines. Sanding is done every three to five years.

=== Propagation ===
Cranberry vines are propagated by moving vines from an established bed. The vines are spread on the surface of the sand of the new bed and pushed into the sand with a blunt disk. The vines are watered frequently during the first few weeks until roots form and new shoots grow. Beds are given frequent, light application of nitrogen fertilizer during the first year. The cost of renovating cranberry beds is estimated to be between .

=== Ripening and harvest ===
Cranberries are harvested in the fall when the fruit takes on its distinctive deep red color, and most ideally after the first frost. Berries that receive sun turn a deep red when fully ripe, while those that do not fully mature are a pale pink or white color. This is usually in September through the first part of November. To harvest cranberries, the beds are flooded with of water above the vines. A harvester is driven through the beds to remove the fruit from the vines. For the past 50 years, water reel type harvesters have been used. Harvested cranberries float in the water and can be corralled into a corner of the bed and conveyed or pumped from the bed. From the farm, cranberries are taken to receiving stations where they are cleaned, sorted, and stored prior to packaging or processing. While cranberries are harvested when they take on their deep red color, they can also be harvested beforehand when they are still white, which is how white cranberry juice is made. Yields are lower on beds harvested early and the early flooding tends to damage vines, but not severely. Vines can also be trained through dry picking to help avoid damage in subsequent harvests.

Although most cranberries are wet-picked as described above, 5–10% of the US crop is still dry-picked. This entails higher labor costs and lower yield, but dry-picked berries are less bruised and can be sold as fresh fruit instead of having to be immediately frozen or processed. Originally performed with two-handed comb scoops, dry picking is today accomplished by motorized, walk-behind harvesters which must be small enough to traverse beds without damaging the vines.

Cranberries for fresh market are stored in shallow bins or boxes with perforated or slatted bottoms, which deter decay by allowing air to circulate. Because harvest occurs in late autumn, cranberries for fresh market are frequently stored in thick walled barns without mechanical refrigeration. Temperatures are regulated by opening and closing vents in the barn as needed. Cranberries destined for processing are usually frozen in bulk containers shortly after arriving at a receiving station.

=== Diseases ===

Diseases of cranberry include:
*Cranberry fruit rot
*Cranberry root rot
*Cranberry false blossom disease, caused by a phytoplasma that is vectored by the blunt-nosed leafhopper (&quot;Limotettix vaccinii&quot;), and prevents the plant from creating fertile flowers and thus berries.

=== Insect Pests ===
Probably due to the high phenolics and plant defenses, in addition to the harsh environments that cranberries are grown under (acid, sandy soils that get flooded every year), a majority of insect pests associated with cranberries are native to the cranberry&#x27;s home range of North America. The top studied insect pests of cranberries include:
*&quot;Sparganothis sulfureana&quot; (Sparganothis fruitworm), a leafrolling moth 
*&quot;Acrobasis vaccinii&quot; (cranberry fruitworm), a snout moth 
*&quot;Rhopobota naevana&quot; (blackheaded fireworm), a leafrolling moth 
*&quot;Choristoneura parallela&quot; (spotted fireworm), a leafrolling moth 
All four of these top studied insect pests are direct pests, eating the berries.

Other well studied cranberry pests include:
*&quot;Limotettix vaccinii&quot; (blunt-nosed leafhopper), a leafhopper
*&quot;Lymantria dispar&quot; (spongy moth), an invasive moth
*&quot;Dasineura oxycoccana&quot; (cranberry tipworm), a gall-forming midge
*&quot;Chrysoteuchia topiarius&quot; (cranberry girdler), a snout moth
*&quot;Anthonomus musculus&quot; (cranberry weevil), a weevil
*&quot;Systena frontalis&quot; (red-headed flea beetle), a flea beetle
*&quot;Otiorhynchus sulcatus&quot; (black vine weevil), an invasive weevil
*&quot;Anomala orientalis&quot; (oriental beetle), an invasive scarab beetle

As more and more pesticides become banned due to environmental concern, there are increased resurgences of secondary pests.

=== Production ===
In 2022, world production of cranberry was 582,924 tonnes, with the United States and Canada together accounting for 99% of the total. Wisconsin (59% of US production) and Quebec (60% of Canadian production) are two of the largest producers of cranberries in the two countries. Cranberries are also a major commercial crop in Massachusetts, New Jersey, Oregon, and Washington, as well as in the Canadian province of British Columbia (33% of Canadian production).

== Possible safety concerns ==
The anticoagulant effects of warfarin may be increased by consuming cranberry juice, resulting in adverse effects such as increased incidence of bleeding and bruising. Other safety concerns from consuming large quantities of cranberry juice or using cranberry supplements include potential for nausea, and increasing stomach inflammation, sugar intake or kidney stone formation.

== Uses ==
=== Nutrition ===

Raw cranberries are 87% water, 12% carbohydrates, and contain negligible protein and fat (table). In a 100 gram reference amount, raw cranberries supply 46 calories and moderate levels of vitamin C, dietary fiber, and the essential dietary mineral manganese, each with more than 10% of its Daily Value. Other micronutrients have low content (table).

Dried cranberries are commonly processed with up to 10 times their natural sugar content. The drying process also eliminates vitamin C content.

=== History ===
In North America, the Narragansett people of the Algonquian nation in the regions of New England appeared to be using cranberries in pemmican for food and for dye. Calling the red berries, &quot;sasemineash&quot;, the Narragansett people may have introduced cranberries to colonists in Massachusetts. In 1550, James White Norwood made reference to Native Americans using cranberries, and it was the first reference to American cranberries up until this point. In James Rosier&#x27;s book &quot;The Land of Virginia&quot; there is an account of Europeans coming ashore and being met with Native Americans bearing bark cups full of cranberries. In Plymouth, Massachusetts, there is a 1633 account of the husband of Mary Ring auctioning her cranberry-dyed petticoat for 16 shillings. In 1643, Roger Williams&#x27;s book &quot;A Key into the Language of America&quot; described cranberries, referring to them as &quot;bearberries&quot; because bears ate them. In 1648, preacher John Elliott was quoted in Thomas Shepard&#x27;s book &quot;Clear Sunshine of the Gospel&quot; with an account of the difficulties the Pilgrims were having in using the Indians to harvest cranberries as they preferred to hunt and fish. In 1663, the Pilgrim cookbook appears with a recipe for cranberry sauce. In 1667, New Englanders sent to King Charles ten barrels of cranberries, three barrels of codfish and some Indian corn as a means of appeasement for his anger over their local coining of the pine tree shilling minted by John Hull. In 1669, Captain Richard Cobb had a banquet in his house (to celebrate both his marriage to Mary Gorham and his election to the Convention of Assistance), serving wild turkey with sauce made from wild cranberries. In the 1672 book &quot;New England Rarities Discovered&quot; author John Josselyn described cranberries, writing:Sauce for the Pilgrims, cranberry or bearberry, is a small trayling plant that grows in salt marshes that are overgrown with moss. The berries are of a pale yellow color, afterwards red, as big as a cherry, some perfectly round, others oval, all of them hollow with sower astringent taste; they are ripe in August and September. They are excellent against the Scurvy. They are also good to allay the fervor of hoof diseases. The Indians and English use them mush, boyling them with sugar for sauce to eat with their meat; and it is a delicate sauce, especially with roasted mutton. Some make tarts with them as with gooseberries.

&quot;The Compleat Cook&#x27;s Guide&quot;, published in 1683, made reference to cranberry juice. In 1703, cranberries were served at the Harvard University commencement dinner. In 1787, James Madison wrote Thomas Jefferson in France for background information on constitutional government to use at the Constitutional Convention. Jefferson sent back a number of books on the subject and in return asked for a gift of apples, pecans and cranberries. William Aiton, a Scottish botanist, included an entry for the cranberry in volume II of his 1789 work &quot;Hortus Kewensis&quot;. He notes that &quot;Vaccinium macrocarpon&quot; (American cranberry) was cultivated by James Gordon in 1760. In 1796, cranberries were served at the first celebration of the landing of the Pilgrims, and Amelia Simmons (an American orphan) wrote a book entitled &quot;American Cookery&quot; which contained a recipe for cranberry tarts.

===Products===

As fresh cranberries are hard, sour, and bitter, about 95% of cranberries are processed and used to make cranberry juice and sauce. They are also sold dried and sweetened. Cranberry juice is usually sweetened or blended with other fruit juices to reduce its natural tartness. At four teaspoons of sugar per 100 grams (one teaspoon per ounce), cranberry juice cocktail is more highly sweetened than even soda drinks that have been linked to obesity.

Usually cranberries as fruit are cooked into a compote or jelly, known as cranberry sauce. Such preparations are traditionally served with roast turkey, as a staple of Thanksgiving (both in Canada and in the United States) as well as English dinners. The berry is also used in baking (muffins, scones, cakes and breads). In baking it is often combined with orange or orange zest. Less commonly, cranberries are used to add tartness to savory dishes such as soups and stews.

Fresh cranberries can be frozen at home, and will keep up to nine months; they can be used directly in recipes without thawing.

There are several alcoholic cocktails, including the cosmopolitan, that include cranberry juice.

=== Urinary tract infections ===
A 2023 Cochrane systematic review of 50 studies concluded there is evidence that consuming cranberry products (such as juice or capsules) is effective for reducing the risk of urinary tract infections (UTIs) in women with recurrent UTIs, in children, and in people susceptible to UTIs following clinical interventions; there was little evidence of effect in elderly people, those with urination disorders or pregnant women.

When the quality of meta-analyses on the efficacy of consuming cranberry products for preventing or treating UTIs is examined with the weaker evidence that is available, large variation and uncertainty of effects are seen, resulting from inconsistencies of clinical research design and inadequate numbers of subjects. In 2014, the European Food Safety Authority reviewed the evidence for one brand of cranberry extract and concluded that a cause and effect relationship had not been established between cranberry consumption and reduced risk of UTIs.

A 2022 review of international urology guidelines on UTI found that most clinical organizations felt the evidence for use of cranberry products to inhibit UTIs was conflicting, unconvincing or weak.

== Research ==
=== Phytochemicals===
Raw cranberries, cranberry juice and cranberry extracts are a source of polyphenols – including proanthocyanidins, flavonols and quercetin. These phytochemical compounds are being studied in vivo and in vitro for possible effects on the cardiovascular system, immune system and cancer. However, there is no confirmation from human studies that consuming cranberry polyphenols provides anti-cancer, immune, or cardiovascular benefits. Potential is limited by poor absorption and rapid excretion.

Cranberry juice contains a high molecular weight non-dializable material that is under research for its potential to affect formation of plaque by &quot;Streptococcus mutans&quot; pathogens that cause tooth decay. Cranberry juice components are also being studied for possible effects on kidney stone formation.

=== Extract quality ===
Problems may arise with the lack of validation for quantifying of A-type proanthocyanidins (PAC) extracted from cranberries. For instance, PAC extract quality and content can be performed using different methods including the European Pharmacopoeia method, liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry, or a modified 4-dimethylaminocinnamaldehyde colorimetric method. Variations in extract analysis can lead to difficulties in assessing the quality of PAC extracts from different cranberry starting material, such as by regional origin, ripeness at time of harvest and post-harvest processing. Assessments show that quality varies greatly from one commercial PAC extract product to another.

== Marketing and economics ==

===United States===
Cranberry sales in the United States have traditionally been associated with holidays of Thanksgiving and Christmas.

In the U.S., large-scale cranberry cultivation has been developed as opposed to other countries. American cranberry growers have a long history of cooperative marketing. As early as 1904, John Gaynor, a Wisconsin grower, and A.U. Chaney, a fruit broker from Des Moines, Iowa, organized Wisconsin growers into a cooperative called the Wisconsin Cranberry Sales Company to receive a uniform price from buyers. Growers in New Jersey and Massachusetts were also organized into cooperatives, creating the National Fruit Exchange that marketed fruit under the Eatmor brand. The success of cooperative marketing almost led to its failure. With consistent and high prices, area and production doubled between 1903 and 1917 and prices fell.

With surplus cranberries and changing American households some enterprising growers began canning cranberries that were below-grade for fresh market. Competition between canners was fierce because profits were thin. The Ocean Spray cooperative was established in 1930 through a merger of three primary processing companies: Ocean Spray Preserving company, Makepeace Preserving Co, and Cranberry Products Co. The new company was called Cranberry Canners, Inc. and used the Ocean Spray label on their products. Since the new company represented over 90% of the market, it would have been illegal under American antitrust laws had attorney John Quarles not found an exemption for agricultural cooperatives. , about 65% of the North American industry belongs to the Ocean Spray cooperative.

In 1958, Morris April Brothers—who produced Eatmor brand cranberry sauce in Tuckahoe, New Jersey—brought an action against Ocean Spray for violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act and won $200,000 in real damages plus triple damages, just in time for the Great Cranberry Scare: on 9 November 1959, Secretary of the United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare Arthur S. Flemming announced that some of the 1959 cranberry crop was tainted with traces of the herbicide aminotriazole. The market for cranberries collapsed and growers lost millions of dollars. However, the scare taught the industry that they could not be completely dependent on the holiday market for their products; they had to find year-round markets for their fruit. They also had to be exceedingly careful about their use of pesticides. After the aminotriazole scare, Ocean Spray reorganized and spent substantial sums on product development. New products such as cranberry-apple juice blends were introduced, followed by other juice blends.

Prices and production increased steadily during the 1980s and 1990s. Prices peaked at about $65.00 per barrel ()—a cranberry barrel equals —in 1996 then fell to $18.00 per barrel () in 2001. The cause for the precipitous drop was classic oversupply. Production had outpaced consumption leading to substantial inventory in freezers or as concentrate.

Cranberry handlers (processors) include Ocean Spray, Cliffstar Corporation, Northland Cranberries Inc. (Sun Northland LLC), Clement Pappas &amp; Co., and Decas Cranberry Products as well as a number of small handlers and processors.

====Cranberry Marketing Committee====
The Cranberry Marketing Committee is an organization that was established in 1962 as a Federal Marketing Order to ensure a stable, orderly supply of good quality product. The order has been renewed and modified slightly over the years. The market order has been invoked during six crop years: 1962 (12%), 1963 (5%), 1970 (10%), 1971 (12%), 2000 (15%), and 2001 (35%). Even though supply still exceeds demand, there is little will to invoke the Federal Marketing Order out of the realization that any pullback in supply by U.S. growers would easily be filled by Canadian production.

The Cranberry Marketing Committee, based in Wareham, Massachusetts, represents more than 1,100 cranberry growers and 60 cranberry handlers across Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Jersey, Wisconsin, Michigan, Minnesota, Oregon, Washington and New York (Long Island). The authority for the actions taken by the Cranberry Marketing Committee is provided in Chapter IX, Title 7, Code of Federal Regulations which is called the Federal Cranberry Marketing Order. The Order is part of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, identifying cranberries as a commodity good that can be regulated by Congress. The Federal Cranberry Marketing Order has been altered over the years to expand the Cranberry Marketing Committee&#x27;s ability to develop projects in the United States and around the world. The Cranberry Marketing Committee currently runs promotional programs in the United States, China, India, Mexico, Pan-Europe, and South Korea.

===International trade===
, the European Union was the largest importer of American cranberries, followed individually by Canada, China, Mexico, and South Korea. From 2013 to 2017, U.S. cranberry exports to China grew exponentially, making China the second largest country importer, reaching $36 million in cranberry products. The China–United States trade war resulted in many Chinese businesses cutting off ties with their U.S. cranberry suppliers.

== References ==
Notes
Further reading

* Cole, S. &amp; Gifford, L. (2009). &quot;The Cranberry: Hard Work and Holiday Sauce&quot;. Tilbury House Publishers. 
* Trehane, J. (2009). &quot;Blueberries, Cranberries and Other Vacciniums&quot;. Timber Press. 

== External links ==

* Germplasm Resources Information Network: Sect. &quot;Oxycoccus&quot; and Sect. &quot;Oxycoccoides&quot;
* University of Massachusetts Amherst Cranberry Station for information on cranberry research
* Cranberry Library Page Hosted by the University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Wikimapia An overhead view of a cranberry farm near Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin
* Cranberry research at Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
* University of Massachusetts Cranberry Station Hosted by the University of Massachusetts – Amherst
* &quot;Harvest-Time in a Cranberry Bog&quot;, &quot;The Booklovers Magazine&quot;, December 1904. Internet Archive.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="0" end="11" title="Cranberry" label="Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="27" end="36" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12867502" start="37" end="48" title="dwarf shrub" label="dwarf shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238261" start="75" end="83" title="subgenus" label="subgenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079636" start="113" end="122" title="Vaccinium" label="Vaccinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="268" end="277" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184" start="328" end="333" title="berry (botany)" label="berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q374399" start="543" end="562" title="Vaccinium oxycoccos" label="Vaccinium oxycoccos"/>
<link wikidata="Q149397" start="635" end="649" title="Vaccinium macrocarpon" label="V. macrocarpon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="965" end="969" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q865448" start="1184" end="1189" title="cranberry juice" label="juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307390" start="1217" end="1234" title="Dried cranberry" label="dried cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915430" start="1280" end="1295" title="Cranberry sauce" label="Cranberry sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="1354" end="1366" title="Thanksgiving" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="1621" end="1630" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="1714" end="1719" title="Gynoecium" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="1724" end="1730" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184" start="1812" end="1817" title="berry (botany)" label="berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238261" start="2029" end="2037" title="subgenus" label="subgenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60708120" start="2197" end="2207" title="bilberries" label="bilberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="2209" end="2220" title="blueberries" label="blueberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689896" start="2226" end="2239" title="huckleberries" label="huckleberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q505674" start="2484" end="2501" title="Middle Low German" label="Middle Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q187818" start="2637" end="2647" title="John Eliot (missionary)" label="John Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="2700" end="2711" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="2773" end="2777" title="Plant stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="2779" end="2784" title="calyx (flower)" label="calyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q25365" start="2838" end="2843" title="crane (bird)" label="crane"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2944" end="2952" title=":ang:Fenberȝe" label="fenberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q514050" start="3017" end="3020" title="fen" label="fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3065" end="3091" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722472" start="3100" end="3110" title="Henry Hall (American)" label="Henry Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q49152" start="3147" end="3155" title="Cape Cod" label="Cape Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188932" start="3164" end="3170" title="Dennis (CDP), Massachusetts" label="Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3249" end="3255" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="3666" end="3675" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="3734" end="3747" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="3749" end="3759" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="3765" end="3771" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042932" start="3959" end="3969" title="Limotettix" label="Limotettix"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="4283" end="4293" title="pesticides" label="pesticides"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="4632" end="4650" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465360" start="4690" end="4724" title="Food Quality Protection Act" label="heavier restrictions on pesticides"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="5049" end="5054" title="dyke (construction)" label="dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441395" start="5147" end="5158" title="laser level" label="laser level"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="5454" end="5464" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186174" start="5528" end="5548" title="List of common misconceptions" label="common misconception"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754464" start="8886" end="8905" title="Cranberry fruit rot" label="Cranberry fruit rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q104177884" start="8907" end="8925" title="Cranberry root rot" label="Cranberry root rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q132782" start="8972" end="8983" title="phytoplasma" label="phytoplasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="8992" end="9000" title="disease vector" label="vectored"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042932" start="9038" end="9048" title="Limotettix" label="Limotettix"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="9355" end="9360" title="Pest (organism)" label="pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573593" start="9513" end="9536" title="Sparganothis sulfureana" label="Sparganothis sulfureana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28953" start="9571" end="9587" title="Tortricidae" label="leafrolling moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675283" start="9596" end="9614" title="Acrobasis vaccinii" label="Acrobasis vaccinii"/>
<link wikidata="Q248425" start="9646" end="9656" title="Pyralidae" label="snout moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764623" start="9665" end="9682" title="Rhopobota naevana" label="Rhopobota naevana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28953" start="9715" end="9731" title="Tortricidae" label="leafrolling moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13466101" start="9740" end="9763" title="Choristoneura parallela" label="Choristoneura parallela"/>
<link wikidata="Q28953" start="9792" end="9808" title="Tortricidae" label="leafrolling moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042932" start="9943" end="9953" title="Limotettix" label="Limotettix"/>
<link wikidata="Q244452" start="9997" end="10007" title="Cicadellidae" label="leafhopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q45532" start="10015" end="10031" title="Lymantria dispar" label="Lymantria dispar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068481" start="10065" end="10069" title="Erebidae" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016755" start="10077" end="10086" title="Dasineura" label="Dasineura"/>
<link wikidata="Q768519" start="10127" end="10145" title="Cecidomyiidae" label="gall-forming midge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114957" start="10153" end="10176" title="Chrysoteuchia topiarius" label="Chrysoteuchia topiarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q132980" start="10206" end="10216" title="Crambidae" label="snout moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771924" start="10224" end="10243" title="Anthonomus musculus" label="Anthonomus musculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415384" start="10272" end="10278" title="Curculionidae" label="weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509113" start="10286" end="10303" title="Systena frontalis" label="Systena frontalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193407" start="10338" end="10349" title="Chrysomelidae" label="flea beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q585566" start="10357" end="10378" title="Otiorhynchus sulcatus" label="Otiorhynchus sulcatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415384" start="10418" end="10424" title="Curculionidae" label="weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102384" start="10432" end="10450" title="Anomala orientalis" label="Anomala orientalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186946" start="10488" end="10501" title="Scarabaeidae" label="scarab beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="10698" end="10703" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="10782" end="10791" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="10819" end="10825" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="10973" end="10986" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="10988" end="10998" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="11000" end="11006" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="11012" end="11022" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="11063" end="11079" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="11146" end="11159" title="anticoagulant" label="anticoagulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368879" start="11171" end="11179" title="warfarin" label="warfarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047938" start="11240" end="11254" title="adverse effect" label="adverse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q574491" start="11300" end="11308" title="bruising" label="bruising"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="11497" end="11509" title="kidney stone" label="kidney stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="11587" end="11599" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="11625" end="11632" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q130964" start="11708" end="11715" title="calorie" label="calorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="11740" end="11749" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="11751" end="11764" title="dietary fiber" label="dietary fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="11784" end="11799" title="dietary mineral" label="dietary mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="11800" end="11809" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="11842" end="11853" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q531507" start="11861" end="11874" title="micronutrient" label="micronutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307390" start="11903" end="11920" title="dried cranberry" label="Dried cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011065" start="11978" end="11991" title="added sugar" label="sugar content"/>
<link wikidata="Q609726" start="12086" end="12105" title="Narragansett people" label="Narragansett people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="12113" end="12130" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="12149" end="12160" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q130097" start="12197" end="12205" title="pemmican" label="pemmican"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="12350" end="12363" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q391591" start="12854" end="12868" title="Roger Williams" label="Roger Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657544" start="12887" end="12921" title="A Key into the Language of America" label="A Key into the Language of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q515767" start="13065" end="13086" title="Thomas Shepard (minister)" label="Thomas Shepard&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="13379" end="13391" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848673" start="13538" end="13556" title="pine tree shilling" label="pine tree shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451696" start="13567" end="13576" title="John Hull (merchant)" label="John Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242285" start="13860" end="13873" title="John Josselyn" label="John Josselyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="14723" end="14736" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="14743" end="14759" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="14840" end="14865" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q465898" start="14986" end="14999" title="William Aiton" label="William Aiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9004838" start="15094" end="15109" title="Hortus Kewensis" label="Hortus Kewensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q149397" start="15137" end="15158" title="Vaccinium macrocarpon" label="Vaccinium macrocarpon"/>
<link wikidata="Q865448" start="15575" end="15590" title="cranberry juice" label="cranberry juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q635999" start="15967" end="15974" title="compote" label="compote"/>
<link wikidata="Q74048276" start="15978" end="15983" title="jelly (fruit preserves)" label="jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915430" start="15994" end="16009" title="cranberry sauce" label="cranberry sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200953" start="16065" end="16071" title="Turkey meat" label="turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672785" start="16107" end="16116" title="Thanksgiving (Canada)" label="in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="16121" end="16141" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q207220" start="16205" end="16211" title="muffin" label="muffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q869660" start="16214" end="16220" title="scones" label="scones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="16232" end="16238" title="breads" label="breads"/>
<link wikidata="Q196819" start="16287" end="16298" title="orange zest" label="orange zest"/>
<link wikidata="Q268057" start="16577" end="16589" title="Cosmopolitan (cocktail)" label="cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="16662" end="16670" title="Cochrane (organisation)" label="Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="16671" end="16688" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q221668" start="16831" end="16854" title="urinary tract infection" label="urinary tract infection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17040" end="17059" title="Urination#Disorders" label="urination disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="17100" end="17113" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133849" start="17337" end="17354" title="clinical research" label="clinical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q516521" start="17411" end="17441" title="European Food Safety Authority" label="European Food Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="17520" end="17549" title="causality" label="cause and effect relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q105650" start="17663" end="17670" title="urology" label="urology"/>
<link wikidata="Q290439" start="17941" end="17951" title="polyphenol" label="polyphenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q415265" start="17965" end="17981" title="proanthocyanidin" label="proanthocyanidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629666" start="17984" end="17992" title="flavonol" label="flavonol"/>
<link wikidata="Q409478" start="17998" end="18007" title="quercetin" label="quercetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="18015" end="18028" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="18057" end="18064" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="18069" end="18077" title="in vitro" label="in vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="18332" end="18342" title="bioavailability" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q182854" start="18397" end="18413" title="molecular mass" label="molecular weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043671" start="18418" end="18428" title="Dialysis (chemistry)" label="dializable"/>
<link wikidata="Q143504" start="18502" end="18508" title="Dental plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q131452" start="18518" end="18538" title="Streptococcus mutans" label="Streptococcus mutans"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="18653" end="18665" title="kidney stone" label="kidney stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660997" start="18768" end="18791" title="A-type proanthocyanidin" label="A-type proanthocyanidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281444" start="18928" end="18950" title="European Pharmacopoeia" label="European Pharmacopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q873864" start="18959" end="18998" title="liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry" label="liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205585" start="19014" end="19043" title="4-dimethylaminocinnamaldehyde" label="4-dimethylaminocinnamaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q374535" start="19044" end="19056" title="colorimetric" label="colorimetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="19529" end="19541" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20112" end="20118" title="Eatmor" label="Eatmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348672" start="20511" end="20522" title="Ocean Spray (cooperative)" label="Ocean Spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996615" start="20968" end="20992" title="agricultural cooperative" label="agricultural cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425088" start="21235" end="21256" title="Sherman Antitrust Act" label="Sherman Antitrust Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="21392" end="21450" title="United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare" label="United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q709371" start="21451" end="21469" title="Arthur S. Flemming" label="Arthur S. Flemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q423314" start="21558" end="21571" title="aminotriazole" label="aminotriazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348672" start="22494" end="22505" title="Ocean Spray (cooperative)" label="Ocean Spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133110" start="22507" end="22528" title="Cliffstar" label="Cliffstar Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="23574" end="23585" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q51557538" start="24597" end="24626" title="China–United States trade war" label="China–United States trade war"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7030" wikidata="Q1211721" url="?curid=7030" title="Code coverage">
<text>In software engineering, code coverage, also called test coverage, is a percentage measure of the degree to which the source code of a program is executed when a particular test suite is run. A program with high code coverage has more of its source code executed during testing, which suggests it has a lower chance of containing undetected software bugs compared to a program with low code coverage. Many different metrics can be used to calculate test coverage. Some of the most basic are the percentage of program subroutines and the percentage of program statements called during execution of the test suite.

Code coverage was among the first methods invented for systematic software testing. The first published reference was by Miller and Maloney in &quot;Communications of the ACM&quot;, in 1963.

== Coverage criteria ==
To measure what percentage of code has been executed by a test suite, one or more &quot;coverage criteria&quot; are used. These are usually defined as rules or requirements, which a test suite must satisfy.

=== Basic coverage criteria ===
There are a number of coverage criteria, but the main ones are:
* Function coveragehas each function (or subroutine) in the program been called?
* Statement coveragehas each statement in the program been executed?
* Edge coveragehas every edge in the control-flow graph been executed?
** Branch coveragehas each branch (also called the DD-path) of each control structure (such as in &quot;if&quot; and &quot;case&quot; statements) been executed? For example, given an &quot;if&quot; statement, have both the &quot;true&quot; and &quot;false&quot; branches been executed? (This is a subset of edge coverage.)
* Condition coveragehas each Boolean sub-expression evaluated both to true and false? (Also called predicate coverage.)

For example, consider the following C function:

int foo (int x, int y)
 int z = 0;
 if ((x &gt; 0) &amp;&amp; (y &gt; 0))
 z = x;
 return z;


Assume this function is a part of some bigger program and this program was run with some test suite. 
* &quot;Function coverage&quot; will be satisfied if, during this execution, the function codice_1 was called at least once.
* &quot;Statement coverage&quot; for this function will be satisfied if it was called for example as codice_2, because in this case, every line in the function would be executed—including codice_3.
* &quot;Branch coverage&quot; will be satisfied by tests calling codice_2 and codice_5 because, in the first case, both codice_6 conditions are met and codice_3 is executed, while in the second case, the first condition, codice_8, is not satisfied, which prevents the execution of codice_3. 
* &quot;Condition coverage&quot; will be satisfied with tests that call codice_10, codice_5, and codice_2. These are necessary because in the first case, codice_8 is evaluated to codice_14, while in the second, it is evaluated to codice_15. At the same time, the first case makes codice_16 codice_15, the second case does not evaluate codice_16 (because of the lazy-evaluation of the Boolean operator), the third case makes it codice_14.

In programming languages that do not perform short-circuit evaluation, condition coverage does not necessarily imply branch coverage. For example, consider the following Pascal code fragment:

if a and b then

Condition coverage can be satisfied by two tests:
* codice_20, codice_21
* codice_22, codice_23
However, this set of tests does not satisfy branch coverage since neither case will meet the codice_6 condition.

Fault injection may be necessary to ensure that all conditions and branches of exception-handling code have adequate coverage during testing.

=== Modified condition/decision coverage ===

A combination of function coverage and branch coverage is sometimes also called decision coverage. This criterion requires that every point of entry and exit in the program has been invoked at least once, and every decision in the program has taken on all possible outcomes at least once. In this context, the decision is a Boolean expression comprising conditions and zero or more Boolean operators. This definition is not the same as branch coverage, however, the term &quot;decision coverage&quot; is sometimes used as a synonym for it.

Condition/decision coverage requires that both decision and condition coverage be satisfied. However, for safety-critical applications (such as avionics software) it is often required that modified condition/decision coverage (MC/DC) be satisfied. This criterion extends condition/decision criteria with requirements that each condition should affect the decision outcome independently.

For example, consider the following code:

if (a or b) and c then

The condition/decision criteria will be satisfied by the following set of tests:
However, the above tests set will not satisfy modified condition/decision coverage, since in the first test, the value of &#x27;b&#x27; and in the second test the value of &#x27;c&#x27; would not influence the output. So, the following test set is needed to satisfy MC/DC:
=== Multiple condition coverage ===
This criterion requires that all combinations of conditions inside each decision are tested. For example, the code fragment from the previous section will require eight tests:
=== Parameter value coverage ===
Parameter value coverage (PVC) requires that in a method taking parameters, all the common values for such parameters be considered. The idea is that all common possible values for a parameter are tested. For example, common values for a string are: 1) null, 2) empty, 3) whitespace (space, tabs, newline), 4) valid string, 5) invalid string, 6) single-byte string, 7) double-byte string. It may also be appropriate to use very long strings. Failure to test each possible parameter value may result in a bug. Testing only one of these could result in 100% code coverage as each line is covered, but as only one of seven options are tested, there is only 14.2% PVC.

=== Other coverage criteria ===
There are further coverage criteria, which are used less often:
* Linear Code Sequence and Jump (LCSAJ) coverage a.k.a. JJ-Path coverage has every LCSAJ/JJ-path been executed?
* Path coverageHas every possible route through a given part of the code been executed?
* Entry/exit coverageHas every possible call and return of the function been executed?
* Loop coverageHas every possible loop been executed zero times, once, and more than once?
* State coverageHas each state in a finite-state machine been reached and explored?
* Data-flow coverageHas each variable definition and its usage been reached and explored?

Safety-critical or dependable applications are often required to demonstrate 100% of some form of test coverage.
For example, the ECSS-E-ST-40C standard demands 100% statement and decision coverage for two out of four different criticality levels; for the other ones, target coverage values are up to negotiation between supplier and customer.
However, setting specific target values - and, in particular, 100% - has been criticized by practitioners for various reasons (cf.)
Martin Fowler writes: &quot;I would be suspicious of anything like 100% - it would smell of someone writing tests to make the coverage numbers happy, but not thinking about what they are doing&quot;.

Some of the coverage criteria above are connected. For instance, path coverage implies decision, statement and entry/exit coverage. Decision coverage implies statement coverage, because every statement is part of a branch.

Full path coverage, of the type described above, is usually impractical or impossible. Any module with a succession of formula_1 decisions in it can have up to formula_2 paths within it; loop constructs can result in an infinite number of paths. Many paths may also be infeasible, in that there is no input to the program under test that can cause that particular path to be executed. However, a general-purpose algorithm for identifying infeasible paths has been proven to be impossible (such an algorithm could be used to solve the halting problem). Basis path testing is for instance a method of achieving complete branch coverage without achieving complete path coverage.

Methods for practical path coverage testing instead attempt to identify classes of code paths that differ only in the number of loop executions, and to achieve &quot;basis path&quot; coverage the tester must cover all the path classes.

==In practice==
The target software is built with special options or libraries and run under a controlled environment, to map every executed function to the function points in the source code. This allows testing parts of the target software that are rarely or never accessed under normal conditions, and helps reassure that the most important conditions (function points) have been tested. The resulting output is then analyzed to see what areas of code have not been exercised and the tests are updated to include these areas as necessary. Combined with other test coverage methods, the aim is to develop a rigorous, yet manageable, set of regression tests.

In implementing test coverage policies within a software development environment, one must consider the following:

* What are coverage requirements for the end product certification and if so what level of test coverage is required? The typical level of rigor progression is as follows: Statement, Branch/Decision, Modified Condition/Decision Coverage (MC/DC), LCSAJ (Linear Code Sequence and Jump)
* Will coverage be measured against tests that verify requirements levied on the system under test (DO-178B)?
* Is the object code generated directly traceable to source code statements? Certain certifications, (i.e. DO-178B Level A) require coverage at the assembly level if this is not the case: &quot;Then, additional verification should be performed on the object code to establish the correctness of such generated code sequences&quot; (DO-178B) para-6.4.4.2.

Software authors can look at test coverage results to devise additional tests and input or configuration sets to increase the coverage over vital functions. Two common forms of test coverage are statement (or line) coverage and branch (or edge) coverage. Line coverage reports on the execution footprint of testing in terms of which lines of code were executed to complete the test. Edge coverage reports which branches or code decision points were executed to complete the test. They both report a coverage metric, measured as a percentage. The meaning of this depends on what form(s) of coverage have been used, as 67% branch coverage is more comprehensive than 67% statement coverage.

Generally, test coverage tools incur computation and logging in addition to the actual program thereby slowing down the application, so typically this analysis is not done in production. As one might expect, there are classes of software that cannot be feasibly subjected to these coverage tests, though a degree of coverage mapping can be approximated through analysis rather than direct testing.

There are also some sorts of defects which are affected by such tools. In particular, some race conditions or similar real time sensitive operations can be masked when run under test environments; though conversely, some of these defects may become easier to find as a result of the additional overhead of the testing code.

Most professional software developers use C1 and C2 coverage. C1 stands for statement coverage and C2 for branch or condition coverage. With a combination of C1 and C2, it is possible to cover most statements in a code base. Statement coverage would also cover function coverage with entry and exit, loop, path, state flow, control flow and data flow coverage. With these methods, it is possible to achieve nearly 100% code coverage in most software projects.

===Notable code coverage tools===
====Hardware manufacturers====
* Aldec
* Mentor Graphics
* Silvaco
* Synopsys

====Software====
* LDRA Testbed
* Parasoft

===== C / C++ =====
* Cantata++
* Gcov
* Insure++
* LDRA Testbed
* Tcov
* Testwell CTC++
* Trucov
* Squish (Froglogic)

===== C# .NET =====
* DevPartner Studio
* JetBrains
* NCover

===== Java =====

* Clover
* DevPartner Java
* EMMA
* Jtest
* LDRA Testbed

===== PHP =====
* PHPUnit, also need Xdebug to make coverage reports

==Usage in industry==
Test coverage is one consideration in the safety certification of avionics equipment. The guidelines by which avionics gear is certified by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is documented in DO-178B and DO-178C.

Test coverage is also a requirement in part 6 of the automotive safety standard ISO 26262 &quot;Road Vehicles - Functional Safety&quot;.

==See also==
* Cyclomatic complexity
* Intelligent verification
* Linear code sequence and jump
* Modified condition/decision coverage
* Mutation testing
* Regression testing
* Software metric
* Static program analysis
* White-box testing
* Java code coverage tools

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="3" end="23" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211721" start="25" end="38" title="Code coverage" label="code coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211721" start="52" end="65" title="Code coverage" label="test coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="118" end="129" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="135" end="142" title="computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705809" start="173" end="183" title="test suite" label="test suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="341" end="353" title="software bug" label="software bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="517" end="527" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q613299" start="559" end="569" title="statement (computer science)" label="statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q188522" start="680" end="696" title="software testing" label="software testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120519" start="763" end="788" title="Communications of the ACM" label="Communications of the ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705809" start="888" end="898" title="test suite" label="test suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="1175" end="1185" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q613299" start="1244" end="1253" title="statement (computer science)" label="statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="1309" end="1313" title="Graph theory" label="edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187693" start="1321" end="1339" title="control-flow graph" label="control-flow graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249208" start="1406" end="1413" title="DD-path" label="DD-path"/>
<link wikidata="Q817862" start="1453" end="1499" title="Conditional (programming)" label="&amp;quot;if&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;case&amp;quot; statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="1835" end="1836" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q605499" start="3144" end="3168" title="short-circuit evaluation" label="short-circuit evaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="3269" end="3275" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041312" start="3519" end="3534" title="Fault injection" label="Fault injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q471748" start="3598" end="3616" title="exception handling" label="exception-handling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005914" start="3842" end="3865" title="Entry and exit points" label="point of entry and exit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979515" start="4032" end="4050" title="Boolean expression" label="Boolean expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996307" start="4355" end="4370" title="safety-critical" label="safety-critical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828920" start="4393" end="4410" title="avionics software" label="avionics software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809585" start="5556" end="5560" title="Null object" label="null"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553422" start="6067" end="6096" title="Linear Code Sequence and Jump" label="Linear Code Sequence and Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="6479" end="6499" title="finite-state machine" label="finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996307" start="6618" end="6633" title="Safety-critical" label="Safety-critical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689057" start="6637" end="6647" title="Dependability" label="dependable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376491" start="6748" end="6752" title="European Cooperation for Space Standardization" label="ECSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q74894" start="7094" end="7107" title="Martin Fowler (software engineer)" label="Martin Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q622849" start="8053" end="8068" title="halting problem" label="halting problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867572" start="8071" end="8089" title="Basis path testing" label="Basis path testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139093" start="9410" end="9446" title="Modified Condition/Decision Coverage" label="Modified Condition/Decision Coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553422" start="9463" end="9492" title="Linear Code Sequence and Jump" label="Linear Code Sequence and Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q906182" start="9594" end="9601" title="DO-178B" label="DO-178B"/>
<link wikidata="Q906182" start="9936" end="9943" title="DO-178B" label="DO-178B"/>
<link wikidata="Q616554" start="11139" end="11153" title="race condition" label="race condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="11166" end="11175" title="Real-time computing" label="real time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033684" start="11901" end="11906" title="Aldec" label="Aldec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153205" start="11909" end="11924" title="Mentor Graphics" label="Mentor Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515669" start="11927" end="11934" title="Silvaco" label="Silvaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303478" start="11937" end="11945" title="Synopsys" label="Synopsys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205974" start="11966" end="11978" title="LDRA Testbed" label="LDRA Testbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135972" start="11981" end="11989" title="Parasoft" label="Parasoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="11997" end="11998" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="12001" end="12004" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033556" start="12013" end="12022" title="Cantata++" label="Cantata++"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039303" start="12025" end="12029" title="Gcov" label="Gcov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042396" start="12032" end="12040" title="Insure++" label="Insure++"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205974" start="12043" end="12055" title="LDRA Testbed" label="LDRA Testbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690698" start="12058" end="12062" title="Tcov" label="Tcov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12065" end="12079" title="Testwell CTC++" label="Testwell CTC++"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847232" start="12082" end="12088" title="Trucov" label="Trucov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582358" start="12091" end="12109" title="Squish (Froglogic)" label="Squish (Froglogic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="12117" end="12119" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622213" start="12120" end="12124" title=".NET" label=".NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266377" start="12133" end="12150" title="DevPartner Studio" label="DevPartner Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688472" start="12153" end="12162" title="JetBrains" label="JetBrains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953262" start="12165" end="12171" title="NCover" label="NCover"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="12179" end="12183" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109486" start="12193" end="12199" title="Clover (software)" label="Clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266377" start="12202" end="12217" title="DevPartner Java" label="DevPartner Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109486" start="12220" end="12224" title="EMMA (code coverage tool)" label="EMMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6298668" start="12227" end="12232" title="Jtest" label="Jtest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205974" start="12235" end="12247" title="LDRA Testbed" label="LDRA Testbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="12255" end="12258" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663673" start="12267" end="12274" title="PHPUnit" label="PHPUnit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588925" start="12286" end="12292" title="Xdebug" label="Xdebug"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="12485" end="12516" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q906182" start="12540" end="12547" title="DO-178B" label="DO-178B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205827" start="12552" end="12559" title="DO-178C" label="DO-178C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137075" start="12642" end="12651" title="ISO 26262" label="ISO 26262"/>
<link wikidata="Q867330" start="12715" end="12736" title="Cyclomatic complexity" label="Cyclomatic complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044160" start="12739" end="12763" title="Intelligent verification" label="Intelligent verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553422" start="12766" end="12795" title="Linear code sequence and jump" label="Linear code sequence and jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139093" start="12798" end="12834" title="Modified condition/decision coverage" label="Modified condition/decision coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308623" start="12837" end="12853" title="Mutation testing" label="Mutation testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q917415" start="12856" end="12874" title="Regression testing" label="Regression testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q657339" start="12877" end="12892" title="Software metric" label="Software metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329550" start="12895" end="12918" title="Static program analysis" label="Static program analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066228" start="12921" end="12938" title="White-box testing" label="White-box testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109486" start="12941" end="12965" title="Java code coverage tools" label="Java code coverage tools"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7033" wikidata="Q2187997" url="?curid=7033" title="Caitlin Clarke">
<text>Caitlin Clarke (born Katherine Anne Clarke; May 3, 1952 – September 9, 2004) was an American actress best known for her roles as Valerian in the 1981 fantasy film &quot;Dragonslayer&quot; and Charlotte Cardoza in the 1998–1999 Broadway musical &quot;Titanic&quot;.

==Biography==
Clarke was born in Pittsburgh, the oldest of five sisters, the youngest of whom is Victoria Clarke. Her family moved to Sewickley when she was ten. 

Clarke received her B.A. in theater arts from Mount Holyoke College in 1974 and her M.F.A. from the Yale School of Drama in 1978. During her final year at Yale, Clarke performed with the Yale Repertory Theater in such plays as &quot;Tales from the Vienna Woods&quot;. Clarke starred in the 1981 fantasy film &quot;Dragonslayer&quot;.

After appearing in three Broadway plays in 1985, Clarke moved to Los Angeles for several years as a film and television actress. She appeared in the 1986 film &quot;Crocodile Dundee&quot; as Simone, a friendly prostitute. She returned to theater in the early 1990s, and to Broadway as Charlotte Cardoza in &quot;Titanic&quot;. 

Clarke was diagnosed with ovarian cancer in 2000. She returned to Pittsburgh to teach theater at the University of Pittsburgh and at the Pittsburgh Musical Theater&#x27;s Rauh Conservatory as well as to perform in Pittsburgh theatre until her death on September 9, 2004.

==Stage==
===Broadway===
*1983 – &quot;Teaneck Tanzi: The Venus Flytrap&quot;
*1985 – &quot;The Marriage of Figaro&quot;
*1985 – &quot;Arms and the Man&quot;
*1985 – &quot;Strange Interlude&quot;
*1998 – &quot;Titanic: A New Musical&quot;

===Off-Broadway===
*1979 – &quot;Othello&quot;
*1981 – &quot;No End of Blame&quot;
*1983 – &quot;Summer&quot;
*1984 – &quot;Total Eclipse&quot;
*1984 – &quot;Quartermaine&#x27;s Terms&quot;
*1984 – &quot;Thin Ice&quot;
*1994 – &quot;Three Birds Alighting On A Field&quot;
*1994 – &quot;Unexpected Tenderness&quot;

===Regional===
*1978 – &quot;Tales from the Vienna Woods&quot; (New Haven)
*1979 – &quot;The Winter&#x27;s Tale&quot; (Washington)
*1980 – &quot;Bal&quot; (Chicago)
*1981 – &quot;Plenty&quot; (Chicago)
*1982 – &quot;Summer Vacation Madness&quot; (Minneapolis)
*1984 – &quot;As You Like It&quot; (San Diego)
*1984 – &quot;Not Quite Jerusalem&quot; (New Haven)
*1989 – &quot;Our Country&#x27;s Good&quot; (Los Angeles)
*1991 – &quot;The Queen And The Rebels&quot; (Baltimore)
*1996 – &quot;Mrs. Warren&#x27;s Profession&quot; (New Haven)
*1997 – &quot;Indiscretions&quot; (Dallas)
*1997 – &quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot; (Portland, Maine)
*1999 – &quot;Griller&quot; (Baltimore)
*2000 – &quot;Who&#x27;s Afraid of Virginia Woolf&quot; (Rochester, NY)
*2002 – &quot;The Gigli Concert&quot; (Pittsburgh)
*2002 – &quot;Aristocrats&quot; (Pittsburgh)

==Film==
* 1981 &quot;Dragonslayer&quot; as Valerian
* 1986 &quot;Crocodile Dundee&quot; as Simone
* 1988 &quot;Kenny&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;The Kid Brother&quot;) as Sharon
* 1989 &quot;The Big Picture&quot; as Sharon
* 1989 &quot;Penn &amp; Teller Get Killed&quot; as Carlotta / Officer McNamara
* 1994 &quot;Blown Away&quot; as Officer Rita
* 1997 &quot;Cost of Living&quot; as Annie
* 1997 &quot;A Cure For Serpents&quot; (Short) as Mother
* 1999 &quot;Joe the King&quot; as Pat
* 2001 &quot;Never Again&quot; as Allison (final film role)

==Television==
Series: &quot;Northern Exposure&quot; (&quot;Only You&quot;), &quot;The Equalizer&quot;, &quot;Once a Hero&quot;, &quot;Moonlighting&quot;, &quot;Sex And The City&quot;, &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot; (&quot;Menace&quot;, &quot;Juvenile&quot;, &quot;Stiff&quot;), &quot;Matlock&quot; (&quot;The Witness&quot;).

Movies: &quot;Mayflower Madam&quot; (1986), &quot;Love, Lies and Murder&quot; (1991), &quot;The Stepford Husbands&quot; (1996).

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2187997" start="0" end="14" title="Caitlin Clarke" label="Caitlin Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187997" start="21" end="42" title="Caitlin Clarke" label="Katherine Anne Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193005" start="169" end="181" title="Dragonslayer (1981 film)" label="Dragonslayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="227" end="235" title="Broadway theater" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="236" end="243" title="musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416989" start="250" end="257" title="Titanic (musical)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="299" end="309" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15504611" start="363" end="378" title="Victoria Clarke" label="Victoria Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187224" start="400" end="409" title="Sewickley, Pennsylvania" label="Sewickley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="476" end="497" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047423" start="530" end="550" title="Yale School of Drama" label="Yale School of Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047414" start="617" end="639" title="Yale Repertory Theater" label="Yale Repertory Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247830" start="663" end="690" title="Tales from the Vienna Woods (play)" label="Tales from the Vienna Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193005" start="744" end="756" title="Dragonslayer (1981 film)" label="Dragonslayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="790" end="798" title="Broadway theater" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q615254" start="930" end="946" title="Crocodile Dundee" label="Crocodile Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416989" start="1077" end="1084" title="Titanic (musical)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172341" start="1120" end="1134" title="ovarian cancer" label="ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="1160" end="1170" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275200" start="1195" end="1219" title="Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199333" start="1231" end="1257" title="Pittsburgh Musical Theater" label="Pittsburgh Musical Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777488" start="1308" end="1326" title="Theatre in Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034849" start="1405" end="1437" title="Trafford Tanzi" label="Teaneck Tanzi: The Venus Flytrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199684" start="1458" end="1480" title="The Marriage of Figaro (play)" label="The Marriage of Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646905" start="1501" end="1517" title="Arms and the Man" label="Arms and the Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621410" start="1538" end="1555" title="Strange Interlude" label="Strange Interlude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416989" start="1576" end="1598" title="Titanic (musical)" label="Titanic: A New Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247830" start="1950" end="1977" title="Tales from the Vienna Woods (play)" label="Tales from the Vienna Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193005" start="2789" end="2801" title="Dragonslayer (1981 film)" label="Dragonslayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q615254" start="2833" end="2849" title="Crocodile Dundee" label="Crocodile Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195213" start="2879" end="2884" title="Kenny (1988 film)" label="Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q339045" start="2951" end="2966" title="The Big Picture (1989 film)" label="The Big Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283708" start="2996" end="3024" title="Penn &amp;amp; Teller Get Killed" label="Penn &amp;amp; Teller Get Killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q614858" start="3075" end="3085" title="Blown Away (1994 film)" label="Blown Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932706" start="3221" end="3233" title="Joe the King" label="Joe the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865436" start="3260" end="3271" title="Never Again (2001 film)" label="Never Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q301345" start="3337" end="3354" title="Northern Exposure" label="Northern Exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193168" start="3391" end="3404" title="The Equalizer (1985 TV series)" label="The Equalizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091896" start="3418" end="3429" title="Once a Hero" label="Once a Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q471350" start="3443" end="3455" title="Moonlighting (TV series)" label="Moonlighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q35791" start="3469" end="3485" title="Sex And The City" label="Sex And The City"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="3499" end="3514" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031383" start="3590" end="3597" title="Matlock (1986 TV series)" label="Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659834" start="3646" end="3661" title="Mayflower Madam" label="Mayflower Madam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514974" start="3682" end="3703" title="Love, Lies and Murder" label="Love, Lies and Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442283" start="3724" end="3745" title="The Stepford Husbands" label="The Stepford Husbands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7034" wikidata="Q104843" url="?curid=7034" title="Cruiser">
<text>A cruiser is a type of warship. Modern cruisers are generally the largest ships in a fleet after aircraft carriers and amphibious assault ships, and can usually perform several operational roles from search-and-destroy to ocean escort to sea denial.

The term &quot;cruiser&quot;, which has been in use for several hundred years, has changed its meaning over time. During the Age of Sail, the term &quot;cruising&quot; referred to certain kinds of missions—independent scouting, commerce protection, or raiding—usually fulfilled by frigates or sloops-of-war, which functioned as the &quot;cruising warships&quot; of a fleet.

In the middle of the 19th century, &quot;cruiser&quot; came to be a classification of the ships intended for cruising distant waters, for commerce raiding, and for scouting for the battle fleet. Cruisers came in a wide variety of sizes, from the medium-sized protected cruiser to large armored cruisers that were nearly as big (although not as powerful or as well-armored) as a pre-dreadnought battleship. With the advent of the dreadnought battleship before World War I, the armored cruiser evolved into a vessel of similar scale known as the battlecruiser. The very large battlecruisers of the World War I era that succeeded armored cruisers were now classified, along with dreadnought battleships, as capital ships.

By the early 20th century, after World War I, the direct successors to protected cruisers could be placed on a consistent scale of warship size, smaller than a battleship but larger than a destroyer. In 1922, the Washington Naval Treaty placed a formal limit on these cruisers, which were defined as warships of up to 10,000 tons displacement carrying guns no larger than 8 inches in calibre; whilst the 1930 London Naval Treaty created a divide of two cruiser types, heavy cruisers having 6.1 inches to 8 inch guns, while those with guns of 6.1 inches or less were light cruisers. Each type were limited in total and individual tonnage which shaped cruiser design until the collapse of the treaty system just prior to the start of World War II. Some variations on the Treaty cruiser design included the German &quot;pocket battleships&quot;, which had heavier armament at the expense of speed compared to standard heavy cruisers, and the American , which was a scaled-up heavy cruiser design designated as a &quot;cruiser-killer&quot;.

In the later 20th century, the obsolescence of the battleship left the cruiser as the largest and most powerful surface combatant ships (as opposed to the aerial warfare role of aircraft carriers). The role of the cruiser varied according to ship and navy, often including air defense and shore bombardment. During the Cold War the Soviet Navy&#x27;s cruisers had heavy anti-ship missile armament designed to sink NATO carrier task-forces via saturation attack. The U.S. Navy built guided-missile cruisers upon destroyer-style hulls (some called &quot;destroyer leaders&quot; or &quot;frigates&quot; prior to the 1975 reclassification) primarily designed to provide air defense while often adding anti-submarine capabilities, being larger and having longer-range surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) than early &quot;Charles F. Adams&quot; guided-missile destroyers tasked with the short-range air defense role. By the end of the Cold War the line between cruisers and destroyers had blurred, with the cruiser using the hull of the destroyer but receiving the cruiser designation due to their enhanced mission and combat systems.

, only two countries operated active duty vessels formally classed as cruisers: the United States and Russia. These cruisers are primarily armed with guided missiles, with the exceptions of the aircraft cruiser . was the last gun cruiser in service, serving with the Peruvian Navy until 2017.

Nevertheless, other classes in addition to the above may be considered cruisers due to differing classification systems. The US/NATO system includes the Type 055 from China and the &quot;Kirov&quot; and &quot;Slava&quot; from Russia. International Institute for Strategic Studies&#x27; &quot;The Military Balance&quot; defines a cruiser as a surface combatant displacing at least 9750 tonnes; with respect to vessels in service as of the early 2020s it includes the Type 055, the &quot;Sejong the Great&quot; from South Korea, the &quot;Atago&quot; and &quot;Maya&quot; from Japan and the Flight III &quot;Arleigh Burke&quot;, &quot;Ticonderoga&quot; and &quot;Zumwalt&quot; from the US.

==Early history==
The term &quot;cruiser&quot; or &quot;cruizer&quot; was first commonly used in the 17th century to refer to an independent warship. &quot;Cruiser&quot; meant the purpose or mission of a ship, rather than a category of vessel. However, the term was nonetheless used to mean a smaller, faster warship suitable for such a role. In the 17th century, the ship of the line was generally too large, inflexible, and expensive to be dispatched on long-range missions (for instance, to the Americas), and too strategically important to be put at risk of fouling and foundering by continual patrol duties.

The Dutch navy was noted for its cruisers in the 17th century, while the Royal Navy—and later French and Spanish navies—subsequently caught up in terms of their numbers and deployment. The British Cruiser and Convoy Acts were an attempt by mercantile interests in Parliament to focus the Navy on commerce defence and raiding with cruisers, rather than the more scarce and expensive ships of the line. During the 18th century the frigate became the preeminent type of cruiser. A frigate was a small, fast, long range, lightly armed (single gun-deck) ship used for scouting, carrying dispatches, and disrupting enemy trade. The other principal type of cruiser was the sloop, but many other miscellaneous types of ship were used as well.

==Steam cruisers==
During the 19th century, navies began to use steam power for their fleets. The 1840s saw the construction of experimental steam-powered frigates and sloops. By the middle of the 1850s, the British and U.S. Navies were both building steam frigates with very long hulls and a heavy gun armament, for instance or .

The 1860s saw the introduction of the ironclad. The first ironclads were frigates, in the sense of having one gun deck; however, they were also clearly the most powerful ships in the navy, and were principally to serve in the line of battle. In spite of their great speed, they would have been wasted in a cruising role.

The French constructed a number of smaller ironclads for overseas cruising duties, starting with the , commissioned 1865. These &quot;station ironclads&quot; were the beginning of the development of the armored cruisers, a type of ironclad specifically for the traditional cruiser missions of fast, independent raiding and patrol.

The first true armored cruiser was the Russian , completed in 1874, and followed by the British a few years later.

Until the 1890s armored cruisers were still built with masts for a full sailing rig, to enable them to operate far from friendly coaling stations.

Unarmored cruising warships, built out of wood, iron, steel or a combination of those materials, remained popular until towards the end of the 19th century. The ironclad&#x27;s armor often meant that they were limited to short range under steam, and many ironclads were unsuited to long-range missions or for work in distant colonies. The unarmored cruiser—often a screw sloop or screw frigate—could continue in this role. Even though mid- to late-19th century cruisers typically carried up-to-date guns firing explosive shells, they were unable to face ironclads in combat. This was evidenced by the clash between , a modern British cruiser, and the Peruvian monitor &quot;Huáscar&quot;. Even though the Peruvian vessel was obsolete by the time of the encounter, it stood up well to roughly 50 hits from British shells.

==Steel cruisers==
In the 1880s, naval engineers began to use steel as a material for construction and armament. A steel cruiser could be lighter and faster than one built of iron or wood. The &quot;Jeune Ecole&quot; school of naval doctrine suggested that a fleet of fast unprotected steel cruisers were ideal for commerce raiding, while the torpedo boat would be able to destroy an enemy battleship fleet.

Steel also offered the cruiser a way of acquiring the protection needed to survive in combat. Steel armor was considerably stronger, for the same weight, than iron. By putting a relatively thin layer of steel armor above the vital parts of the ship, and by placing the coal bunkers where they might stop shellfire, a useful degree of protection could be achieved without slowing the ship too much. Protected cruisers generally had an armored deck with sloped sides, providing similar protection to a light armored belt at less weight and expense.

The first protected cruiser was the Chilean ship &quot;Esmeralda&quot;, launched in 1883. Produced by a shipyard at Elswick, in Britain, owned by Armstrong, she inspired a group of protected cruisers produced in the same yard and known as the &quot;Elswick cruisers&quot;. Her forecastle, poop deck and the wooden board deck had been removed, replaced with an armored deck.

&quot;Esmeralda&quot;″s armament consisted of fore and aft 10-inch (25.4 cm) guns and 6-inch (15.2 cm) guns in the midships positions. It could reach a speed of , and was propelled by steam alone. It also had a displacement of less than 3,000 tons. During the two following decades, this cruiser type came to be the inspiration for combining heavy artillery, high speed and low displacement.

===Torpedo cruisers===

The torpedo cruiser (known in the Royal Navy as the torpedo gunboat) was a smaller unarmored cruiser, which emerged in the 1880s–1890s. These ships could reach speeds up to and were armed with medium to small calibre guns as well as torpedoes. These ships were tasked with guard and reconnaissance duties, to repeat signals and all other fleet duties for which smaller vessels were suited. These ships could also function as flagships of torpedo boat flotillas. After the 1900s, these ships were usually traded for faster ships with better sea going qualities.

===Pre-dreadnought armored cruisers===

Steel also affected the construction and role of armored cruisers. Steel meant that new designs of battleship, later known as pre-dreadnought battleships, would be able to combine firepower and armor with better endurance and speed than ever before. The armored cruisers of the 1890s and early 1900s greatly resembled the battleships of the day; they tended to carry slightly smaller main armament ( rather than 12-inch) and have somewhat thinner armor in exchange for a faster speed (perhaps rather than 18). Because of their similarity, the lines between battleships and armored cruisers became blurred.

==Early 20th century==

Shortly after the turn of the 20th century there were difficult questions about the design of future cruisers. Modern armored cruisers, almost as powerful as battleships, were also fast enough to outrun older protected and unarmored cruisers. In the Royal Navy, Jackie Fisher cut back hugely on older vessels, including many cruisers of different sorts, calling them &quot;a miser&#x27;s hoard of useless junk&quot; that any modern cruiser would sweep from the seas. The scout cruiser also appeared in this era; this was a small, fast, lightly armed and armored type designed primarily for reconnaissance. The Royal Navy and the Italian Navy were the primary developers of this type.

===Battle cruisers===
The growing size and power of the armored cruiser resulted in the battlecruiser, with an armament and size similar to the revolutionary new dreadnought battleship; the brainchild of British admiral Jackie Fisher. He believed that to ensure British naval dominance in its overseas colonial possessions, a fleet of large, fast, powerfully armed vessels which would be able to hunt down and mop up enemy cruisers and armored cruisers with overwhelming fire superiority was needed. They were equipped with the same gun types as battleships, though usually with fewer guns, and were intended to engage enemy capital ships as well. This type of vessel came to be known as the &quot;battlecruiser&quot;, and the first were commissioned into the Royal Navy in 1907. The British battlecruisers sacrificed protection for speed, as they were intended to &quot;choose their range&quot; (to the enemy) with superior speed and only engage the enemy at long range. When engaged at moderate ranges, the lack of protection combined with unsafe ammunition handling practices became tragic with the loss of three of them at the Battle of Jutland. Germany and eventually Japan followed suit to build these vessels, replacing armored cruisers in most frontline roles. German battlecruisers were generally better protected but slower than British battlecruisers. Battlecruisers were in many cases larger and more expensive than contemporary battleships, due to their much larger propulsion plants.

===Light cruisers===

At around the same time as the battlecruiser was developed, the distinction between the armored and the unarmored cruiser finally disappeared. By the British , the first of which was launched in 1909, it was possible for a small, fast cruiser to carry both belt and deck armor, particularly when turbine engines were adopted. These light armored cruisers began to occupy the traditional cruiser role once it became clear that the battlecruiser squadrons were required to operate with the battle fleet.

===Flotilla leaders===

Some light cruisers were built specifically to act as the leaders of flotillas of destroyers.

===Coastguard cruisers===

These vessels were essentially large coastal patrol boats armed with multiple light guns. One such warship was &quot;Grivița&quot; of the Romanian Navy. She displaced 110 tons, measured 60 meters in length and was armed with four light guns.

===Auxiliary cruisers===
The auxiliary cruiser was a merchant ship hastily armed with small guns on the outbreak of war. Auxiliary cruisers were used to fill gaps in their long-range lines or provide escort for other cargo ships, although they generally proved to be useless in this role because of their low speed, feeble firepower and lack of armor. In both world wars the Germans also used small merchant ships armed with cruiser guns to surprise Allied merchant ships.

Some large liners were armed in the same way. In British service these were known as Armed Merchant Cruisers (AMC). The Germans and French used them in World War I as raiders because of their high speed (around 30 knots (56 km/h)), and they were used again as raiders early in World War II by the Germans and Japanese. In both the First World War and in the early part of the Second, they were used as convoy escorts by the British.

===World War I===
Cruisers were one of the workhorse types of warship during World War I. By the time of World War I, cruisers had accelerated their development and improved their quality significantly, with drainage volume reaching 3000–4000 tons, a speed of 25–30 knots and a calibre of 127–152 mm.

==Mid-20th century==
Naval construction in the 1920s and 1930s was limited by international treaties designed to prevent the repetition of the Dreadnought arms race of the early 20th century. The Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 placed limits on the construction of ships with a standard displacement of more than 10,000 tons and an armament of guns larger than 8-inch (203 mm). A number of navies commissioned classes of cruisers at the top end of this limit, known as &quot;treaty cruisers&quot;.

The London Naval Treaty in 1930 then formalised the distinction between these &quot;heavy&quot; cruisers and light cruisers: a &quot;heavy&quot; cruiser was one with guns of more than 6.1-inch (155 mm) calibre. The Second London Naval Treaty attempted to reduce the tonnage of new cruisers to 8,000 or less, but this had little effect; Japan and Germany were not signatories, and some navies had already begun to evade treaty limitations on warships. The first London treaty did touch off a period of the major powers building 6-inch or 6.1-inch gunned cruisers, nominally of 10,000 tons and with up to fifteen guns, the treaty limit. Thus, most light cruisers ordered after 1930 were the size of heavy cruisers but with more and smaller guns. The Imperial Japanese Navy began this new race with the , launched in 1934. After building smaller light cruisers with six or eight 6-inch guns launched 1931–35, the British Royal Navy followed with the 12-gun in 1936. To match foreign developments and potential treaty violations, in the 1930s the US developed a series of new guns firing &quot;super-heavy&quot; armor piercing ammunition; these included the 6-inch (152 mm)/47 caliber gun Mark 16 introduced with the 15-gun s in 1936, and the 8-inch (203 mm)/55 caliber gun Mark 12 introduced with in 1937.

===Heavy cruisers===
The heavy cruiser was a type of cruiser designed for long range, high speed and an armament of naval guns around 203 mm (8 in) in calibre. The first heavy cruisers were built in 1915, although it only became a widespread classification following the London Naval Treaty in 1930. The heavy cruiser&#x27;s immediate precursors were the light cruiser designs of the 1910s and 1920s; the US lightly armored 8-inch &quot;treaty cruisers&quot; of the 1920s (built under the Washington Naval Treaty) were originally classed as light cruisers until the London Treaty forced their redesignation.

Initially, all cruisers built under the Washington treaty had torpedo tubes, regardless of nationality. However, in 1930, results of war games caused the US Naval War College to conclude that only perhaps half of cruisers would use their torpedoes in action. In a surface engagement, long-range gunfire and destroyer torpedoes would decide the issue, and under air attack numerous cruisers would be lost before getting within torpedo range. Thus, beginning with launched in 1933, new cruisers were built without torpedoes, and torpedoes were removed from older heavy cruisers due to the perceived hazard of their being exploded by shell fire. The Japanese took exactly the opposite approach with cruiser torpedoes, and this proved crucial to their tactical victories in most of the numerous cruiser actions of 1942. Beginning with the launched in 1925, every Japanese heavy cruiser was armed with torpedoes, larger than any other cruisers&#x27;. By 1933 Japan had developed the Type 93 torpedo for these ships, eventually nicknamed &quot;Long Lance&quot; by the Allies. This type used compressed oxygen instead of compressed air, allowing it to achieve ranges and speeds unmatched by other torpedoes. It could achieve a range of at , compared with the US Mark 15 torpedo with at . The Mark 15 had a maximum range of at , still well below the &quot;Long Lance&quot;. The Japanese were able to keep the Type 93&#x27;s performance and oxygen power secret until the Allies recovered one in early 1943, thus the Allies faced a great threat they were not aware of in 1942. The Type 93 was also fitted to Japanese post-1930 light cruisers and the majority of their World War II destroyers.

Heavy cruisers continued in use until after World War II, with some converted to guided-missile cruisers for air defense or strategic attack and some used for shore bombardment by the United States in the Korean War and the Vietnam War.

===German pocket battleships===
The German was a series of three &quot;Panzerschiffe&quot; (&quot;armored ships&quot;), a form of heavily armed cruiser, designed and built by the German Reichsmarine in nominal accordance with restrictions imposed by the Treaty of Versailles. All three ships were launched between 1931 and 1934, and served with Germany&#x27;s Kriegsmarine during World War II. Within the Kriegsmarine, the Panzerschiffe had the propaganda value of capital ships: heavy cruisers with battleship guns, torpedoes, and scout aircraft. (The similar Swedish &quot;Panzerschiffe&quot; were tactically used as centers of battlefleets and not as cruisers.) They were deployed by Nazi Germany in support of the German interests in the Spanish Civil War. Panzerschiff &quot;Admiral Graf Spee&quot; represented Germany in the 1937 Coronation Fleet Review.

The British press referred to the vessels as pocket battleships, in reference to the heavy firepower contained in the relatively small vessels; they were considerably smaller than contemporary battleships, though at 28 knots were slower than battlecruisers. At up to 16,000 tons at full load, they were not treaty compliant 10,000 ton cruisers. And although their displacement and scale of armor protection were that of a heavy cruiser, their main armament was heavier than the guns of other nations&#x27; heavy cruisers, and the latter two members of the class also had tall conning towers resembling battleships. The Panzerschiffe were listed as Ersatz replacements for retiring Reichsmarine coastal defense battleships, which added to their propaganda status in the Kriegsmarine as Ersatz battleships; within the Royal Navy, only battlecruisers HMS &quot;Hood&quot;, HMS &quot;Repulse&quot; and HMS &quot;Renown&quot; were capable of both outrunning and outgunning the Panzerschiffe. They were seen in the 1930s as a new and serious threat by both Britain and France. While the Kriegsmarine reclassified them as heavy cruisers in 1940, &quot;Deutschland&quot;-class ships continued to be called &quot;pocket battleships&quot; in the popular press.

===Large cruiser===
The American represented the supersized cruiser design. Due to the German pocket battleships, the , and rumored Japanese &quot;super cruisers&quot;, all of which carried guns larger than the standard heavy cruiser&#x27;s 8-inch size dictated by naval treaty limitations, the &quot;Alaska&quot;s were intended to be &quot;cruiser-killers&quot;. While superficially appearing similar to a battleship/battlecruiser and mounting three triple turrets of 12-inch guns, their actual protection scheme and design resembled a scaled-up heavy cruiser design. Their hull classification symbol of CB (cruiser, big) reflected this.

===Anti-aircraft cruisers===
A precursor to the anti-aircraft cruiser was the Romanian British-built protected cruiser &quot;Elisabeta&quot;. After the start of World War I, her four 120 mm main guns were landed and her four 75 mm (12-pounder) secondary guns were modified for anti-aircraft fire.

The development of the anti-aircraft cruiser began in 1935 when the Royal Navy re-armed and . Torpedo tubes and low-angle guns were removed from these World War I light cruisers and replaced with ten high-angle guns, with appropriate fire-control equipment to provide larger warships with protection against high-altitude bombers.

A tactical shortcoming was recognised after completing six additional conversions of s. Having sacrificed anti-ship weapons for anti-aircraft armament, the converted anti-aircraft cruisers might themselves need protection against surface units. New construction was undertaken to create cruisers of similar speed and displacement with dual-purpose guns, which offered good anti-aircraft protection with anti-surface capability for the traditional light cruiser role of defending capital ships from destroyers.

The first purpose built anti-aircraft cruiser was the British , completed in 1940–42. The US Navy&#x27;s cruisers (CLAA: light cruiser with anti-aircraft capability) were designed to match the capabilities of the Royal Navy. Both &quot;Dido&quot; and &quot;Atlanta&quot; cruisers initially carried torpedo tubes; the &quot;Atlanta&quot; cruisers at least were originally designed as destroyer leaders, were originally designated CL (light cruiser), and did not receive the CLAA designation until 1949.

The concept of the quick-firing dual-purpose gun anti-aircraft cruiser was embraced in several designs completed too late to see combat, including: , completed in 1948; , completed in 1949; two s, completed in 1947; two s, completed in 1953; , completed in 1955; , completed in 1959; and , and , all completed between 1959 and 1961.

Most post-World War II cruisers were tasked with air defense roles. In the early 1950s, advances in aviation technology forced the move from anti-aircraft artillery to anti-aircraft missiles. Therefore, most modern cruisers are equipped with surface-to-air missiles as their main armament. Today&#x27;s equivalent of the anti-aircraft cruiser is the guided-missile cruiser (CAG/CLG/CG/CGN).

==World War II==
Cruisers participated in a number of surface engagements in the early part of World War II, along with escorting carrier and battleship groups throughout the war. In the later part of the war, Allied cruisers primarily provided anti-aircraft (AA) escort for carrier groups and performed shore bombardment. Japanese cruisers similarly escorted carrier and battleship groups in the later part of the war, notably in the disastrous Battle of the Philippine Sea and Battle of Leyte Gulf. In 1937–41 the Japanese, having withdrawn from all naval treaties, upgraded or completed the &quot;Mogami&quot; and es as heavy cruisers by replacing their triple turrets with twin turrets. Torpedo refits were also made to most heavy cruisers, resulting in up to sixteen tubes per ship, plus a set of reloads. In 1941 the 1920s light cruisers and were converted to torpedo cruisers with four guns and forty torpedo tubes. In 1944 &quot;Kitakami&quot; was further converted to carry up to eight &quot;Kaiten&quot; human torpedoes in place of ordinary torpedoes.

Before World War II, cruisers were mainly divided into three types: heavy cruisers, light cruisers and auxiliary cruisers. Heavy cruiser tonnage reached 20–30,000 tons, speed 32–34 knots, endurance of more than 10,000 nautical miles, armor thickness of 127–203 mm. Heavy cruisers were equipped with eight or nine guns with a range of more than 20 nautical miles. They were mainly used to attack enemy surface ships and shore-based targets. In addition, there were 10–16 secondary guns with a caliber of less than . Also, dozens of automatic antiaircraft guns were installed to fight aircraft and small vessels such as torpedo boats. For example, in World War II, American Alaska-class cruisers were more than 30,000 tons, equipped with nine guns. Some cruisers could also carry three or four seaplanes to correct the accuracy of gunfire and perform reconnaissance.

Together with battleships, these heavy cruisers formed powerful naval task forces, which dominated the world&#x27;s oceans for more than a century. After the signing of the Washington Treaty on Arms Limitation in 1922, the tonnage and quantity of battleships, aircraft carriers and cruisers were severely restricted. In order not to violate the treaty, countries began to develop light cruisers. Light cruisers of the 1920s had displacements of less than 10,000 tons and a speed of up to 35 knots. They were equipped with 6–12 main guns with a caliber of 127–133 mm (5–5.5 inches). In addition, they were equipped with 8–12 secondary guns under 127 mm (5 in) and dozens of small caliber cannons, as well as torpedoes and mines. Some ships also carried 2–4 seaplanes, mainly for reconnaissance. In 1930 the London Naval Treaty allowed large light cruisers to be built, with the same tonnage as heavy cruisers and armed with up to fifteen guns. The Japanese &quot;Mogami&quot; class were built to this treaty&#x27;s limit, the Americans and British also built similar ships. However, in 1939 the &quot;Mogami&quot;s were refitted as heavy cruisers with ten guns.

===1939 to Pearl Harbor===
In December 1939, three British cruisers engaged the German &quot;pocket battleship&quot; &quot;Admiral Graf Spee&quot; (which was on a commerce raiding mission) in the Battle of the River Plate; German cruiser Admiral Graf Spee then took refuge in neutral Montevideo, Uruguay. By broadcasting messages indicating capital ships were in the area, the British caused &quot;Admiral Graf Spee&quot;″s captain to think he faced a hopeless situation while low on ammunition and order his ship scuttled. On 8 June 1940 the German capital ships and , classed as battleships but with large cruiser armament, sank the aircraft carrier with gunfire. From October 1940 through March 1941 the German heavy cruiser (also known as &quot;pocket battleship&quot;, see above) conducted a successful commerce-raiding voyage in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans.

On 27 May 1941, attempted to finish off the German battleship with torpedoes, probably causing the Germans to scuttle the ship. &quot;Bismarck&quot; (accompanied by the heavy cruiser ) previously sank the battlecruiser and damaged the battleship with gunfire in the Battle of the Denmark Strait.

On 19 November 1941 sank in a mutually fatal engagement with the German raider &quot;Kormoran&quot; in the Indian Ocean near Western Australia.

===Atlantic, Mediterranean, and Indian Ocean operations 1942–1944===
Twenty-three British cruisers were lost to enemy action, mostly to air attack and submarines, in operations in the Atlantic, Mediterranean, and Indian Ocean. Sixteen of these losses were in the Mediterranean. The British included cruisers and anti-aircraft cruisers among convoy escorts in the Mediterranean and to northern Russia due to the threat of surface and air attack. Almost all cruisers in World War II were vulnerable to submarine attack due to a lack of anti-submarine sonar and weapons. Also, until 1943–44 the light anti-aircraft armament of most cruisers was weak.

In July 1942 an attempt to intercept Convoy PQ 17 with surface ships, including the heavy cruiser &quot;Admiral Scheer&quot;, failed due to multiple German warships grounding, but air and submarine attacks sank 2/3 of the convoy&#x27;s ships. In August 1942 &quot;Admiral Scheer&quot; conducted Operation Wunderland, a solo raid into northern Russia&#x27;s Kara Sea. She bombarded Dikson Island but otherwise had little success.

On 31 December 1942 the Battle of the Barents Sea was fought, a rare action for a Murmansk run because it involved cruisers on both sides. Four British destroyers and five other vessels were escorting Convoy JW 51B from the UK to the Murmansk area. Another British force of two cruisers ( and ) and two destroyers were in the area. Two heavy cruisers (one the &quot;pocket battleship&quot; &quot;Lützow&quot;), accompanied by six destroyers, attempted to intercept the convoy near North Cape after it was spotted by a U-boat. Although the Germans sank a British destroyer and a minesweeper (also damaging another destroyer), they failed to damage any of the convoy&#x27;s merchant ships. A German destroyer was lost and a heavy cruiser damaged. Both sides withdrew from the action for fear of the other side&#x27;s torpedoes.

On 26 December 1943 the German capital ship &quot;Scharnhorst&quot; was sunk while attempting to intercept a convoy in the Battle of the North Cape. The British force that sank her was led by Vice Admiral Bruce Fraser in the battleship , accompanied by four cruisers and nine destroyers. One of the cruisers was the preserved .

&quot;Scharnhorst&quot;″s sister &quot;Gneisenau&quot;, damaged by a mine and a submerged wreck in the Channel Dash of 13 February 1942 and repaired, was further damaged by a British air attack on 27 February 1942. She began a conversion process to mount six guns instead of nine guns, but in early 1943 Hitler (angered by the recent failure at the Battle of the Barents Sea) ordered her disarmed and her armament used as coast defence weapons. One 28 cm triple turret survives near Trondheim, Norway.

===Pearl Harbor through Dutch East Indies campaign===
The attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 brought the United States into the war, but with eight battleships sunk or damaged by air attack. On 10 December 1941 HMS &quot;Prince of Wales&quot; and the battlecruiser were sunk by land-based torpedo bombers northeast of Singapore. It was now clear that surface ships could not operate near enemy aircraft in daylight without air cover; most surface actions of 1942–43 were fought at night as a result. Generally, both sides avoided risking their battleships until the Japanese attack at Leyte Gulf in 1944.

Six of the battleships from Pearl Harbor were eventually returned to service, but no US battleships engaged Japanese surface units at sea until the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal in November 1942, and not thereafter until the Battle of Surigao Strait in October 1944. was on hand for the initial landings at Guadalcanal on 7 August 1942, and escorted carriers in the Battle of the Eastern Solomons later that month. However, on 15 September she was torpedoed while escorting a carrier group and had to return to the US for repairs.

Generally, the Japanese held their capital ships out of all surface actions in the 1941–42 campaigns or they failed to close with the enemy; the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal in November 1942 was the sole exception. The four ships performed shore bombardment in Malaya, Singapore, and Guadalcanal and escorted the raid on Ceylon and other carrier forces in 1941–42. Japanese capital ships also participated ineffectively (due to not being engaged) in the Battle of Midway and the simultaneous Aleutian diversion; in both cases they were in battleship groups well to the rear of the carrier groups. Sources state that sat out the entire Guadalcanal Campaign due to lack of high-explosive bombardment shells, poor nautical charts of the area, and high fuel consumption. It is likely that the poor charts affected other battleships as well. Except for the &quot;Kongō&quot; class, most Japanese battleships spent the critical year of 1942, in which most of the war&#x27;s surface actions occurred, in home waters or at the fortified base of Truk, far from any risk of attacking or being attacked.

From 1942 through mid-1943, US and other Allied cruisers were the heavy units on their side of the numerous surface engagements of the Dutch East Indies campaign, the Guadalcanal Campaign, and subsequent Solomon Islands fighting; they were usually opposed by strong Japanese cruiser-led forces equipped with Long Lance torpedoes. Destroyers also participated heavily on both sides of these battles and provided essentially all the torpedoes on the Allied side, with some battles in these campaigns fought entirely between destroyers.

Along with lack of knowledge of the capabilities of the Long Lance torpedo, the US Navy was hampered by a deficiency it was initially unaware of—the unreliability of the Mark 15 torpedo used by destroyers. This weapon shared the Mark 6 exploder and other problems with the more famously unreliable Mark 14 torpedo; the most common results of firing either of these torpedoes were a dud or a miss. The problems with these weapons were not solved until mid-1943, after almost all of the surface actions in the Solomon Islands had taken place. Another factor that shaped the early surface actions was the pre-war training of both sides. The US Navy concentrated on long-range 8-inch gunfire as their primary offensive weapon, leading to rigid battle line tactics, while the Japanese trained extensively for nighttime torpedo attacks. Since all post-1930 Japanese cruisers had 8-inch guns by 1941, almost all of the US Navy&#x27;s cruisers in the South Pacific in 1942 were the 8-inch-gunned (203 mm) &quot;treaty cruisers&quot;; most of the 6-inch-gunned (152 mm) cruisers were deployed in the Atlantic.

===Dutch East Indies campaign===
Although their battleships were held out of surface action, Japanese cruiser-destroyer forces rapidly isolated and mopped up the Allied naval forces in the Dutch East Indies campaign of February–March 1942. In three separate actions, they sank five Allied cruisers (two Dutch and one each British, Australian, and American) with torpedoes and gunfire, against one Japanese cruiser damaged. With one other Allied cruiser withdrawn for repairs, the only remaining Allied cruiser in the area was the damaged . Despite their rapid success, the Japanese proceeded methodically, never leaving their air cover and rapidly establishing new air bases as they advanced.

===Guadalcanal campaign===
After the key carrier battles of the Coral Sea and Midway in mid-1942, Japan had lost four of the six fleet carriers that launched the Pearl Harbor raid and was on the strategic defensive. On 7 August 1942 US Marines were landed on Guadalcanal and other nearby islands, beginning the Guadalcanal Campaign. This campaign proved to be a severe test for the Navy as well as the Marines. Along with two carrier battles, several major surface actions occurred, almost all at night between cruiser-destroyer forces.

Battle of Savo Island
On the night of 8–9 August 1942 the Japanese counterattacked near Guadalcanal in the Battle of Savo Island with a cruiser-destroyer force. In a controversial move, the US carrier task forces were withdrawn from the area on the 8th due to heavy fighter losses and low fuel. The Allied force included six heavy cruisers (two Australian), two light cruisers (one Australian), and eight US destroyers. Of the cruisers, only the Australian ships had torpedoes. The Japanese force included five heavy cruisers, two light cruisers, and one destroyer. Numerous circumstances combined to reduce Allied readiness for the battle. The results of the battle were three American heavy cruisers sunk by torpedoes and gunfire, one Australian heavy cruiser disabled by gunfire and scuttled, one heavy cruiser damaged, and two US destroyers damaged. The Japanese had three cruisers lightly damaged. This was the most lopsided outcome of the surface actions in the Solomon Islands. Along with their superior torpedoes, the opening Japanese gunfire was accurate and very damaging. Subsequent analysis showed that some of the damage was due to poor housekeeping practices by US forces. Stowage of boats and aircraft in midships hangars with full gas tanks contributed to fires, along with full and unprotected ready-service ammunition lockers for the open-mount secondary armament. These practices were soon corrected, and US cruisers with similar damage sank less often thereafter. Savo was the first surface action of the war for almost all the US ships and personnel; few US cruisers and destroyers were targeted or hit at Coral Sea or Midway.

Battle of the Eastern Solomons
On 24–25 August 1942 the Battle of the Eastern Solomons, a major carrier action, was fought. Part of the action was a Japanese attempt to reinforce Guadalcanal with men and equipment on troop transports. The Japanese troop convoy was attacked by Allied aircraft, resulting in the Japanese subsequently reinforcing Guadalcanal with troops on fast warships at night. These convoys were called the &quot;Tokyo Express&quot; by the Allies. Although the Tokyo Express often ran unopposed, most surface actions in the Solomons revolved around Tokyo Express missions. Also, US air operations had commenced from Henderson Field, the airfield on Guadalcanal. Fear of air power on both sides resulted in all surface actions in the Solomons being fought at night.

Battle of Cape Esperance
The Battle of Cape Esperance occurred on the night of 11–12 October 1942. A Tokyo Express mission was underway for Guadalcanal at the same time as a separate cruiser-destroyer bombardment group loaded with high explosive shells for bombarding Henderson Field. A US cruiser-destroyer force was deployed in advance of a convoy of US Army troops for Guadalcanal that was due on 13 October. The Tokyo Express convoy was two seaplane tenders and six destroyers; the bombardment group was three heavy cruisers and two destroyers, and the US force was two heavy cruisers, two light cruisers, and five destroyers. The US force engaged the Japanese bombardment force; the Tokyo Express convoy was able to unload on Guadalcanal and evade action. The bombardment force was sighted at close range () and the US force opened fire. The Japanese were surprised because their admiral was anticipating sighting the Tokyo Express force, and withheld fire while attempting to confirm the US ships&#x27; identity. One Japanese cruiser and one destroyer were sunk and one cruiser damaged, against one US destroyer sunk with one light cruiser and one destroyer damaged. The bombardment force failed to bring its torpedoes into action, and turned back. The next day US aircraft from Henderson Field attacked several of the Japanese ships, sinking two destroyers and damaging a third. The US victory resulted in overconfidence in some later battles, reflected in the initial after-action report claiming two Japanese heavy cruisers, one light cruiser, and three destroyers sunk by the gunfire of alone. The battle had little effect on the overall situation, as the next night two Kongō-class battleships bombarded and severely damaged Henderson Field unopposed, and the following night another Tokyo Express convoy delivered 4,500 troops to Guadalcanal. The US convoy delivered the Army troops as scheduled on the 13th.

Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands
The Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands took place 25–27 October 1942. It was a pivotal battle, as it left the US and Japanese with only two large carriers each in the South Pacific (another large Japanese carrier was damaged and under repair until May 1943). Due to the high carrier attrition rate with no replacements for months, for the most part both sides stopped risking their remaining carriers until late 1943, and each side sent in a pair of battleships instead. The next major carrier operations for the US were the carrier raid on Rabaul and support for the invasion of Tarawa, both in November 1943.

Naval Battle of Guadalcanal
The Naval Battle of Guadalcanal occurred 12–15 November 1942 in two phases. A night surface action on 12–13 November was the first phase. The Japanese force consisted of two Kongō-class battleships with high explosive shells for bombarding Henderson Field, one small light cruiser, and 11 destroyers. Their plan was that the bombardment would neutralize Allied airpower and allow a force of 11 transport ships and 12 destroyers to reinforce Guadalcanal with a Japanese division the next day. However, US reconnaissance aircraft spotted the approaching Japanese on the 12th and the Americans made what preparations they could. The American force consisted of two heavy cruisers, one light cruiser, two anti-aircraft cruisers, and eight destroyers. The Americans were outgunned by the Japanese that night, and a lack of pre-battle orders by the US commander led to confusion. The destroyer closed with the battleship , firing all torpedoes (though apparently none hit or detonated) and raking the battleship&#x27;s bridge with gunfire, wounding the Japanese admiral and killing his chief of staff. The Americans initially lost four destroyers including &quot;Laffey&quot;, with both heavy cruisers, most of the remaining destroyers, and both anti-aircraft cruisers damaged. The Japanese initially had one battleship and four destroyers damaged, but at this point they withdrew, possibly unaware that the US force was unable to further oppose them. At dawn US aircraft from Henderson Field, , and Espiritu Santo found the damaged battleship and two destroyers in the area. The battleship (&quot;Hiei&quot;) was sunk by aircraft (or possibly scuttled), one destroyer was sunk by the damaged , and the other destroyer was attacked by aircraft but was able to withdraw. Both of the damaged US anti-aircraft cruisers were lost on 13 November, one () torpedoed by a Japanese submarine, and the other sank on the way to repairs. &quot;Juneau&quot;″s loss was especially tragic; the submarine&#x27;s presence prevented immediate rescue, over 100 survivors of a crew of nearly 700 were adrift for eight days, and all but ten died. Among the dead were the five Sullivan brothers.

The Japanese transport force was rescheduled for the 14th and a new cruiser-destroyer force (belatedly joined by the surviving battleship ) was sent to bombard Henderson Field the night of 13 November. Only two cruisers actually bombarded the airfield, as &quot;Kirishima&quot; had not arrived yet and the remainder of the force was on guard for US warships. The bombardment caused little damage. The cruiser-destroyer force then withdrew, while the transport force continued towards Guadalcanal. Both forces were attacked by US aircraft on the 14th. The cruiser force lost one heavy cruiser sunk and one damaged. Although the transport force had fighter cover from the carrier , six transports were sunk and one heavily damaged. All but four of the destroyers accompanying the transport force picked up survivors and withdrew. The remaining four transports and four destroyers approached Guadalcanal at night, but stopped to await the results of the night&#x27;s action.

On the night of 14–15 November a Japanese force of &quot;Kirishima&quot;, two heavy and two light cruisers, and nine destroyers approached Guadalcanal. Two US battleships ( and ) were there to meet them, along with four destroyers. This was one of only two battleship-on-battleship encounters during the Pacific War; the other was the lopsided Battle of Surigao Strait in October 1944, part of the Battle of Leyte Gulf. The battleships had been escorting &quot;Enterprise&quot;, but were detached due to the urgency of the situation. With nine 16-inch (406 mm) guns apiece against eight 14-inch (356 mm) guns on &quot;Kirishima&quot;, the Americans had major gun and armor advantages. All four destroyers were sunk or severely damaged and withdrawn shortly after the Japanese attacked them with gunfire and torpedoes. Although her main battery remained in action for most of the battle, &quot;South Dakota&quot; spent much of the action dealing with major electrical failures that affected her radar, fire control, and radio systems. Although her armor was not penetrated, she was hit by 26 shells of various calibers and temporarily rendered, in a US admiral&#x27;s words, &quot;deaf, dumb, blind, and impotent&quot;. &quot;Washington&quot; went undetected by the Japanese for most of the battle, but withheld shooting to avoid &quot;friendly fire&quot; until &quot;South Dakota&quot; was illuminated by Japanese fire, then rapidly set &quot;Kirishima&quot; ablaze with a jammed rudder and other damage. &quot;Washington&quot;, finally spotted by the Japanese, then headed for the Russell Islands to hopefully draw the Japanese away from Guadalcanal and &quot;South Dakota&quot;, and was successful in evading several torpedo attacks. Unusually, only a few Japanese torpedoes scored hits in this engagement. &quot;Kirishima&quot; sank or was scuttled before the night was out, along with two Japanese destroyers. The remaining Japanese ships withdrew, except for the four transports, which beached themselves in the night and started unloading. However, dawn (and US aircraft, US artillery, and a US destroyer) found them still beached, and they were destroyed.

Battle of Tassafaronga
The Battle of Tassafaronga took place on the night of 30 November – 1 December 1942. The US had four heavy cruisers, one light cruiser, and four destroyers. The Japanese had eight destroyers on a Tokyo Express run to deliver food and supplies in drums to Guadalcanal. The Americans achieved initial surprise, damaging one destroyer with gunfire which later sank, but the Japanese torpedo counterattack was devastating. One American heavy cruiser was sunk and three others heavily damaged, with the bows blown off of two of them. It was significant that these two were not lost to Long Lance hits as happened in previous battles; American battle readiness and damage control had improved. Despite defeating the Americans, the Japanese withdrew without delivering the crucial supplies to Guadalcanal. Another attempt on 3 December dropped 1,500 drums of supplies near Guadalcanal, but Allied strafing aircraft sank all but 300 before the Japanese Army could recover them. On 7 December PT boats interrupted a Tokyo Express run, and the following night sank a Japanese supply submarine. The next day the Japanese Navy proposed stopping all destroyer runs to Guadalcanal, but agreed to do just one more. This was on 11 December and was also intercepted by PT boats, which sank a destroyer; only 200 of 1,200 drums dropped off the island were recovered. The next day the Japanese Navy proposed abandoning Guadalcanal; this was approved by the Imperial General Headquarters on 31 December and the Japanese left the island in early February 1943.

===Post-Guadalcanal===
After the Japanese abandoned Guadalcanal in February 1943, Allied operations in the Pacific shifted to the New Guinea campaign and isolating Rabaul. The Battle of Kula Gulf was fought on the night of 5–6 July. The US had three light cruisers and four destroyers; the Japanese had ten destroyers loaded with 2,600 troops destined for Vila to oppose a recent US landing on Rendova. Although the Japanese sank a cruiser, they lost two destroyers and were able to deliver only 850 troops. On the night of 12–13 July, the Battle of Kolombangara occurred. The Allies had three light cruisers (one New Zealand) and ten destroyers; the Japanese had one small light cruiser and five destroyers, a Tokyo Express run for Vila. All three Allied cruisers were heavily damaged, with the New Zealand cruiser put out of action for 25 months by a Long Lance hit. The Allies sank only the Japanese light cruiser, and the Japanese landed 1,200 troops at Vila. Despite their tactical victory, this battle caused the Japanese to use a different route in the future, where they were more vulnerable to destroyer and PT boat attacks.

The Battle of Empress Augusta Bay was fought on the night of 1–2 November 1943, immediately after US Marines invaded Bougainville in the Solomon Islands. A Japanese heavy cruiser was damaged by a nighttime air attack shortly before the battle; it is likely that Allied airborne radar had progressed far enough to allow night operations. The Americans had four of the new cruisers and eight destroyers. The Japanese had two heavy cruisers, two small light cruisers, and six destroyers. Both sides were plagued by collisions, shells that failed to explode, and mutual skill in dodging torpedoes. The Americans suffered significant damage to three destroyers and light damage to a cruiser, but no losses. The Japanese lost one light cruiser and a destroyer, with four other ships damaged. The Japanese withdrew; the Americans pursued them until dawn, then returned to the landing area to provide anti-aircraft cover.

After the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands in October 1942, both sides were short of large aircraft carriers. The US suspended major carrier operations until sufficient carriers could be completed to destroy the entire Japanese fleet at once should it appear. The Central Pacific carrier raids and amphibious operations commenced in November 1943 with a carrier raid on Rabaul (preceded and followed by Fifth Air Force attacks) and the bloody but successful invasion of Tarawa. The air attacks on Rabaul crippled the Japanese cruiser force, with four heavy and two light cruisers damaged; they were withdrawn to Truk. The US had built up a force in the Central Pacific of six large, five light, and six escort carriers prior to commencing these operations.

From this point on, US cruisers primarily served as anti-aircraft escorts for carriers and in shore bombardment. The only major Japanese carrier operation after Guadalcanal was the disastrous (for Japan) Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944, nicknamed the &quot;Marianas Turkey Shoot&quot; by the US Navy.

===Leyte Gulf===

The Imperial Japanese Navy&#x27;s last major operation was the Battle of Leyte Gulf, an attempt to dislodge the American invasion of the Philippines in October 1944. The two actions at this battle in which cruisers played a significant role were the Battle off Samar and the Battle of Surigao Strait.

Battle of Surigao Strait
The Battle of Surigao Strait was fought on the night of 24–25 October, a few hours before the Battle off Samar. The Japanese had a small battleship group composed of and , one heavy cruiser, and four destroyers. They were followed at a considerable distance by another small force of two heavy cruisers, a small light cruiser, and four destroyers. Their goal was to head north through Surigao Strait and attack the invasion fleet off Leyte. The Allied force, known as the 7th Fleet Support Force, guarding the strait was overwhelming. It included six battleships (all but one previously damaged in 1941 at Pearl Harbor), four heavy cruisers (one Australian), four light cruisers, and 28 destroyers, plus a force of 39 PT boats. The only advantage to the Japanese was that most of the Allied battleships and cruisers were loaded mainly with high explosive shells, although a significant number of armor-piercing shells were also loaded. The lead Japanese force evaded the PT boats&#x27; torpedoes, but were hit hard by the destroyers&#x27; torpedoes, losing a battleship. Then they encountered the battleship and cruiser guns. Only one destroyer survived. The engagement is notable for being one of only two occasions in which battleships fired on battleships in the Pacific Theater, the other being the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal. Due to the starting arrangement of the opposing forces, the Allied force was in a &quot;crossing the T&quot; position, so this was the last battle in which this occurred, but it was not a planned maneuver. The following Japanese cruiser force had several problems, including a light cruiser damaged by a PT boat and two heavy cruisers colliding, one of which fell behind and was sunk by air attack the next day. An American veteran of Surigao Strait, , was transferred to Argentina in 1951 as , becoming most famous for being sunk by in the Falklands War on 2 May 1982. She was the first ship sunk by a nuclear submarine outside of accidents, and only the second ship sunk by a submarine since World War II.

Battle off Samar
At the Battle off Samar, a Japanese battleship group moving towards the invasion fleet off Leyte engaged a minuscule American force known as &quot;Taffy 3&quot; (formally Task Unit 77.4.3), composed of six escort carriers with about 28 aircraft each, three destroyers, and four destroyer escorts. The biggest guns in the American force were /38 caliber guns, while the Japanese had , , and guns. Aircraft from six additional escort carriers also participated for a total of around 330 US aircraft, a mix of F6F Hellcat fighters and TBF Avenger torpedo bombers. The Japanese had four battleships including &quot;Yamato&quot;, six heavy cruisers, two small light cruisers, and 11 destroyers. The Japanese force had earlier been driven off by air attack, losing &quot;Yamato&quot;″s sister . Admiral Halsey then decided to use his Third Fleet carrier force to attack the Japanese carrier group, located well to the north of Samar, which was actually a decoy group with few aircraft. The Japanese were desperately short of aircraft and pilots at this point in the war, and Leyte Gulf was the first battle in which &quot;kamikaze&quot; attacks were used. Due to a tragedy of errors, Halsey took the American battleship force with him, leaving San Bernardino Strait guarded only by the small Seventh Fleet escort carrier force. The battle commenced at dawn on 25 October 1944, shortly after the Battle of Surigao Strait. In the engagement that followed, the Americans exhibited uncanny torpedo accuracy, blowing the bows off several Japanese heavy cruisers. The escort carriers&#x27; aircraft also performed very well, attacking with machine guns after their carriers ran out of bombs and torpedoes. The unexpected level of damage, and maneuvering to avoid the torpedoes and air attacks, disorganized the Japanese and caused them to think they faced at least part of the Third Fleet&#x27;s main force. They had also learned of the defeat a few hours before at Surigao Strait, and did not hear that Halsey&#x27;s force was busy destroying the decoy fleet. Convinced that the rest of the Third Fleet would arrive soon if it hadn&#x27;t already, the Japanese withdrew, eventually losing three heavy cruisers sunk with three damaged to air and torpedo attacks. The Americans lost two escort carriers, two destroyers, and one destroyer escort sunk, with three escort carriers, one destroyer, and two destroyer escorts damaged, thus losing over one-third of their engaged force sunk with nearly all the remainder damaged.

===Wartime cruiser production===
The US built cruisers in quantity through the end of the war, notably 14 heavy cruisers and 27 &quot;Cleveland&quot;-class light cruisers, along with eight &quot;Atlanta&quot;-class anti-aircraft cruisers. The &quot;Cleveland&quot; class was the largest cruiser class ever built in number of ships completed, with nine additional &quot;Cleveland&quot;s completed as light aircraft carriers. The large number of cruisers built was probably due to the significant cruiser losses of 1942 in the Pacific theater (seven American and five other Allied) and the perceived need for several cruisers to escort each of the numerous s being built. Losing four heavy and two small light cruisers in 1942, the Japanese built only five light cruisers during the war; these were small ships with six guns each. Losing 20 cruisers in 1940–42, the British completed no heavy cruisers, thirteen light cruisers ( and classes), and sixteen anti-aircraft cruisers (&quot;Dido&quot; class) during the war.

==Late 20th century==
The rise of air power during World War II dramatically changed the nature of naval combat. Even the fastest cruisers could not maneuver quickly enough to evade aerial attack, and aircraft now had torpedoes, allowing moderate-range standoff capabilities. This change led to the end of independent operations by single ships or very small task groups, and for the second half of the 20th century naval operations were based on very large fleets believed able to fend off all but the largest air attacks, though this was not tested by any war in that period. The US Navy became centered around carrier groups, with cruisers and battleships primarily providing anti-aircraft defense and shore bombardment. Until the Harpoon missile entered service in the late 1970s, the US Navy was almost entirely dependent on carrier-based aircraft and submarines for conventionally attacking enemy warships. Lacking aircraft carriers, the Soviet Navy depended on anti-ship cruise missiles; in the 1950s these were primarily delivered from heavy land-based bombers. Soviet submarine-launched cruise missiles at the time were primarily for land attack; but by 1964 anti-ship missiles were deployed in quantity on cruisers, destroyers, and submarines.

===US cruiser development===
The US Navy was aware of the potential missile threat as soon as World War II ended, and had considerable related experience due to Japanese &quot;kamikaze&quot; attacks in that war. The initial response was to upgrade the light AA armament of new cruisers from 40 mm and 20 mm weapons to twin 3-inch (76 mm)/50 caliber gun mounts. For the longer term, it was thought that gun systems would be inadequate to deal with the missile threat, and by the mid-1950s three naval SAM systems were developed: Talos (long range), Terrier (medium range), and Tartar (short range). Talos and Terrier were nuclear-capable and this allowed their use in anti-ship or shore bombardment roles in the event of nuclear war. Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Arleigh Burke is credited with speeding the development of these systems.

Terrier was initially deployed on two converted &quot;Baltimore&quot;-class cruisers (CAG), with conversions completed in 1955–56. Further conversions of six &quot;Cleveland&quot;-class cruisers (CLG) ( and classes), redesign of the as guided-missile &quot;frigates&quot; (DLG), and development of the DDGs resulted in the completion of numerous additional guided-missile ships deploying all three systems in 1959–1962. Also completed during this period was the nuclear-powered , with two Terrier and one Talos launchers, plus an ASROC anti-submarine launcher the World War II conversions lacked. The converted World War II cruisers up to this point retained one or two main battery turrets for shore bombardment. However, in 1962–1964 three additional &quot;Baltimore&quot; and cruisers were more extensively converted as the . These had two Talos and two Tartar launchers plus ASROC and two 5-inch (127 mm) guns for self-defense, and were primarily built to get greater numbers of Talos launchers deployed. Of all these types, only the &quot;Farragut&quot; DLGs were selected as the design basis for further production, although their successors were significantly larger (5,670 tons standard versus 4,150 tons standard) due to a second Terrier launcher and greater endurance. An economical crew size compared with World War II conversions was probably a factor, as the &quot;Leahy&quot;s required a crew of only 377 versus 1,200 for the &quot;Cleveland&quot;-class conversions. Through 1980, the ten &quot;Farragut&quot;s were joined by four additional classes and two one-off ships for a total of 36 guided-missile frigates, eight of them nuclear-powered (DLGN). In 1975 the &quot;Farragut&quot;s were reclassified as guided-missile destroyers (DDG) due to their small size, and the remaining DLG/DLGN ships became guided-missile cruisers (CG/CGN). The World War II conversions were gradually retired between 1970 and 1980; the Talos missile was withdrawn in 1980 as a cost-saving measure and the &quot;Albany&quot;s were decommissioned. &quot;Long Beach&quot; had her Talos launcher removed in a refit shortly thereafter; the deck space was used for Harpoon missiles. Around this time the Terrier ships were upgraded with the RIM-67 Standard ER missile. The guided-missile frigates and cruisers served in the Cold War and the Vietnam War; off Vietnam they performed shore bombardment and shot down enemy aircraft or, as Positive Identification Radar Advisory Zone (PIRAZ) ships, guided fighters to intercept enemy aircraft. By 1995 the former guided-missile frigates were replaced by the s and s.

The U.S. Navy&#x27;s guided-missile cruisers were built upon destroyer-style hulls (some called &quot;destroyer leaders&quot; or &quot;frigates&quot; prior to the 1975 reclassification). As the U.S. Navy&#x27;s strike role was centered around aircraft carriers, cruisers were primarily designed to provide air defense while often adding anti-submarine capabilities. These U.S. cruisers that were built in the 1960s and 1970s were larger, often nuclear-powered for extended endurance in escorting nuclear-powered fleet carriers, and carried longer-range surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) than early &quot;Charles F. Adams&quot; guided-missile destroyers that were tasked with the short-range air defense role. The U.S. cruiser was a major contrast to their contemporaries, Soviet &quot;rocket cruisers&quot; that were armed with large numbers of anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCMs) as part of the combat doctrine of saturation attack, though in the early 1980s the U.S. Navy retrofitted some of these existing cruisers to carry a small number of Harpoon anti-ship missiles and Tomahawk cruise missiles.

The line between U.S. Navy cruisers and destroyers blurred with the . While originally designed for anti-submarine warfare, a &quot;Spruance&quot; destroyer was comparable in size to existing U.S. cruisers, while having the advantage of an enclosed hangar (with space for up to two medium-lift helicopters) which was a considerable improvement over the basic aviation facilities of earlier cruisers. The &quot;Spruance&quot; hull design was used as the basis for two classes; the which had comparable anti-air capabilities to cruisers at the time, and then the DDG-47-class destroyers which were redesignated as the &quot;Ticonderoga&quot;-class guided-missile cruisers to emphasize the additional capability provided by the ships&#x27; Aegis combat systems, and their flag facilities suitable for an admiral and his staff. In addition, 24 members of the &quot;Spruance&quot; class were upgraded with the vertical launch system (VLS) for Tomahawk cruise missiles due to its modular hull design, along with the similarly VLS-equipped &quot;Ticonderoga&quot; class, these ships had anti-surface strike capabilities beyond the 1960s–1970s cruisers that received Tomahawk armored-box launchers as part of the New Threat Upgrade. Like the &quot;Ticonderoga&quot; ships with VLS, the &quot;Arleigh Burke&quot; and , despite being classified as destroyers, actually have much heavier anti-surface armament than previous U.S. ships classified as cruisers.

Following the American example, three smaller light cruisers of other NATO countries were rearmed with anti-aircraft missiles installed in place of their aft armament: the Dutch &quot;De Zeven Provinciën&quot;, the Italian &quot;Giuseppe Garibaldi&quot;, and the French &quot;Colbert&quot;. Only the French ship, rebuilt last in 1972, also received Exocet anti-ship missile launchers and domestically produced Masurca anti-aircraft missiles. The others received American Terrier missiles, with &quot;Garibaldi&quot; uniquely among surface ships also being armed with Polaris strategic missile launchers, although these were never actually carried. In the Soviet Navy, only one cruiser, &quot;Dzerzhinsky&quot;, of Project 68bis, was similarly rearmed with anti-aircraft missiles. The M-2 missiles used on it, adapted from the land-based S-75, proved ineffective as a naval system, and further conversions were abandoned. Another cruiser of this project, &quot;Admiral Nakhimov&quot;, was used for testing anti-ship missiles but never entered service in this role. The British considered converting older cruisers to guided-missile cruisers with the Seaslug system but ultimately did not proceed. Several other classical cruisers from various countries were rearmed with short-range anti-aircraft systems requiring fewer modifications, such as Seacat or Osa-M, but since these were intended only for self-defense, they are not considered guided-missile cruisers (e.g., the Soviet &quot;Zhdanov&quot; and &quot;Admiral Senyavin&quot; of Project 68U). The Peruvian light cruiser &quot;Almirante Grau&quot; (formerly the Dutch &quot;De Ruyter&quot;) was rearmed with eight Otomat anti-ship missiles at the end of the 20th century, but these did not constitute its primary armament.

====US Navy &quot;cruiser gap&quot;====
Prior to the introduction of the &quot;Ticonderoga&quot;s, the US Navy used odd naming conventions that left its fleet seemingly without many cruisers, although a number of their ships were cruisers in all but name. From the 1950s to the 1970s, US Navy cruisers were large vessels equipped with heavy, specialized missiles (mostly surface-to-air, but for several years including the Regulus nuclear cruise missile) for wide-ranging combat against land-based and sea-based targets. Naming conventions changed, and some guided-missile cruisers were classified as frigates or destroyers during certain periods or at the construction stage. All save one—USS &quot;Long Beach&quot;—were converted from World War II cruisers of the &quot;Oregon City&quot;, &quot;Baltimore&quot; and &quot;Cleveland&quot; classes. &quot;Long Beach&quot; was also the last cruiser built with a World War II-era cruiser style hull (characterized by a long lean hull); later new-build cruisers were actually converted frigates (DLG/CG , , and the &quot;Leahy&quot;, , , and classes) or uprated destroyers (the DDG/CG &quot;Ticonderoga&quot; class was built on a &quot;Spruance&quot;-class destroyer hull).

Literature sometimes considers ships as cruisers even if they are not officially classified as such, primarily larger representatives of the Soviet large anti-submarine ship class, which had no equivalent in global classification. Ultimately, after the 1975 classification reform in the US, larger ships were called cruisers, slightly smaller and weaker fleet escorts were called destroyers, and smaller ships for ocean escort and anti-submarine warfare were called frigates. However, the size and qualitative differences between them and destroyers were vague and arbitrary. With the development of destroyers, this distinction has blurred even further (for example, the American &quot;Arleigh Burke&quot;-class destroyers, complementing the &quot;Ticonderoga&quot;-class cruisers as the core of US Navy air defense, have displacements up to 9,700 tons and nearly equal combat capabilities, carrying the Aegis system and similar missiles, albeit in smaller numbers; similarly for Japanese destroyers).

Frigates under this scheme were almost as large as the cruisers and optimized for anti-aircraft warfare, although they were capable anti-surface warfare combatants as well. In the late 1960s, the US government perceived a &quot;cruiser gap&quot;—at the time, the US Navy possessed six ships designated as cruisers, compared to 19 for the Soviet Union, even though the USN had 21 ships designated as frigates with equal or superior capabilities to the Soviet cruisers at the time. Because of this, in 1975 the Navy performed a massive redesignation of its forces:
* CVA/CVAN (Attack Aircraft Carrier/Nuclear-powered Attack Aircraft Carrier) were redesignated CV/CVN (although and never embarked anti-submarine squadrons).
* DLG/DLGN (Frigates/Nuclear-powered Frigates) of the &quot;Leahy&quot;, &quot;Belknap&quot;, and &quot;California&quot; classes along with USS &quot;Bainbridge&quot; and USS &quot;Truxtun&quot; were redesignated CG/CGN (Guided-Missile Cruiser/Nuclear-powered Guided-Missile Cruiser).
* &quot;Farragut&quot;-class guided-missile frigates (DLG), being smaller and less capable than the others, were redesignated to DDGs ( was the first ship of this class to be re-numbered; because of this the class is sometimes called the &quot;Coontz&quot; class);
* DE/DEG (Ocean Escort/Guided-Missile Ocean Escort) were redesignated to FF/FFG (Guided-Missile Frigates), bringing the US &quot;Frigate&quot; designation into line with the rest of the world.

Also, a series of Patrol Frigates of the , originally designated PFG, were redesignated into the FFG line. The cruiser-destroyer-frigate realignment and the deletion of the Ocean Escort type brought the US Navy&#x27;s ship designations into line with the rest of the world&#x27;s, eliminating confusion with foreign navies. In 1980, the Navy&#x27;s then-building DDG-47-class destroyers were redesignated as cruisers (&quot;Ticonderoga&quot; guided-missile cruisers) to emphasize the additional capability provided by the ships&#x27; Aegis combat systems, and their flag facilities suitable for an admiral and his staff.

===Soviet cruiser development===
In the Soviet Navy, cruisers formed the basis of combat groups. In the immediate post-war era it built a fleet of gun-armed light cruisers, but replaced these beginning in the early 1960s with large ships called &quot;rocket cruisers&quot;, carrying large numbers of anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCMs) and anti-aircraft missiles. The Soviet combat doctrine of saturation attack meant that their cruisers (as well as destroyers and even missile boats) mounted multiple missiles in large container/launch tube housings and carried far more ASCMs than their NATO counterparts, while NATO combatants instead used individually smaller and lighter missiles (while appearing under-armed when compared to Soviet ships).

In 1962–1965 the four s entered service; these had launchers for eight long-range SS-N-3 Shaddock ASCMs with a full set of reloads; these had a range of up to with mid-course guidance. The four more modest s, with launchers for four SS-N-3 ASCMs and no reloads, entered service in 1967–69. In 1969–79 Soviet cruiser numbers more than tripled with ten s and seven s entering service. These had launchers for eight large-diameter missiles whose purpose was initially unclear to NATO. This was the SS-N-14 Silex, an over/under rocket-delivered heavyweight torpedo primarily for the anti-submarine role, but capable of anti-surface action with a range of up to . Soviet doctrine had shifted; powerful anti-submarine vessels (these were designated &quot;Large Anti-Submarine Ships&quot;, but were listed as cruisers in most references) were needed to destroy NATO submarines to allow Soviet ballistic missile submarines to get within range of the United States in the event of nuclear war. By this time Long Range Aviation and the Soviet submarine force could deploy numerous ASCMs. Doctrine later shifted back to overwhelming carrier group defenses with ASCMs, with the &quot;Slava&quot; and &quot;Kirov&quot; classes.

After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Russian cruiser &quot;Moskva&quot; of Project 1164 became the flagship of the Black Sea Fleet and in 2022 participated in the invasion of Ukraine, shelling and blockading the coast, but was subsequently sunk by anti-ship missiles.

===Current cruisers===

The end of the Cold War and the subsequent reduction of military rivalry led to significant reductions in naval forces. This reduction was more pronounced in the Soviet Navy, which was mostly taken over by Russia. Faced with severe financial difficulties, Russia was forced to decommission most of its ships in the 1990s or send them for extended overhauls. The most recent Soviet/Russian rocket cruisers, the four s, were built in the 1970s and 1980s. One of the &quot;Kirov&quot; class is in refit, and 2 are being scrapped, with the in active service. Russia also operates two s and one &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot;-class carrier which is officially designated as a cruiser, specifically a &quot;heavy aviation cruiser&quot; () due to her complement of 12 P-700 Granit supersonic AShMs. In 2022, the cruiser &quot;Moskva&quot; of Project 1164 sank after being hit by a Ukrainian missile.

Currently, the &quot;Kirov&quot;-class heavy missile cruisers are used for command purposes, as &quot;Pyotr Velikiy&quot; is the flagship of the Northern Fleet. However, their air defense capabilities are still powerful, as shown by the array of point defense missiles they carry, from 44 OSA-MA missiles to 196 9K311 Tor missiles. For longer range targets, the S-300 is used. For closer range targets, AK-630 or Kashtan CIWSs are used. Aside from that, &quot;Kirov&quot;s have 20 P-700 Granit missiles for anti-ship warfare. For target acquisition beyond the radar horizon, three helicopters can be used. Besides a vast array of armament, &quot;Kirov&quot;-class cruisers are also outfitted with many sensors and communications equipment, allowing them to lead the fleet.

The United States Navy has centered on the aircraft carrier since World War II. The &quot;Ticonderoga&quot;-class cruisers, built in the 1980s, were originally designed and designated as a class of destroyer, intended to provide a very powerful air-defense in these carrier-centered fleets. As of 2020, the US Navy still had 22 of its newest &quot;Ticonderoga&quot;-class cruisers in service. These ships were continuously upgraded, enhancing their value and versatility. Some were equipped with ballistic missile defense capabilities (Aegis BMD system). However, no new cruisers of this class were being built. In the 21st century, there were design efforts for futuristic large cruisers provisionally designated as CG(X), but the program was canceled in 2010 due to budget constraints.

Formally, only the aforementioned ships are classified as cruisers globally. The latest American futuristic large destroyers of the &quot;Zumwalt&quot; class, despite their displacement of approximately 16,000 tons and armament with two large-caliber (155 mm) guns traditionally associated with cruisers, are classified as destroyers. Literature often emphasizes that these ships are essentially large cruisers. Similarly, Japanese large missile destroyers of the &quot;Kongō&quot; class, with a displacement of 9,485 tons and equipped with the Aegis system (derived from the &quot;Arleigh Burke&quot;-class destroyers), are sometimes referred to as cruisers. Their improved versions, the &quot;Atago&quot; and &quot;Maya&quot; classes, exceed 10,000 tons. Japan, for political reasons, does not use the term &quot;cruiser&quot; or even &quot;destroyer&quot;, formally classifying these ships as missile escorts with hull numbers prefixed by DDG, corresponding to guided-missile destroyers. These Japanese destroyers also provide ballistic missile defense.

Outside the US and Soviet navies, new cruisers were rare following World War II. Most navies use guided-missile destroyers for fleet air defense, and destroyers and frigates for cruise missiles. The need to operate in task forces has led most navies to change to fleets designed around ships dedicated to a single role, anti-submarine or anti-aircraft typically, and the large &quot;generalist&quot; ship has disappeared from most forces. The United States Navy and the Russian Navy are the only remaining navies which operate active duty ships formally classed as cruisers. Italy used until 2003 (decommissioned in 2006) and the aircraft cruiser until 2024; France operated a single helicopter cruiser until May 2010, , for training purposes only. While Type 055 of the Chinese Navy is classified as a cruiser by the U.S. Department of Defense, the Chinese consider it a guided-missile destroyer.

In the years since the launch of in 1981, the class has received a number of upgrades that have dramatically improved its members&#x27; capabilities for anti-submarine and land attack (using the Tomahawk missile). Like their Soviet counterparts, the modern &quot;Ticonderoga&quot;s can also be used as the basis for an entire battle group. Their cruiser designation was almost certainly deserved when first built, as their sensors and combat management systems enable them to act as flagships for a surface warship flotilla if no carrier is present, but newer ships rated as destroyers and also equipped with Aegis approach them very closely in capability, and once more blur the line between the two classes.

===Aircraft cruisers===

From time to time, some navies have experimented with aircraft-carrying cruisers. One example is the Swedish . Another was the Japanese &quot;Mogami&quot;, which was converted to carry a large floatplane group in 1942. Another variant is the &quot;helicopter cruiser&quot;. The further development of helicopter cruisers led to the creation of ships formally classified only as cruisers but significantly larger and effectively light aircraft carriers. In the Soviet Union, a series of unusual hybrid ships of Project 1143 (&quot;Kiev&quot; class) were built in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Initially classified as anti-submarine cruisers, they were ultimately designated as &quot;heavy aircraft cruisers&quot;. These ships combined the architecture of cruisers and aircraft carriers and were armed with long-range anti-ship and anti-aircraft missiles along with a deck for vertical take-off and landing aircraft. Their full displacement of approximately 43,000 tons is typical for aircraft carriers. By hosting several helicopters, their primary mission was also anti-submarine warfare. The last example in service was the Soviet Navy&#x27;s , whose last unit was converted to a pure aircraft carrier and sold to India as . The Russian Navy&#x27;s is nominally designated as an aviation cruiser but otherwise resembles a standard medium aircraft carrier, albeit with a surface-to-surface missile battery. The Royal Navy&#x27;s aircraft-carrying and the Italian Navy&#x27;s aircraft-carrying vessels were originally designated &#x27;through-deck cruisers&#x27;, but were since designated as small aircraft carriers (although the &#x27;C&#x27; in the pennant for &quot;Giuseppe Garibaldi&quot; indicated it retained some status as an aircraft-carrying cruiser). It was armed with missiles, but these were short-range self-defense missiles (anti-aircraft Aspide and anti-ship Otomat) and did not match the significance of its aviation capabilities. Similarly, the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force&#x27;s &quot;helicopter destroyers&quot; are really more along the lines of helicopter cruisers in function and aircraft complement, but due to the Treaty of San Francisco, must be designated as destroyers.

One cruiser alternative studied in the late 1980s by the United States was variously entitled a Mission Essential Unit (MEU) or CG V/STOL. In a return to the thoughts of the independent operations cruiser-carriers of the 1930s and the Soviet &quot;Kiev&quot; class, the ship was to be fitted with a hangar, elevators, and a flight deck. The mission systems were Aegis, SQS-53 sonar, 12 SV-22 ASW aircraft and 200 VLS cells. The resulting ship would have had a waterline length of 700 feet, a waterline beam of 97 feet, and a displacement of about 25,000 tons. Other features included an integrated electric drive and advanced computer systems, both stand-alone and networked. It was part of the U.S. Navy&#x27;s &quot;Revolution at Sea&quot; effort. The project was curtailed by the sudden end of the Cold War and its aftermath, otherwise the first of class would have been likely ordered in the early 1990s.

=== Strike cruisers ===
An alternative development path for guided-missile cruisers was represented by ships armed with heavy long-range anti-ship missiles, primarily developed in the Soviet Union with a focus on combating aircraft carriers. Starting in 1962, four ships of Project 58 (NATO designation: &quot;Kynda&quot;) entered service. They were armed with eight P-35 missile launchers with a range of 250 km and a twin launcher for M-1 Volna anti-aircraft missiles. With a moderate full displacement of 5,350 tons, they were initially intended to be classified as destroyers but ultimately entered service as guided-missile cruisers. During this period, designs for larger cruisers, such as Project 64 and the nuclear-powered Project 63 (with 24 anti-ship missiles), were also developed. However, their construction was abandoned due to high costs and vulnerability to air attacks due to the shortcomings of available anti-aircraft missiles.

The next built type was four ships of Project 1134 (NATO designation: &quot;Kresta I&quot;) with a displacement of 7,500 tons, equipped with four P-35 anti-ship missile launchers and two Volna anti-aircraft missile launchers. These were transitional types with lesser strike capabilities and were initially classified as large anti-submarine ships but were reclassified as guided-missile cruisers in 1977.

In the 1980s, before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, only three guided-missile cruisers of the new generation Project 1164 (&quot;Slava&quot; class) with a full displacement of 11,300 tons were completed out of a longer planned series. They carried 16 Bazalt anti-ship missile launchers and eight vertical launchers for long-range Fort anti-aircraft missiles. The pinnacle of development for cruisers designed to engage surface ships, while also protecting fleet formations from aircraft and submarines, was the four large nuclear-powered cruisers of Project 1144 (&quot;Kirov&quot; class) from the 1980s. These were officially classified as &quot;heavy nuclear guided-missile cruisers&quot;. With a full displacement of up to 25,000 tons, they were armed with 20 Granit heavy anti-ship missile launchers, 12 vertical launchers for long-range Fort anti-aircraft missiles, and short-range missiles. For anti-submarine warfare, they were equipped with rocket-torpedo launchers and three helicopters, and their crew numbered up to 744 people. In English-language literature, they are sometimes referred to as &quot;battlecruisers&quot;, although this designation lacks official justification.

The ship &quot;Muntenia&quot;, with a displacement of 5,790 tons, was constructed and built in Romania in the 1980s. It was initially somewhat ambitiously designated as a light helicopter cruiser but was reclassified as a destroyer in 1990, along with a name change. The ship and its classification reflected the ambitions of dictator Nicolae Ceaușescu amid limited industrial capabilities. It carried eight Soviet P-20M medium-range anti-ship missiles but lacked anti-aircraft missile armament and was equipped with two light helicopters without means for long-range anti-submarine warfare.

==Operators==

Few cruisers are still operational in the world&#x27;s navies. Those that remain in service today are:
* : The cruiser is kept in ceremonial commission as the flagship of the Hellenic Navy due to her historical significance.
* : 2 and 2 guided-missile cruisers, the heavy aviation cruiser ; the cruiser was ceremonially recommissioned as the flagship of the Russian Navy due to her historical significance.
* : 9 guided-missile cruisers in service. 13 more in the Reserve Fleet.

The following is laid up:
* : The cruiser is a &quot;Slava&quot;-class cruiser that was under construction during the breakup of the Soviet Union. Ukraine inherited the ship following its independence. Progress to complete the ship has been slow and has been at 95% complete since circa 1995. It is estimated that an additional US$30 million are needed to complete the ship, and in 2019 Ukroboronprom announced that the ship would be sold. The cruiser sits docked and unfinished at the harbor of Mykolaiv in southern Ukraine. It was reported that the Ukrainian government invested ₴6.08 million into the ship&#x27;s maintenance in 2012. On 26 March 2017, it was announced that the Ukrainian Government will be scrapping the vessel which has been laid up, incomplete, for nearly 30 years in Mykolaiv. Maintenance and construction was costing the country US$225,000 per month. On 19 September 2019, the new director of Ukroboronprom Aivaras Abromavičius announced that the ship will be sold. Her current status is unknown due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

The following are classified as destroyers by their respective operators, but, due to their size and capabilities, are considered to be cruisers by some, all having full load displacements of at least 10,000 tons:
* : The first Type 055 destroyer was launched by China in June 2017 and was commissioned on 12 January 2020 (as of 2023, 8 are in service). Despite being classified as a destroyer by its operator, many naval analysts believe that it is far too large and too well equipped to be considered a destroyer, and is classified by the United States Defense Department as such.
* : 2 s, 2 s, 2 s. Despite the official classification of these ships as destroyers, these vessels are of a displacement greater than most of the world&#x27;s destroyer classes. The &quot;Maya&quot;-class ships incorporate a level of armament more akin to cruisers. The &quot;Hyūga&quot;-class ships incorporate a level of armament more akin to helicopter cruisers than helicopter carriers.
* : 4 s. Despite their classification as a destroyer, many naval analysts feel they are in fact cruisers due to their size and armament, which are both greater than most of the world&#x27;s destroyer classes.
* : 2 s. Even if considered a destroyer, they remain significantly larger and more capable than the only definitive cruisers in USN service, the &quot;Ticonderoga&quot;-class.

==Future development==
* will add 8 more Type 055 destroyers to its fleet for a total of 16. As of 2024, 4 of these are under construction.
* has ordered 6 F126 frigates, displacing some 10,383 tons. As of 2024, 1 of these is under construction. It is also developing the Type F127 frigate and plans to procure 6 of these vessels. The design is expected to be a MEKO A-400 AMD, which has a displacement of 10,000 tons.
* announced that between 8 and 10 ships would be built under the &quot;&quot;. The destroyers will displace from 10,000 to 13,000-tons.
* is developing its DDX destroyer project. The 2 ships will displace 10,000 tons each, making them the largest surface combatants Italy has built since World War II.
* : announced that it would build 2 guided-missile warships, nominally called Aegis system equipped vessels, each displacing 20,000 tons, easily placing them into the cruiser classification.
* is to build an unknown number of &quot;Lider&quot;-class destroyers. At 19,000 tons of displacement they will more than double the displacement of existing s.
* will add 2 more &quot;Sejong the Great&quot;-class destroyers to its fleet.
* is developing the Type 83 destroyer, likely to be larger than the Type 45 destroyer it is set to replace and, in terms of displacement, possibly in the 10,000 tonne range. Analysis at &#x27;DefenceConnect&#x27; of a BAE concept for the class stated that their proposal displaced at least 11,810 tons.
* currently has 1 &quot;Zumwalt&quot;-class destroyer undergoing sea trials and is developing its DDG(X) project to replace the aging &quot;Ticonderoga&quot;-class cruisers. Displacing 12,000 tons, much greater than their predecessors, the DDG(X) ships will be cruisers in all but name.

==Museum ships==
As of 2019, several decommissioned cruisers have been saved from scrapping and exist worldwide as museum ships. They are:
* A floating replica of the is on display in Dandong, China.
* in Athens, Greece; still active as the flagship of the Hellenic Navy
* in St. Petersburg, Russia; still active as the flagship of the Russian Navy
* in Novorossiysk, Russia; the last surviving 
* in London, England
* in Belfast, Northern Ireland; the last surviving ship from the Battle of Jutland
* in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; the world&#x27;s oldest steel-hulled warship afloat.
* in Buffalo, New York
* in Quincy, Massachusetts; the world&#x27;s last heavy cruiser.
* Bow section of in La Spezia, Italy

===Former museums===
* The was on display in Bordeaux, France until 2006, when she was forced to close due to financial difficulties. She sat in the French Navy&#x27;s mothball fleet in Landevennec until she was sold for scrap in 2014.

==Former operators==

* last cruiser, the was sunk in action during the Falklands War in 1982.
* lost its entire navy following the Empire&#x27;s collapse following World War I.
* decommissioned both its surviving s in 1949.
* returned its only cruiser, to France following the abolition of its navy in 1920.
* decommissioned its last , &quot;Almirante Tamandaré&quot; in 1976.
* decommissioned HMCS &quot;Quebec&quot; in 1961.
* decommissioned its last , &quot;O&#x27;Higgins&quot; in 1991.
* &#x27;s last cruiser, , was decommissioned in 1958 and sold for scrapping in 1959. This light cruiser was akin to pre-WW1 light cruisers at time of commissioning and its contemporaries were gunboats; Taiwan&#x27;s penultimate cruiser was ROCS Chung King, their lone vessel in the Arethusa-class. She defected to the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy during the Chinese Civil War in 1949.
* only cruiser, &quot;Znaim&quot; was handed over to Germany in 1943.
* decommissioned its last cruiser, in 1923.
* decommissioned its last cruiser, in 2010.
* decommissioned its last cruiser, in 1990.
* decommissioned its last active duty cruiser, &quot;Elli&quot; in 1965.
* Haitian Navy only cruiser, &quot;Consul Gostrück&quot; sank due to the inexperience of her crew in 1910.
* decommissioned its , in 1985.
* decommissioned its only cruiser, the RI &quot;Irian&quot; in 1972.
* decommissioned helicopter cruiser &quot;Vittorio Veneto&quot; in 2006 and aircraft cruiser in 2024.
* surrendered all its remaining cruisers to the Allies following World War II.
* decommissioned its last cruiser, HMNZS &quot;Royalist&quot; in 1966.
* decommissioned its last cruiser, in 1975.
* decommissioned its only cruiser, between 1982 and 1985. The ship was scrapped in 1985.
* decommissioned its last , in 2017.
* returned its lone surviving , ORP &quot;Conrad&quot;, to the United Kingdom in 1946.
* decommissioned its last cruiser, NRP &quot;Vasco da Gama&quot; in 1935.
* decommissioned its only cruiser, in 1929. From 1985 to 1990, the Romanian People&#x27;s Navy (and subsequently, the Romanian Naval Forces) classified &quot;Muntenia&quot; as a light helicopter cruiser, but it was refitted and redesignated as a destroyer (ultimately, it was redesignated as a frigate in 2001).
* decommissioned its only cruiser SATS &quot;General Botha&quot; in 1947.
* decommissioned its last cruiser, in 1977.
* decommissioned its last cruiser, in 1971.
* decommissioned its last cruiser, TCG &quot;Mecidiye&quot; in 1948; they retained a battlecruiser, TCG &quot;Yavuz&quot;, which was decommissioned in 1950 and stricken from the Naval Register in 1954.
* decommissioned its last cruiser in 1979.
* lost its entire fleet upon its reintegration into the Soviet Union in 1921.
* decommissioned its only cruiser, ROU &quot;Montevideo&quot; in 1932.
* decommissioned its only cruiser, FNV &quot;Mariscal Sucre&quot; in 1940.
* only cruiser KB &quot;Dalmacija&quot; was captured by Germany during the Invasion of Yugoslavia in 1941.

==See also==
* List of battlecruisers of the Second World War
* List of cruisers
* List of cruisers of World War I
* List of cruisers of the Second World War
* List of ships of the Second World War

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Parkes, Oscar &quot;British Battleships&quot; (2nd Edition). Leo Cooper, London, 1990. .
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="2" end="9" title="Cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="23" end="30" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="97" end="113" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q474748" start="119" end="142" title="amphibious assault ship" label="amphibious assault ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247281" start="200" end="218" title="search-and-destroy" label="search-and-destroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771733" start="222" end="234" title="ocean escort" label="ocean escort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440059" start="238" end="248" title="sea denial" label="sea denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667474" start="376" end="387" title="Age of Sail" label="Age of Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="532" end="539" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="544" end="557" title="sloop-of-war" label="sloops-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q986676" start="764" end="780" title="commerce raiding" label="commerce raiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q830335" start="885" end="902" title="protected cruiser" label="protected cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q847478" start="912" end="927" title="armored cruiser" label="armored cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051067" start="1004" end="1019" title="pre-dreadnought" label="pre-dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="1020" end="1030" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="1055" end="1077" title="dreadnought battleship" label="dreadnought battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1085" end="1096" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q214190" start="1170" end="1183" title="battlecruiser" label="battlecruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194368" start="1330" end="1342" title="capital ship" label="capital ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="1535" end="1544" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="1559" end="1582" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="1676" end="1688" title="Displacement (ship)" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019825" start="1730" end="1737" title="Caliber (artillery)" label="calibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q704536" start="1755" end="1774" title="London Naval Treaty" label="London Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q898771" start="1814" end="1827" title="heavy cruiser" label="heavy cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q778129" start="1912" end="1925" title="light cruiser" label="light cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914532" start="2496" end="2513" title="surface combatant" label="surface combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="2539" end="2553" title="aerial warfare" label="aerial warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="2562" end="2578" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="2657" end="2668" title="air defense" label="air defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982006" start="2673" end="2690" title="shore bombardment" label="shore bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2703" end="2711" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q796754" start="2716" end="2727" title="Soviet Navy" label="Soviet Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="2754" end="2771" title="anti-ship missile" label="anti-ship missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2798" end="2802" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426592" start="2827" end="2844" title="saturation attack" label="saturation attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16325725" start="2936" end="2952" title="destroyer leader" label="destroyer leader"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2963" end="2983" title="Frigate#Guided-missile role" label="&amp;quot;frigates&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350391" start="2997" end="3018" title="United States Navy 1975 ship reclassification" label="1975 reclassification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="3081" end="3108" title="anti-submarine warfare" label="anti-submarine capabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="3147" end="3169" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063383" start="3195" end="3211" title="Charles F. Adams-class destroyer" label="Charles F. Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607934" start="3218" end="3242" title="guided-missile destroyer" label="guided-missile destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501875" start="3260" end="3283" title="short-range air defense" label="short-range air defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3593" end="3606" title="United States Navy" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="3611" end="3617" title="Russian Navy" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430687" start="3703" end="3719" title="aircraft cruiser" label="aircraft cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q15729915" start="3956" end="3964" title="Type 055 destroyer" label="Type 055"/>
<link wikidata="Q521029" start="3990" end="3995" title="Kirov-class battlecruiser" label="Kirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359363" start="4012" end="4017" title="Slava-class cruiser" label="Slava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206709" start="4037" end="4082" title="International Institute for Strategic Studies" label="International Institute for Strategic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q495389" start="4289" end="4305" title="Sejong the Great-class destroyer" label="Sejong the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="4317" end="4328" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q753161" start="4340" end="4345" title="Atago-class destroyer" label="Atago"/>
<link wikidata="Q22123561" start="4362" end="4366" title="Maya-class destroyer" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q674909" start="4409" end="4422" title="Arleigh Burke-class destroyer" label="Arleigh Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q873688" start="4436" end="4447" title="Ticonderoga-class cruiser" label="Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q229770" start="4464" end="4471" title="Zumwalt-class destroyer" label="Zumwalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="4860" end="4876" title="ship of the line" label="ship of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q931281" start="5110" end="5120" title="Dutch navy" label="Dutch navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="5179" end="5189" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5303" end="5325" title="Cruiser and Convoy Act" label="Cruiser and Convoy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="6212" end="6220" title="ironclad" label="ironclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439100" start="7457" end="7468" title="screw sloop" label="screw sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506352" start="7472" end="7485" title="screw frigate" label="screw frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="7613" end="7618" title="Shell (projectile)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q137823" start="7752" end="7759" title="Monitor (warship)" label="monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639516" start="7760" end="7779" title="Huáscar (ironclad)" label="&amp;quot;Huáscar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="7976" end="7981" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688565" start="8113" end="8124" title="Jeune Ecole" label="Jeune Ecole"/>
<link wikidata="Q986676" start="8229" end="8245" title="commerce raiding" label="commerce raiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q324233" start="8257" end="8269" title="torpedo boat" label="torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q152083" start="8920" end="8941" title="Chilean cruiser Esmeralda (1883)" label="&amp;quot;Esmeralda&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q98972704" start="8987" end="8994" title="Elswick, Tyne and Wear" label="Elswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q689159" start="9017" end="9026" title="Armstrong Whitworth" label="Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q357447" start="9148" end="9158" title="forecastle" label="forecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758120" start="9160" end="9169" title="poop deck" label="poop deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141016" start="9715" end="9730" title="torpedo gunboat" label="torpedo gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051067" start="10391" end="10417" title="pre-dreadnought battleship" label="pre-dreadnought battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q334999" start="11158" end="11171" title="John Fisher, 1st Baron Fisher" label="Jackie Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q759783" start="11367" end="11380" title="scout cruiser" label="scout cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q833040" start="11525" end="11537" title="Italian Navy" label="Italian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156554" start="12712" end="12729" title="Battle of Jutland" label="Battle of Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883847" start="13868" end="13875" title="NMS Grivița" label="Grivița"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387294" start="13889" end="13902" title="Romanian Navy" label="Romanian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569963" start="14023" end="14040" title="Armed merchantmen" label="auxiliary cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="14047" end="14060" title="merchant marine" label="merchant ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q695497" start="14964" end="14990" title="Naval warfare of World War I" label="warship during World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170417" start="15180" end="15187" title="Caliber" label="calibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="15347" end="15358" title="Dreadnought" label="Dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="15482" end="15503" title="standard displacement" label="standard displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="15524" end="15527" title="ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q898771" start="15679" end="15693" title="treaty cruiser" label="treaty cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q704536" start="15707" end="15726" title="London Naval Treaty" label="London Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632944" start="15918" end="15944" title="Second London Naval Treaty" label="Second London Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="16451" end="16473" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766411" start="16857" end="16895" title="6&amp;quot;/47 caliber gun" label="6-inch (152 mm)/47 caliber gun Mark 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644249" start="16942" end="16980" title="8&amp;quot;/55 caliber gun" label="8-inch (203 mm)/55 caliber gun Mark 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="17773" end="17790" title="Naval War College" label="Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970825" start="18594" end="18609" title="Type 93 torpedo" label="Type 93 torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849429" start="18871" end="18886" title="Mark 15 torpedo" label="Mark 15 torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19424" end="19440" title="SSM-N-8 Regulus#Ships fitted with Regulus" label="strategic attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="19505" end="19515" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="19524" end="19535" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q643834" start="19717" end="19736" title="Reichsmarine" label="German Reichsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="19792" end="19812" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="19898" end="19910" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="19918" end="19930" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20369" end="20397" title="Fleet review (Commonwealth realms)#George VI" label="1937 Coronation Fleet Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q156966" start="21746" end="21764" title="Deutschland-class cruiser" label="pocket battleships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548031" start="22121" end="22133" title="12&amp;quot;/50 caliber Mark 8 gun" label="12-inch guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329696" start="22417" end="22426" title="NMS Elisabeta" label="Elisabeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310234" start="23257" end="23273" title="dual-purpose gun" label="dual-purpose gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q778129" start="23866" end="23879" title="light cruiser" label="light cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q504347" start="25108" end="25136" title="Battle of the Philippine Sea" label="Battle of the Philippine Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="25141" end="25161" title="Battle of Leyte Gulf" label="Battle of Leyte Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295041" start="25528" end="25543" title="torpedo cruiser" label="torpedo cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q277621" start="25663" end="25669" title="Kaiten" label="Kaiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q816356" start="25676" end="25689" title="human torpedo" label="human torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="26266" end="26278" title="antiaircraft" label="antiaircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="26764" end="26781" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q704536" start="27397" end="27416" title="London Naval Treaty" label="London Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q154115" start="27833" end="27899" title="German cruiser Admiral Graf Spee" label="German &amp;quot;pocket battleship&amp;quot; &amp;quot;Admiral Graf Spee&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q713529" start="27949" end="27974" title="Battle of the River Plate" label="Battle of the River Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q154115" start="27976" end="28008" title="German cruiser Admiral Graf Spee" label="German cruiser Admiral Graf Spee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="28037" end="28047" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="28049" end="28056" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q696607" start="28887" end="28915" title="Battle of the Denmark Strait" label="Battle of the Denmark Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q58459" start="28963" end="29017" title="Sinking of HMAS Sydney" label="engagement with the German raider &amp;quot;Kormoran&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29167" end="29187" title="List of Royal Navy losses in World War II#Cruisers" label="lost to enemy action"/>
<link wikidata="Q133220" start="29612" end="29617" title="sonar" label="sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q689123" start="29749" end="29761" title="Convoy PQ 17" label="Convoy PQ 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q705261" start="30007" end="30027" title="Operation Wunderland" label="Operation Wunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33629" start="30069" end="30077" title="Kara Sea" label="Kara Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225369" start="30093" end="30106" title="Dikson Island" label="Dikson Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q699411" start="30166" end="30191" title="Battle of the Barents Sea" label="Battle of the Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763" start="30224" end="30232" title="Murmansk" label="Murmansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q820115" start="30343" end="30356" title="Convoy JW 51B" label="Convoy JW 51B"/>
<link wikidata="Q158427" start="30538" end="30544" title="German cruiser Deutschland" label="Lützow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069" start="30623" end="30633" title="North Cape (Norway)" label="North Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q715886" start="31092" end="31116" title="Battle of the North Cape" label="Battle of the North Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072926" start="31174" end="31186" title="Bruce Fraser, 1st Baron Fraser of North Cape" label="Bruce Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q859612" start="31401" end="31413" title="Channel Dash" label="Channel Dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138347" start="31720" end="31733" title="coastal defence and fortification" label="coast defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="31781" end="31790" title="Trondheim" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="31859" end="31881" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q700569" start="32078" end="32112" title="Sinking of Prince of Wales and Repulse" label="sunk by land-based torpedo bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q696438" start="32562" end="32589" title="Naval Battle of Guadalcanal" label="Naval Battle of Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="32637" end="32661" title="Battle of Surigao Strait" label="Battle of Surigao Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q696479" start="32778" end="32808" title="Battle of the Eastern Solomons" label="Battle of the Eastern Solomons"/>
<link wikidata="Q757871" start="33256" end="33270" title="Indian Ocean raid" label="raid on Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="33397" end="33413" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q249708" start="33435" end="33453" title="Aleutian Islands Campaign" label="Aleutian diversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q217145" start="33578" end="33598" title="Guadalcanal Campaign" label="Guadalcanal Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593555" start="33980" end="33984" title="Chuuk Lagoon" label="Truk"/>
<link wikidata="Q698226" start="34172" end="34198" title="Dutch East Indies campaign" label="Dutch East Indies campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759161" start="34241" end="34256" title="Solomon Islands campaign" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970825" start="34345" end="34355" title="Long Lance" label="Long Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770120" start="34801" end="34816" title="Mark 6 exploder" label="Mark 6 exploder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380971" start="34870" end="34885" title="Mark 14 torpedo" label="Mark 14 torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471117" start="35312" end="35323" title="battle line" label="battle line"/>
<link wikidata="Q263142" start="35973" end="35982" title="Battle of the Java Sea" label="two Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440134" start="35996" end="36003" title="Second Battle of the Java Sea" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536686" start="36005" end="36029" title="Battle of Sunda Strait" label="Australian, and American"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="36432" end="36441" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="36601" end="36611" title="United States Marine Corps" label="US Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q700032" start="37013" end="37034" title="Battle of Savo Island" label="Battle of Savo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="37874" end="37889" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q671079" start="38772" end="38788" title="Troopship" label="troop transports"/>
<link wikidata="Q376667" start="38987" end="39000" title="Tokyo Express" label="Tokyo Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q12259031" start="39190" end="39205" title="Henderson Field (Guadalcanal)" label="Henderson Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475243" start="39369" end="39393" title="Battle of Cape Esperance" label="Battle of Cape Esperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q699669" start="41299" end="41331" title="Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands" label="Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089635" start="41818" end="41840" title="carrier raid on Rabaul" label="carrier raid on Rabaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q250309" start="41861" end="41879" title="Battle of Tarawa" label="invasion of Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q337524" start="43427" end="43441" title="Espiritu Santo" label="Espiritu Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850286" start="44082" end="44099" title="Sullivan brothers" label="Sullivan brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="46076" end="46088" title="Fire-control system" label="fire control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147699" start="46657" end="46672" title="Russell Islands" label="Russell Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475679" start="47266" end="47288" title="Battle of Tassafaronga" label="Battle of Tassafaronga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888190" start="48246" end="48253" title="PT boat" label="PT boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q702397" start="48700" end="48729" title="Imperial General Headquarters" label="Imperial General Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276692" start="48933" end="48952" title="New Guinea campaign" label="New Guinea campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026016" start="48957" end="48973" title="Operation Cartwheel" label="isolating Rabaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q702096" start="48979" end="48998" title="Battle of Kula Gulf" label="Battle of Kula Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929970" start="49159" end="49163" title="Vila, Solomon Islands" label="Vila"/>
<link wikidata="Q952882" start="49197" end="49204" title="Rendova" label="Rendova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668495" start="49343" end="49365" title="Battle of Kolombangara" label="Battle of Kolombangara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165486" start="49942" end="49971" title="Battle of Empress Augusta Bay" label="Battle of Empress Augusta Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q704785" start="50047" end="50067" title="Bougainville Campaign" label="invaded Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817902" start="51256" end="51271" title="Fifth Air Force" label="Fifth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185562" start="51541" end="51546" title="light aircraft carrier" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q253555" start="51556" end="51570" title="escort carrier" label="escort carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348033" start="52191" end="52207" title="Battle off Samar" label="Battle off Samar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632248" start="52653" end="52667" title="Surigao Strait" label="Surigao Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q211377" start="52702" end="52707" title="Leyte" label="Leyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141302" start="53688" end="53702" title="crossing the T" label="crossing the T"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="54141" end="54154" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071130" start="54667" end="54683" title="5&amp;quot;/38 caliber gun" label="/38 caliber guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q465903" start="54833" end="54844" title="F6F Hellcat" label="F6F Hellcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q734103" start="54858" end="54869" title="TBF Avenger" label="TBF Avenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q439984" start="55123" end="55129" title="William Halsey Jr." label="Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="55442" end="55450" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576377" start="55564" end="55585" title="San Bernardino Strait" label="San Bernardino Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068928" start="57236" end="57259" title="Independence-class aircraft carrier" label="light aircraft carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4307465" start="58468" end="58482" title="carrier strike group" label="carrier groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q331436" start="58589" end="58604" title="Harpoon missile" label="Harpoon missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="58712" end="58722" title="submarines" label="submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055881" start="58899" end="58923" title="Long Range Aviation" label="heavy land-based bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631562" start="58932" end="58965" title="submarine-launched cruise missile" label="submarine-launched cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634025" start="59433" end="59469" title="3&amp;quot;/50 caliber gun" label="3-inch (76 mm)/50 caliber gun mounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q741489" start="59638" end="59643" title="Talos missile" label="Talos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190906" start="59658" end="59665" title="Terrier missile" label="Terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q44402" start="59686" end="59692" title="Tartar missile" label="Tartar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="59843" end="59868" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q127730" start="59877" end="59890" title="Arleigh Burke" label="Arleigh Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630219" start="59990" end="60036" title="Boston-class cruiser" label="converted &amp;quot;Baltimore&amp;quot;-class cruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q76917" start="60482" end="60487" title="ASROC" label="ASROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136147" start="62183" end="62198" title="RIM-67 Standard" label="RIM-67 Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119424" start="62422" end="62427" title="PIRAZ" label="PIRAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387973" start="62436" end="62451" title="radar picket" label="guided fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="63626" end="63649" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Tomahawk cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q380682" start="64390" end="64409" title="Aegis combat system" label="Aegis combat system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045001" start="64858" end="64876" title="New Threat Upgrade" label="New Threat Upgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="65172" end="65176" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261834" start="65331" end="65349" title="Italian cruiser Giuseppe Garibaldi (1936)" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567251" start="65378" end="65385" title="French cruiser Colbert (C611)" label="Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q150570" start="65451" end="65457" title="Exocet" label="Exocet"/>
<link wikidata="Q578967" start="65512" end="65519" title="Masurca" label="Masurca"/>
<link wikidata="Q796754" start="65757" end="65768" title="Soviet Navy" label="Soviet Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001742" start="65816" end="65829" title="Sverdlov-class cruiser" label="Project 68bis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163186" start="65939" end="65943" title="S-75 Dvina" label="S-75"/>
<link wikidata="Q685067" start="66251" end="66258" title="Seaslug (missile)" label="Seaslug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089676" start="66445" end="66451" title="Seacat (missile)" label="Seacat"/>
<link wikidata="Q694993" start="66455" end="66460" title="OSA-M" label="Osa-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q507573" start="66771" end="66777" title="Otomat" label="Otomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340751" start="67304" end="67311" title="Regulus missile" label="Regulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="67312" end="67319" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350391" start="68355" end="68381" title="United States Navy 1975 ship reclassification" label="1975 classification reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q674909" start="68783" end="68825" title="Arleigh Burke-class destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Arleigh Burke&amp;quot;-class destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="69188" end="69201" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001742" start="71350" end="71364" title="Sverdlov-class cruiser" label="light cruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="71444" end="71458" title="rocket cruiser" label="rocket cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330530" start="72020" end="72035" title="SS-N-3 Shaddock" label="SS-N-3 Shaddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514068" start="72433" end="72446" title="SS-N-14 Silex" label="SS-N-14 Silex"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="72824" end="72851" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055881" start="72936" end="72955" title="Long Range Aviation" label="Long Range Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992278" start="73201" end="73235" title="Russian cruiser Moskva" label="Russian cruiser &amp;quot;Moskva&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="73279" end="73294" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="73327" end="73346" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="73472" end="73480" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q358966" start="74047" end="74090" title="Kuznetsov-class aircraft carrier" label="&amp;quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&amp;quot;-class carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430687" start="74157" end="74179" title="Aircraft cruiser" label="heavy aviation cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072126" start="74217" end="74229" title="P-700 Granit" label="P-700 Granit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992278" start="74275" end="74281" title="Russian cruiser Moskva" label="Moskva"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="74479" end="74487" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q936613" start="74495" end="74509" title="Northern Fleet" label="Northern Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204799" start="74596" end="74609" title="point defense" label="point defense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74639" end="74645" title="9K33 Osa#Variants" label="OSA-MA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74662" end="74671" title="Tor missile system#3K95 Kinzhal (naval variant)" label="9K311 Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q48446" start="74712" end="74717" title="S-300 (missile)" label="S-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q294067" start="74753" end="74759" title="AK-630" label="AK-630"/>
<link wikidata="Q16871285" start="74763" end="74770" title="Kashtan" label="Kashtan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072126" start="74831" end="74843" title="P-700 Granit" label="P-700 Granit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279983" start="74910" end="74923" title="radar horizon" label="radar horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="74931" end="74941" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156255" start="75620" end="75645" title="United States national missile defense" label="ballistic missile defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q907689" start="75660" end="75669" title="Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense System" label="Aegis BMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023560" start="75841" end="75846" title="CG(X)" label="CG(X)"/>
<link wikidata="Q229770" start="76051" end="76058" title="Zumwalt-class destroyer" label="Zumwalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q915138" start="76383" end="76388" title="Kongō-class destroyer" label="Kongō"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="77414" end="77432" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="77441" end="77453" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850384" start="78742" end="78760" title="Japanese cruiser Mogami (1934)" label="&amp;quot;Mogami&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185562" start="79034" end="79056" title="light aircraft carrier" label="light aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q928457" start="79116" end="79128" title="Kiev-class aircraft carrier" label="Project 1143"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430687" start="79296" end="79312" title="aircraft cruiser" label="aircraft cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193453" start="79483" end="79512" title="V/STOL" label="vertical take-off and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="79823" end="79828" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143706" start="79979" end="80005" title="surface-to-surface missile" label="surface-to-surface missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q731647" start="80571" end="80604" title="Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force" label="Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q392541" start="80753" end="80776" title="Treaty of San Francisco" label="Treaty of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q380682" start="81175" end="81180" title="Aegis Combat System" label="Aegis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217935" start="81199" end="81204" title="SV-22" label="SV-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617767" start="81226" end="81229" title="Mark 41 Vertical Launching System" label="VLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794694" start="81997" end="82007" title="Kynda-class cruiser" label="Project 58"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82090" end="82094" title="P-6/P-35" label="P-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q312471" start="82160" end="82169" title="M-1 Volna" label="M-1 Volna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788034" start="82709" end="82721" title="Kresta I-class cruiser" label="Project 1134"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359363" start="83193" end="83205" title="Slava-class cruiser" label="Project 1164"/>
<link wikidata="Q521029" start="83634" end="83646" title="Kirov-class battlecruiser" label="Project 1144"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072126" start="83847" end="83853" title="P-700 Granit" label="Granit"/>
<link wikidata="Q214190" start="84195" end="84208" title="battlecruiser" label="battlecruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q944700" start="84289" end="84297" title="Romanian frigate Mărășești" label="Muntenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="84369" end="84376" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="84609" end="84626" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q177218" start="84689" end="84694" title="P-15 Termit" label="P-20M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946066" start="85346" end="85359" title="United States Navy reserve fleets" label="Reserve Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739421" start="85749" end="85762" title="Ukroboronprom" label="Ukroboronprom"/>
<link wikidata="Q41572" start="85858" end="85866" title="Mykolaiv" label="Mykolaiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739421" start="86279" end="86292" title="Ukroboronprom" label="Ukroboronprom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18600209" start="86293" end="86313" title="Aivaras Abromavičius" label="Aivaras Abromavičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="86393" end="86425" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15729915" start="86656" end="86674" title="Type 055 destroyer" label="Type 055 destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="86969" end="87001" title="United States Defense Department" label="United States Defense Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q15729915" start="87829" end="87847" title="Type 055 destroyer" label="Type 055 destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917619" start="87944" end="87956" title="F126 frigate" label="F126 frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q115813748" start="88060" end="88077" title="Type F127 frigate" label="Type F127 frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519446" start="88587" end="88616" title="Aegis system equipped vessels (ASEV)" label="Aegis system equipped vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4359246" start="88735" end="88768" title="Lider-class destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Lider&amp;quot;-class destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q495389" start="88879" end="88923" title="Sejong the Great-class destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Sejong the Great&amp;quot;-class destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q106390327" start="88959" end="88976" title="Type 83 destroyer" label="Type 83 destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073186" start="89007" end="89024" title="Type 45 destroyer" label="Type 45 destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q110115871" start="89340" end="89346" title="DDG(X)" label="DDG(X)"/>
<link wikidata="Q873688" start="89376" end="89413" title="Ticonderoga-class cruiser" label="&amp;quot;Ticonderoga&amp;quot;-class cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q110115871" start="89482" end="89488" title="DDG(X)" label="DDG(X)"/>
<link wikidata="Q575727" start="89645" end="89656" title="museum ship" label="museum ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q75110" start="89714" end="89721" title="Dandong" label="Dandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="89723" end="89728" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="89735" end="89749" title="Athens, Greece" label="Athens, Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129369" start="89787" end="89800" title="Hellenic Navy" label="Hellenic Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="89806" end="89828" title="St. Petersburg, Russia" label="St. Petersburg, Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760" start="89884" end="89904" title="Novorossiysk, Russia" label="Novorossiysk, Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="89931" end="89946" title="London, England" label="London, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="89952" end="89977" title="Belfast, Northern Ireland" label="Belfast, Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="90035" end="90061" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="90121" end="90138" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49143" start="90144" end="90165" title="Quincy, Massachusetts" label="Quincy, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8611" start="90224" end="90233" title="La Spezia" label="La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="90235" end="90240" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="90287" end="90295" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="90297" end="90303" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q193530" start="90428" end="90439" title="Landevennec" label="Landevennec"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="90551" end="90564" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268688" start="90816" end="90847" title="USS St. Louis (CL-49)" label="&amp;quot;Almirante Tamandaré&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565602" start="90874" end="90897" title="HMS Uganda (66)" label="HMCS &amp;quot;Quebec&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608583" start="90935" end="90961" title="USS Brooklyn (CL-40)" label="&amp;quot;O&amp;#x27;Higgins&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q705231" start="91211" end="91226" title="HMS Aurora (12)" label="ROCS Chung King"/>
<link wikidata="Q544342" start="91378" end="91395" title="SMS Niobe" label="&amp;quot;Znaim&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252649" start="91611" end="91627" title="Italian cruiser Eugenio di Savoia" label="&amp;quot;Elli&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138101" start="91639" end="91651" title="Haitian Navy" label="Haitian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18274291" start="91666" end="91693" title="Italian cruiser Umbria" label="&amp;quot;Consul Gostrück&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336053" start="91815" end="91835" title="Indonesian cruiser Irian" label="RI &amp;quot;Irian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705078" start="91881" end="91908" title="Italian cruiser Vittorio Veneto" label="&amp;quot;Vittorio Veneto&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346520" start="92061" end="92087" title="HMS Royalist (89)" label="HMNZS &amp;quot;Royalist&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564568" start="92299" end="92321" title="HMS Danae (D44)" label="ORP &amp;quot;Conrad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708050" start="92389" end="92418" title="Portuguese ironclad Vasco da Gama" label="NRP &amp;quot;Vasco da Gama&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q944700" start="92586" end="92594" title="Romanian frigate Mărășești" label="Muntenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634612" start="92774" end="92804" title="HMS Thames (1885)" label="SATS &amp;quot;General Botha&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915660" start="92937" end="92961" title="Ottoman cruiser Mecidiye" label="TCG &amp;quot;Mecidiye&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q694461" start="93002" end="93023" title="SMS Goeben" label="TCG &amp;quot;Yavuz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q282713" start="93260" end="93286" title="Italian cruiser Dogali" label="ROU &amp;quot;Montevideo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870437" start="93331" end="93361" title="USS Isla de Cuba (1886)" label="FNV &amp;quot;Mariscal Sucre&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q544342" start="93386" end="93410" title="SMS Niobe" label="KB &amp;quot;Dalmacija&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037128" start="93494" end="93540" title="List of battlecruisers of the Second World War" label="List of battlecruisers of the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434475" start="93543" end="93559" title="List of cruisers" label="List of cruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q117457846" start="93562" end="93593" title="List of cruisers of World War I" label="List of cruisers of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037139" start="93596" end="93636" title="List of cruisers of the Second World War" label="List of cruisers of the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604373" start="93639" end="93676" title="List of ships of the Second World War" label="List of ships of the Second World War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7037" wikidata="Q153356" url="?curid=7037" title="Chlamydia">
<text>Chlamydia, or more specifically a chlamydia infection, is a sexually transmitted infection caused by the bacterium &quot;Chlamydia trachomatis&quot;. Most people who are infected have no symptoms. When symptoms do appear, they may occur only several weeks after infection; the incubation period between exposure and being able to infect others is thought to be on the order of two to six weeks. Symptoms in women may include vaginal discharge or burning with urination. Symptoms in men may include discharge from the penis, burning with urination, or pain and swelling of one or both testicles. The infection can spread to the upper genital tract in women, causing pelvic inflammatory disease, which may result in future infertility or ectopic pregnancy.

Chlamydia infections can occur in other areas besides the genitals, including the anus, eyes, throat, and lymph nodes. Repeated chlamydia infections of the eyes that go without treatment can result in trachoma, a common cause of blindness in the developing world.

Chlamydia can be spread during vaginal, anal, oral, or manual sex and can be passed from an infected mother to her baby during childbirth. The eye infections may also be spread by personal contact, flies, and contaminated towels in areas with poor sanitation. Infection by the bacterium &quot;Chlamydia trachomatis&quot; only occurs in humans. Diagnosis is often by screening, which is recommended yearly in sexually active women under the age of 25, others at higher risk, and at the first prenatal visit. Testing can be done on the urine or a swab of the cervix, vagina, or urethra. Rectal or mouth swabs are required to diagnose infections in those areas.

Prevention is by not having sex, the use of condoms, or having sex with only one other person, who is not infected. Chlamydia can be cured by antibiotics, with typically either azithromycin or doxycycline being used. Erythromycin or azithromycin is recommended in babies and during pregnancy. Sexual partners should also be treated, and infected people should be advised not to have sex for seven days and until symptom free. Gonorrhea, syphilis, and HIV should be tested for in those who have been infected. Following treatment, people should be tested again after three months.

Chlamydia is one of the most common sexually transmitted infections, affecting about 4.2% of women and 2.7% of men worldwide. In 2015, about 61 million new cases occurred globally. In the United States, about 1.4 million cases were reported in 2014. Infections are most common among those between the ages of 15 and 25 and are more common in women than men. In 2015, infections resulted in about 200 deaths. The word &quot;chlamydia&quot; is from the Greek , meaning &#x27;cloak&#x27;.
==Signs and symptoms==

===Genital disease===


====Women====
Chlamydial infection of the cervix (neck of the womb) is a sexually transmitted infection which has no symptoms for around 70% of women infected. The infection can be passed through vaginal, anal, oral, or manual sex. Of those who have an asymptomatic infection that is not detected by their doctor, approximately half will develop pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), a generic term for infection of the uterus, fallopian tubes, and/or ovaries. PID can cause scarring inside the reproductive organs, which can later cause serious complications, including chronic pelvic pain, difficulty becoming pregnant, ectopic (tubal) pregnancy, and other dangerous complications of pregnancy.

Chlamydia is known as the &quot;silent epidemic&quot;, as at least 70% of genital &quot;C. trachomatis&quot; infections in women (and 50% in men) are asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis, and can linger for months or years before being discovered. Signs and symptoms may include abnormal vaginal bleeding or discharge, abdominal pain, painful sexual intercourse, fever, painful urination or the urge to urinate more often than usual (urinary urgency).

For sexually active women who are not pregnant, screening is recommended in those under 25 and others at risk of infection. Risk factors include a history of chlamydial or other sexually transmitted infection, new or multiple sexual partners, and inconsistent condom use. Guidelines recommend all women attending for emergency contraceptive are offered chlamydia testing, with studies showing up to 9% of women aged under 25 years had chlamydia.

====Men====
In men, those with a chlamydial infection show symptoms of infectious inflammation of the urethra in about 50% of cases. Symptoms that may occur include: a painful or burning sensation when urinating, an unusual discharge from the penis, testicular pain or swelling, or fever. If left untreated, chlamydia in men can spread to the testicles causing epididymitis, which in rare cases can lead to sterility if not treated. Chlamydia is also a potential cause of prostatic inflammation in men, although the exact relevance in prostatitis is difficult to ascertain due to possible contamination from urethritis.

===Eye disease===
Trachoma is a chronic conjunctivitis caused by &quot;Chlamydia trachomatis&quot;. It was once the leading cause of blindness worldwide, but its role diminished from 15% of blindness cases by trachoma in 1995 to 3.6% in 2002. The infection can be spread from eye to eye by fingers, shared towels or cloths, coughing and sneezing and eye-seeking flies. Symptoms include mucopurulent ocular discharge, irritation, redness, and lid swelling. Newborns can also develop chlamydia eye infection through childbirth (see below). Using the SAFE strategy (acronym for surgery for in-growing or in-turned lashes, antibiotics, facial cleanliness, and environmental improvements), the World Health Organization aimed (unsuccessfully) for the global elimination of trachoma by 2020 (GET 2020 initiative). The updated World Health Assembly neglected tropical diseases road map (2021–2030) sets 2030 as the new timeline for global elimination.

===Joints===
Chlamydia may also cause reactive arthritis—the triad of arthritis, conjunctivitis and urethral inflammation—especially in young men. About 15,000 men develop reactive arthritis due to chlamydia infection each year in the U.S., and about 5,000 are permanently affected by it. It can occur in both sexes, though is more common in men.

===Infants===
As many as half of all infants born to mothers with chlamydia will be born with the disease. Chlamydia can affect infants by causing spontaneous abortion; premature birth; conjunctivitis, which may lead to blindness; and pneumonia. Conjunctivitis due to chlamydia typically occurs one week after birth (compared with chemical causes (within hours) or gonorrhea (2–5 days)).

===Other conditions===
A different serovar of &quot;Chlamydia trachomatis&quot; is also the cause of lymphogranuloma venereum, an infection of the lymph nodes and lymphatics. It usually presents with genital ulceration and swollen lymph nodes in the groin, but it may also manifest as rectal inflammation, fever or swollen lymph nodes in other regions of the body.

==Transmission==
Chlamydia can be transmitted during vaginal, anal, oral, or manual sex or direct contact with infected tissue such as conjunctiva. Chlamydia can also be passed from an infected mother to her baby during vaginal childbirth. It is assumed that the probability of becoming infected is proportionate to the number of bacteria one is exposed to.

==Pathophysiology==
Chlamydia bacteria have the ability to establish long-term associations with host cells. When an infected host cell is starved for various nutrients such as amino acids (for example, tryptophan), iron, or vitamins, this has a negative consequence for chlamydia bacteria since the organism is dependent on the host cell for these nutrients. Long-term cohort studies indicate that approximately 50% of those infected clear within a year, 80% within two years, and 90% within three years.

The starved chlamydia bacteria can enter a persistent growth state where they stop cell division and become morphologically aberrant by increasing in size. Persistent organisms remain viable as they are capable of returning to a normal growth state once conditions in the host cell improve.

There is debate as to whether persistence has relevance: some believe that persistent chlamydia bacteria are the cause of chronic chlamydial diseases. Some antibiotics such as β-lactams have been found to induce a persistent-like growth state.

==Diagnosis==

The diagnosis of genital chlamydial infections evolved rapidly from the 1990s through 2006. Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT), such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR), transcription mediated amplification (TMA), and the DNA strand displacement amplification (SDA) now are the mainstays. NAAT for chlamydia may be performed on swab specimens sampled from the cervix (women) or urethra (men), on self-collected vaginal swabs, or on voided urine. NAAT has been estimated to have a sensitivity of approximately 90% and a specificity of approximately 99%, regardless of sampling from a cervical swab or by urine specimen. In women seeking treatment in a sexually transmitted infection clinic where a urine test is negative, a subsequent cervical swab has been estimated to be positive in approximately 2% of the time.

At present, the NAATs have regulatory approval only for testing urogenital specimens, although rapidly evolving research indicates that they may give reliable results on rectal specimens.

Because of improved test accuracy, ease of specimen management, convenience in specimen management, and ease of screening sexually active men and women, the NAATs have largely replaced culture, the historic gold standard for chlamydia diagnosis, and the non-amplified probe tests. The latter test is relatively insensitive, successfully detecting only 60–80% of infections in asymptomatic women, and often giving falsely-positive results. Culture remains useful in selected circumstances and is currently the only assay approved for testing non-genital specimens. Other methods also exist including: ligase chain reaction (LCR), direct fluorescent antibody resting, enzyme immunoassay, and cell culture.

The swab sample for chlamydial infections does not show difference whether the sample was collected in home or in clinic in terms of numbers of patient treated. The implications in cured patients, reinfection, partner management, and safety are unknown.

Rapid point-of-care tests are, as of 2020, not thought to be effective for diagnosing chlamydia in men of reproductive age and non-pregnant women because of high false-negative rates.

==Prevention==
Prevention is by not having sex, the use of condoms, or having sex with only one other person, who is not infected.

===Screening===
For sexually active women who are not pregnant, screening is recommended in those under 25 and others at risk of infection. Risk factors include a history of chlamydial or other sexually transmitted infection, new or multiple sexual partners, and inconsistent condom use. For pregnant women, guidelines vary: screening women with age or other risk factors is recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) (which recommends screening women under 25) and the American Academy of Family Physicians (which recommends screening women aged 25 or younger). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends screening all at risk, while the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend universal screening of pregnant women. The USPSTF acknowledges that in some communities there may be other risk factors for infection, such as ethnicity. Evidence-based recommendations for screening initiation, intervals and termination are currently not possible. For men, the USPSTF concludes evidence is currently insufficient to determine if regular screening of men for chlamydia is beneficial. They recommend regular screening of men who are at increased risk for HIV or syphilis infection. A Cochrane review found that the effects of screening are uncertain in terms of chlamydia transmission but that screening probably reduces the risk of pelvic inflammatory disease in women.

In the United Kingdom the National Health Service (NHS) aims to:

# Prevent and control chlamydia infection through early detection and treatment of asymptomatic infection;
# Reduce onward transmission to sexual partners;
# Prevent the consequences of untreated infection;
# Test at least 25 percent of the sexually active under 25 population annually.
# Retest after treatment.

==Treatment==
&quot;C. trachomatis&quot; infection can be effectively cured with antibiotics. Guidelines recommend azithromycin, doxycycline, erythromycin, levofloxacin or ofloxacin. In men, doxycycline (100 mg twice a day for 7 days) is probably more effective than azithromycin (1 g single dose) but evidence for the relative effectiveness of antibiotics in women is very uncertain. Agents recommended during pregnancy include erythromycin or amoxicillin.

An option for treating sexual partners of those with chlamydia or gonorrhea includes patient-delivered partner therapy (PDT or PDPT), which is the practice of treating the sex partners of index cases by providing prescriptions or medications to the patient to take to his/her partner without the health care provider first examining the partner.

Following treatment people should be tested again after three months to check for reinfection. Test of cure may be false-positive due to the limitations of NAAT in a bacterial (rather than a viral) context, since targeted genetic material may persist in the absence of viable organisms.

==Epidemiology==

Globally, as of 2015, sexually transmitted chlamydia affects approximately 61 million people. It is more common in women (3.8%) than men (2.5%). In 2015 it resulted in about 200 deaths.

In the United States about 1.6 million cases were reported in 2016. The CDC estimates that if one includes unreported cases there are about 2.9 million each year. It affects around 2% of young people. Chlamydial infection is the most common bacterial sexually transmitted infection in the UK.

Chlamydia causes more than 250,000 cases of epididymitis in the U.S. each year. Chlamydia causes 250,000 to 500,000 cases of PID every year in the United States. Women infected with chlamydia are up to five times more likely to become infected with HIV, if exposed.
== See also ==
* Chlamydia research

== References ==
== External links ==

* WHO fact sheet on chlamydia
* About Chlamydia from the CDC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="0" end="9" title="Chlamydia" label="Chlamydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="34" end="53" title="Chlamydia" label="chlamydia infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="60" end="90" title="sexually transmitted disease" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q131065" start="121" end="142" title="Chlamydia trachomatis" label="Chlamydia trachomatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193566" start="277" end="294" title="incubation period" label="incubation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q778502" start="425" end="442" title="vaginal discharge" label="vaginal discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269399" start="446" end="468" title="burning with urination" label="burning with urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344812" start="551" end="593" title="epididymitis" label="pain and swelling of one or both testicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q558070" start="665" end="692" title="pelvic inflammatory disease" label="pelvic inflammatory disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="721" end="732" title="infertility" label="infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q207087" start="736" end="753" title="ectopic pregnancy" label="ectopic pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193216" start="957" end="965" title="trachoma" label="trachoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="1002" end="1018" title="developing world" label="developing world"/>
<link wikidata="Q164654" start="1052" end="1059" title="vaginal intercourse" label="vaginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="1061" end="1065" title="anal sex" label="anal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122" start="1067" end="1071" title="oral sex" label="oral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1076" end="1086" title="Non-penetrative sex#Manual sex" label="manual sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163564" start="1387" end="1396" title="screening test" label="screening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308829" start="1512" end="1526" title="prenatal visit" label="prenatal visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="1597" end="1604" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q598443" start="1698" end="1712" title="Sexual abstinence" label="not having sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="1725" end="1731" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="1823" end="1833" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165399" start="1858" end="1870" title="azithromycin" label="azithromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422442" start="1874" end="1885" title="doxycycline" label="doxycycline"/>
<link wikidata="Q213511" start="1898" end="1910" title="Erythromycin" label="Erythromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="2107" end="2116" title="Gonorrhea" label="Gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="2118" end="2126" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="2132" end="2135" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2713" end="2718" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="2838" end="2844" title="cervix" label="cervix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="2910" end="2921" title="asymptomatic" label="no symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q558070" start="3142" end="3169" title="pelvic inflammatory disease" label="pelvic inflammatory disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="3213" end="3219" title="uterus" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233836" start="3221" end="3236" title="fallopian tubes" label="fallopian tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9631" start="3245" end="3252" title="ovaries" label="ovaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="3288" end="3306" title="reproductive organ" label="reproductive organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="3372" end="3378" title="pelvis" label="pelvic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207087" start="3415" end="3440" title="ectopic pregnancy" label="ectopic (tubal) pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q244913" start="3780" end="3796" title="vaginal bleeding" label="vaginal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q120395" start="3827" end="3853" title="Dyspareunia" label="painful sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="3855" end="3860" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269399" start="3862" end="3879" title="Dysuria" label="painful urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="3926" end="3941" title="urinary urgency" label="urinary urgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="4205" end="4211" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q741027" start="4262" end="4285" title="emergency contraception" label="emergency contraceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122485" start="4474" end="4501" title="Urethritis" label="inflammation of the urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8124" start="4635" end="4640" title="Human penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="4642" end="4652" title="Testicle" label="testicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344812" start="4753" end="4765" title="epididymitis" label="epididymitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="4799" end="4808" title="infertility" label="sterility"/>
<link wikidata="Q372752" start="4864" end="4886" title="prostatitis" label="prostatic inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193216" start="5031" end="5039" title="Trachoma" label="Trachoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q167844" start="5053" end="5067" title="conjunctivitis" label="conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829829" start="5399" end="5411" title="Pus" label="mucopurulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852755" start="5600" end="5610" title="trichiasis" label="in-growing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327273" start="5614" end="5623" title="entropion" label="in-turned"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="5632" end="5643" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="5702" end="5727" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327700" start="5997" end="6015" title="reactive arthritis" label="reactive arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="6476" end="6491" title="premature birth" label="premature birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q167844" start="6493" end="6507" title="conjunctivitis" label="conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="6542" end="6551" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q848328" start="6731" end="6738" title="serovar" label="serovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q694552" start="6797" end="6821" title="lymphogranuloma venereum" label="lymphogranuloma venereum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="6843" end="6854" title="lymph nodes" label="lymph nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11238641" start="6859" end="6869" title="lymphatics" label="lymphatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116466" start="6896" end="6909" title="genital ulcer" label="genital ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q847726" start="6919" end="6938" title="Lymphadenopathy" label="swollen lymph nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q941770" start="6981" end="7000" title="proctitis" label="rectal inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="7002" end="7007" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q273554" start="7197" end="7208" title="conjunctiva" label="conjunctiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="7598" end="7608" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="7624" end="7634" title="tryptophan" label="tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="7637" end="7641" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="7646" end="7653" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="8011" end="8024" title="cell division" label="cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q41873" start="8396" end="8404" title="β-lactam" label="β-lactam"/>
<link wikidata="Q348667" start="8572" end="8603" title="Nucleic acid amplification test" label="Nucleic acid amplification test"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="8621" end="8646" title="polymerase chain reaction" label="polymerase chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341059" start="8710" end="8743" title="strand displacement amplification" label="strand displacement amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410159" start="8827" end="8834" title="sampling (medicine)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="8964" end="8975" title="sensitivity and specificity" label="sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="9003" end="9014" title="sensitivity and specificity" label="specificity"/>
<link wikidata="Q514654" start="9696" end="9709" title="Gold standard (test)" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422343" start="10089" end="10110" title="ligase chain reaction" label="ligase chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q332126" start="10155" end="10173" title="ELISA" label="enzyme immunoassay"/>
<link wikidata="Q598443" start="10666" end="10680" title="Sexual abstinence" label="not having sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="10693" end="10699" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="11042" end="11048" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891198" start="11160" end="11195" title="U.S. Preventive Services Task Force" label="U.S. Preventive Services Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742888" start="11257" end="11294" title="American Academy of Family Physicians" label="American Academy of Family Physicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q463772" start="11354" end="11405" title="American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists" label="American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="11450" end="11492" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105187" start="12002" end="12017" title="Cochrane review" label="Cochrane review"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="12216" end="12245" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service (NHS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="12651" end="12661" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165399" start="12685" end="12697" title="azithromycin" label="azithromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422442" start="12699" end="12710" title="doxycycline" label="doxycycline"/>
<link wikidata="Q213511" start="12712" end="12724" title="erythromycin" label="erythromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q411447" start="12742" end="12751" title="ofloxacin" label="ofloxacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201928" start="13015" end="13026" title="amoxicillin" label="amoxicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="13095" end="13104" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144953" start="13114" end="13147" title="patient-delivered partner therapy" label="patient-delivered partner therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207010" start="13491" end="13505" title="false-positive" label="false-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975509" start="14446" end="14464" title="Chlamydia research" label="Chlamydia research"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="14562" end="14565" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="CDC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7038" wikidata="Q273510" url="?curid=7038" title="Candidiasis">
<text>Candidiasis is a fungal infection due to any species of the genus &quot;Candida&quot; (a yeast). When it affects the mouth, in some countries it is commonly called thrush. Signs and symptoms include white patches on the tongue or other areas of the mouth and throat. Other symptoms may include soreness and problems swallowing. When it affects the vagina, it may be referred to as a yeast infection or thrush. Signs and symptoms include genital itching, burning, and sometimes a white &quot;cottage cheese-like&quot; discharge from the vagina. Yeast infections of the penis are less common and typically present with an itchy rash. Very rarely, yeast infections may become invasive, spreading to other parts of the body. This may result in fevers, among other symptoms. Finally, candiasis of the esophagus is an important risk factor for contracting esophageal cancer in individuals with achalasia.
More than 20 types of &quot;Candida&quot; may cause infection with &quot;Candida albicans&quot; being the most common. Infections of the mouth are most common among children less than one month old, the elderly, and those with weak immune systems. Conditions that result in a weak immune system include HIV/AIDS, the medications used after organ transplantation, diabetes, and the use of corticosteroids. Other risk factors include during breastfeeding, following antibiotic therapy, and the wearing of dentures. Vaginal infections occur more commonly during pregnancy, in those with weak immune systems, and following antibiotic therapy. Individuals at risk for invasive candidiasis include low birth weight babies, people recovering from surgery, people admitted to intensive care units, and those with an otherwise compromised immune system.
Efforts to prevent infections of the mouth include the use of chlorhexidine mouthwash in those with poor immune function and washing out the mouth following the use of inhaled steroids. Little evidence supports probiotics for either prevention or treatment, even among those with frequent vaginal infections. For infections of the mouth, treatment with topical clotrimazole or nystatin is usually effective. Oral or intravenous fluconazole, itraconazole, or amphotericin B may be used if these do not work. A number of topical antifungal medications may be used for vaginal infections, including clotrimazole. In those with widespread disease, an echinocandin such as caspofungin or micafungin is used. A number of weeks of intravenous amphotericin B may be used as an alternative. In certain groups at very high risk, antifungal medications may be used preventively, and concomitantly with medications known to precipitate infections.
Infections of the mouth occur in about 6% of babies less than a month old. About 20% of those receiving chemotherapy for cancer and 20% of those with AIDS also develop the disease. About three-quarters of women have at least one yeast infection at some time during their lives. Widespread disease is rare except in those who have risk factors.

== Signs and symptoms ==

Signs and symptoms of candidiasis vary depending on the area affected. Most candidal infections result in minimal complications such as redness, itching, and discomfort, though complications may be severe or even fatal if left untreated in certain populations. In healthy (immunocompetent) persons, candidiasis is usually a localized infection of the skin, fingernails or toenails (onychomycosis), or mucosal membranes, including the oral cavity and pharynx (thrush), esophagus, and the sex organs (vagina, penis, etc.); less commonly in healthy individuals, the gastrointestinal tract, urinary tract, and respiratory tract are sites of candida infection.

In immunocompromised individuals, &quot;Candida&quot; infections in the esophagus occur more frequently than in healthy individuals and have a higher potential of becoming systemic, causing a much more serious condition, a fungemia called candidemia. Symptoms of esophageal candidiasis include difficulty swallowing, painful swallowing, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.

=== Mouth ===
Infection in the mouth is characterized by white discolorations in the tongue, around the mouth, and in the throat. Irritation may also occur, causing discomfort when swallowing.

Thrush is commonly seen in infants. It is not considered abnormal in infants unless it lasts longer than a few weeks.

=== Genitals ===
Infection of the vagina or vulva may cause severe itching, burning, soreness, irritation, and a whitish or whitish-gray cottage cheese-like discharge. Symptoms of infection of the male genitalia (balanitis thrush) include red skin around the head of the penis, swelling, irritation, itchiness and soreness of the head of the penis, thick, lumpy discharge under the foreskin, unpleasant odour, difficulty retracting the foreskin (phimosis), and pain when passing urine or during sex.

=== Skin ===
Signs and symptoms of candidiasis in the skin include itching, irritation, and chafing or broken skin.

=== Invasive infection ===
Common symptoms of gastrointestinal candidiasis in healthy individuals are anal itching, belching, bloating, indigestion, nausea, diarrhea, gas, intestinal cramps, vomiting, and gastric ulcers. Perianal candidiasis can cause anal itching; the lesion can be red, papular, or ulcerative in appearance, and it is not considered to be a sexually transmitted infection. Abnormal proliferation of the candida in the gut may lead to dysbiosis. While it is not yet clear, this alteration may be the source of symptoms generally described as the irritable bowel syndrome, and other gastrointestinal diseases.

=== Neurological symptoms ===
Systemic candidiasis can affect the central nervous system causing a variety of neurological symptoms, with a presentation similar to meningitis.

== Causes ==

&quot;Candida&quot; yeasts are generally present in healthy humans, frequently part of the human body&#x27;s normal oral and intestinal flora, and particularly on the skin; however, their growth is normally limited by the human immune system and by competition of other microorganisms, such as bacteria occupying the same locations in the human body.
&quot;Candida&quot; requires moisture for growth, notably on the skin. For example, wearing wet swimwear for long periods of time is believed to be a risk factor. Candida can also cause diaper rashes in babies. In extreme cases, superficial infections of the skin or mucous membranes may enter the bloodstream and cause systemic &quot;Candida&quot; infections.

Factors that increase the risk of candidiasis include HIV/AIDS, mononucleosis, cancer treatments, steroids, stress, antibiotic therapy, diabetes, and nutrient deficiency. Hormone replacement therapy and infertility treatments may also be predisposing factors. Use of inhaled corticosteroids increases risk of candidiasis of the mouth. Inhaled corticosteroids with other risk factors such as antibiotics, oral glucocorticoids, not rinsing mouth after use of inhaled corticosteroids or high dose of inhaled corticosteroids put people at even higher risk. Treatment with antibiotics can lead to eliminating the yeast&#x27;s natural competitors for resources in the oral and intestinal flora, thereby increasing the severity of the condition. A weakened or undeveloped immune system or metabolic illnesses are significant predisposing factors of candidiasis. Almost 15% of people with weakened immune systems develop a systemic illness caused by &quot;Candida&quot; species. Diets high in simple carbohydrates have been found to affect rates of oral candidiases.

&quot;C. albicans&quot; was isolated from the vaginas of 19% of apparently healthy women, i.e., those who experienced few or no symptoms of infection. External use of detergents or douches or internal disturbances (hormonal or physiological) can perturb the normal vaginal flora, consisting of lactic acid bacteria, such as lactobacilli, and result in an overgrowth of &quot;Candida&quot; cells, causing symptoms of infection, such as local inflammation. Pregnancy and the use of oral contraceptives have been reported as risk factors. Diabetes mellitus and the use of antibiotics are also linked to increased rates of yeast infections.

In penile candidiasis, the causes include sexual intercourse with an infected individual, low immunity, antibiotics, and diabetes. Male genital yeast infections are less common, but a yeast infection on the penis caused from direct contact via sexual intercourse with an infected partner is not uncommon.

Breast-feeding mothers may also develop candidiasis on and around the nipple as a result of moisture created by excessive milk-production.

Vaginal candidiasis can cause congenital candidiasis in newborns.

== Diagnosis ==



In oral candidiasis, simply inspecting the person&#x27;s mouth for white patches and irritation may make the diagnosis. A sample of the infected area may also be taken to determine what organism is causing the infection.

Symptoms of vaginal candidiasis are also present in the more common bacterial vaginosis; aerobic vaginitis is distinct and should be excluded in the differential diagnosis. In a 2002 study, only 33% of women who were self-treating for a yeast infection were found to have such an infection, while most had either bacterial vaginosis or a mixed-type infection.

Diagnosis of a yeast infection is confirmed either via microscopic examination or culturing. For identification by light microscopy, a scraping or swab of the affected area is placed on a microscope slide. A single drop of 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution is then added to the specimen. The KOH dissolves the skin cells, but leaves the &quot;Candida&quot; cells intact, permitting visualization of pseudohyphae and budding yeast cells typical of many &quot;Candida&quot; species.

For the culturing method, a sterile swab is rubbed on the infected skin surface. The swab is then streaked on a culture medium. The culture is incubated at 37 °C (98.6 °F) for several days, to allow development of yeast or bacterial colonies. The characteristics (such as morphology and colour) of the colonies may allow initial diagnosis of the organism causing disease symptoms.
Respiratory, gastrointestinal, and esophageal candidiasis require an endoscopy to diagnose. For gastrointestinal candidiasis, it is necessary to obtain a 3–5 milliliter sample of fluid from the duodenum for fungal culture. The diagnosis of gastrointestinal candidiasis is based upon the culture containing in excess of 1,000 colony-forming units per milliliter.

=== Classification ===
Candidiasis may be divided into these types:
* Mucosal candidiasis
** Oral candidiasis (thrush, oropharyngeal candidiasis)
*** Pseudomembranous candidiasis
*** Erythematous candidiasis
*** Hyperplastic candidiasis
*** Denture-related stomatitis — &quot;Candida&quot; organisms are involved in about 90% of cases
*** Angular cheilitis — &quot;Candida&quot; species are responsible for about 20% of cases, mixed infection of &quot;C. albicans&quot; and &quot;Staphylococcus aureus&quot; for about 60% of cases.
*** Median rhomboid glossitis
** Candidal vulvovaginitis (vaginal yeast infection)
** Candidal balanitis — infection of the glans penis, almost exclusively occurring in uncircumcised males
** Esophageal candidiasis (candidal esophagitis)
** Gastrointestinal candidiasis
** Respiratory candidiasis
* Cutaneous candidiasis
** Candidal folliculitis
** Candidal intertrigo
** Candidal paronychia
** Perianal candidiasis, may present as pruritus ani
** Candidid
** Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
** Congenital cutaneous candidiasis
** Diaper candidiasis: an infection of a child&#x27;s diaper area
** Erosio interdigitalis blastomycetica
** Candidal onychomycosis (nail infection) caused by &quot;Candida&quot;
* Systemic candidiasis
** Candidemia, a form of fungemia which may lead to sepsis
** Invasive candidiasis (disseminated candidiasis) — organ infection by &quot;Candida&quot;
** Chronic systemic candidiasis (hepatosplenic candidiasis) — sometimes arises during recovery from neutropenia
* Antibiotic candidiasis (iatrogenic candidiasis)

== Prevention ==
A diet that supports the immune system and is not high in simple carbohydrates contributes to a healthy balance of the oral and intestinal flora. While yeast infections are associated with diabetes, the level of blood sugar control may not affect the risk. Wearing cotton underwear may help to reduce the risk of developing skin and vaginal yeast infections, along with not wearing wet clothes for long periods of time. For women who experience recurrent yeast infections, there is limited evidence that oral or intravaginal probiotics help to prevent future infections. This includes either as pills or as yogurt.

Oral hygiene can help prevent oral candidiasis when people have a weakened immune system. For people undergoing cancer treatment, chlorhexidine mouthwash can prevent or reduce thrush. People who use inhaled corticosteroids can reduce the risk of developing oral candidiasis by rinsing the mouth with water or mouthwash after using the inhaler. People with dentures should also disinfect their dentures regularly to prevent oral candidiasis.

== Treatment ==

Candidiasis is treated with antifungal medications; these include clotrimazole, nystatin, fluconazole, voriconazole, amphotericin B, and echinocandins. Intravenous fluconazole or an intravenous echinocandin such as caspofungin are commonly used to treat immunocompromised or critically ill individuals.

The 2016 revision of the clinical practice guideline for the management of candidiasis lists a large number of specific treatment regimens for &quot;Candida&quot; infections that involve different &quot;Candida&quot; species, forms of antifungal drug resistance, immune statuses, and infection localization and severity. Gastrointestinal candidiasis in immunocompetent individuals is treated with 100–200 mg fluconazole per day for 2–3 weeks.

=== Localized infection ===
Mouth and throat candidiasis are treated with antifungal medication. Oral candidiasis usually responds to topical treatments; otherwise, systemic antifungal medication may be needed for oral infections. Candidal skin infections in the skin folds (candidal intertrigo) typically respond well to topical antifungal treatments (e.g., nystatin or miconazole). For breastfeeding mothers topical miconazole is the most effective treatment for treating candidiasis on the breasts. Gentian violet can be used for thrush in breastfeeding babies. Systemic treatment with antifungals by mouth is reserved for severe cases or if treatment with topical therapy is unsuccessful. Candida esophagitis may be treated orally or intravenously; for severe or azole-resistant esophageal candidiasis, treatment with amphotericin B may be necessary.

Vaginal yeast infections are typically treated with topical antifungal agents. Penile yeast infections are also treated with antifungal agents, but while an internal treatment may be used (such as a pessary) for vaginal yeast infections, only external treatments – such as a cream – can be recommended for penile treatment. A one-time dose of fluconazole by mouth is 90% effective in treating a vaginal yeast infection. For severe nonrecurring cases, several doses of fluconazole is recommended. Local treatment may include vaginal suppositories or medicated douches. Other types of yeast infections require different dosing. &quot;C. albicans&quot; can develop resistance to fluconazole, this being more of an issue in those with HIV/AIDS who are often treated with multiple courses of fluconazole for recurrent oral infections.

For vaginal yeast infection in pregnancy, topical imidazole or triazole antifungals are considered the therapy of choice owing to available safety data. Systemic absorption of these topical formulations is minimal, posing little risk of transplacental transfer. In vaginal yeast infection in pregnancy, treatment with topical azole antifungals is recommended for seven days instead of a shorter duration.

For vaginal yeast infections, many complementary treatments are proposed, however a number have side effects. No benefit from probiotics has been found for active infections.

=== Blood-borne infection ===

Candidemia occurs when any Candida species infects the blood. Its treatment typically consists of oral or intravenous antifungal medications. Examples include intravenous fluconazole or an echinocandin such as caspofungin may be used. Amphotericin B is another option.

== Prognosis ==
In hospitalized patients who develop candidemia, age is an important prognostic factor. Mortality following candidemia is 50% in patients aged ≥75 years and 24% in patients aged &lt;75 years.
Among individuals being treated in intensive care units, the mortality rate is about 30–50% when systemic candidiasis develops.

== Epidemiology ==
Oral candidiasis is the most common fungal infection of the mouth, and it also represents the most common opportunistic oral infection in humans. Infections of the mouth occur in about 6% of babies less than a month old. About 20% of those receiving chemotherapy for cancer and 20% of those with AIDS also develop the disease.

It is estimated that 20% of women may be asymptomatically colonized by vaginal yeast. In the United States there are approximately 1.4 million doctor office visits every year for candidiasis. About three-quarters of women have at least one yeast infection at some time during their lives.

Esophageal candidiasis is the most common esophageal infection in persons with AIDS and accounts for about 50% of all esophageal infections, often coexisting with other esophageal diseases. About two-thirds of people with AIDS and esophageal candidiasis also have oral candidiasis.

Candidal sepsis is rare. Candida is the fourth most common cause of bloodstream infections among hospital patients in the United States. The incidence of bloodstream candida in intensive care units varies widely between countries.

== History ==
Descriptions of what sounds like oral thrush go back to the time of Hippocrates &quot;circa&quot; 460–370 BCE.

The first description of a fungus as the causative agent of an oropharyngeal and oesophageal candidosis was by Bernhard von Langenbeck in 1839.

Vulvovaginal candidiasis was first described in 1849 by Wilkinson. In 1875, Haussmann demonstrated the causative organism in both vulvovaginal and oral candidiasis is the same.

With the advent of antibiotics following World War II, the rates of candidiasis increased. The rates then decreased in the 1950s following the development of nystatin.

The colloquial term &quot;thrush&quot; is of unknown origin but may stem from an unrecorded Old English word *þrusc or from a Scandinavian root. The term is not related to the bird of the same name. The term candidosis is largely used in British English, and candidiasis in American English. &quot;Candida&quot; is also pronounced differently; in American English, the stress is on the &quot;i&quot;, whereas in British English the stress is on the first syllable.

The genus &quot;Candida&quot; and species &quot;C. albicans&quot; were described by botanist Christine Marie Berkhout in her doctoral thesis at the University of Utrecht in 1923. Over the years, the classification of the genera and species has evolved. Obsolete names for this genus include &quot;Mycotorula&quot; and &quot;Torulopsis&quot;. The species has also been known in the past as &quot;Monilia albicans&quot; and &quot;Oidium albicans&quot;. The current classification is &quot;nomen conservandum&quot;, which means the name is authorized for use by the International Botanical Congress (IBC).

The genus &quot;Candida&quot; includes about 150 different species. However, only a few are known to cause human infections. &quot;C. albicans&quot; is the most significant pathogenic species. Other species pathogenic in humans include &quot;C. auris&quot;, &quot;C. tropicalis&quot;, &quot;C. parapsilosis&quot;, &quot;C. dubliniensis&quot;, and &quot;C. lusitaniae&quot;.

The name &quot;Candida&quot; was proposed by Berkhout. It is from the Latin word &quot;toga candida&quot;, referring to the white toga (robe) worn by candidates for the Senate of the ancient Roman republic. The specific epithet &quot;albicans&quot; also comes from Latin, &quot;albicare&quot; meaning &quot;to whiten&quot;. These names refer to the generally white appearance of &quot;Candida&quot; species when cultured.

== Alternative medicine ==

A 2005 publication noted that &quot;a large pseudoscientific cult&quot; has developed around the topic of &quot;Candida&quot;, with claims stating that up to one in three people are affected by yeast-related illness, particularly a condition called &quot;Candidiasis hypersensitivity&quot;. Some practitioners of alternative medicine have promoted these purported conditions and sold dietary supplements as supposed cures; a number of them have been prosecuted. In 1990, alternative health vendor Nature&#x27;s Way signed an FTC consent agreement not to misrepresent in advertising any self-diagnostic test concerning yeast conditions or to make any unsubstantiated representation concerning any food or supplement&#x27;s ability to control yeast conditions, with a fine of $30,000 payable to the National Institutes of Health for research in genuine candidiasis.

== Research ==
High level &quot;Candida&quot; colonization is linked to several diseases of the gastrointestinal tract including Crohn&#x27;s disease.

There has been an increase in resistance to antifungals worldwide over the past 30–40 years.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273510" start="0" end="11" title="Candidiasis" label="Candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q464067" start="17" end="33" title="Fungal infection in animals" label="fungal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q131260" start="72" end="79" title="Candida (genus)" label="Candida"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="89" end="94" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886899" start="105" end="122" title="Oral candidiasis" label="affects the mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q273510" start="164" end="170" title="Candidiasis" label="thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q977090" start="336" end="354" title="vaginal yeast infection" label="affects the vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q273510" start="383" end="398" title="Candidiasis" label="yeast infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q273510" start="402" end="408" title="Candidiasis" label="thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="740" end="745" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q661015" start="888" end="897" title="achalasia" label="achalasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310443" start="972" end="988" title="Candida albicans" label="Candida albicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="1126" end="1145" title="immunodeficiency" label="weak immune systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="1202" end="1210" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="1239" end="1260" title="organ transplantation" label="organ transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="1262" end="1270" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="1287" end="1301" title="corticosteroid" label="corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="1363" end="1373" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q143567" start="1402" end="1410" title="dentures" label="dentures"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="1458" end="1467" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29887808" start="1562" end="1582" title="invasive candidiasis" label="invasive candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692979" start="1591" end="1614" title="low birth weight babies" label="low birth weight babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094647" start="1667" end="1686" title="intensive care unit" label="intensive care unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15646788" start="1806" end="1819" title="chlorhexidine" label="chlorhexidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="1955" end="1964" title="probiotic" label="probiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="2097" end="2104" title="topical" label="topical"/>
<link wikidata="Q413546" start="2105" end="2117" title="clotrimazole" label="clotrimazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q251005" start="2121" end="2129" title="nystatin" label="nystatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q411478" start="2172" end="2183" title="fluconazole" label="fluconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q411229" start="2185" end="2197" title="itraconazole" label="itraconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q412223" start="2202" end="2216" title="amphotericin B" label="amphotericin B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718510" start="2391" end="2403" title="echinocandin" label="echinocandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420875" start="2412" end="2423" title="caspofungin" label="caspofungin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827850" start="2427" end="2437" title="micafungin" label="micafungin"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="2784" end="2796" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="2830" end="2834" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149136" start="3324" end="3339" title="immunocompetence" label="immunocompetent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370895" start="3485" end="3496" title="Human mouth" label="oral cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q174778" start="3501" end="3508" title="pharynx" label="pharynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886899" start="3510" end="3516" title="oral thrush" label="thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q173710" start="3519" end="3528" title="esophagus" label="esophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="3550" end="3556" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8124" start="3558" end="3563" title="Human penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="3614" end="3636" title="Human gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q181100" start="3638" end="3651" title="urinary tract" label="urinary tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="3657" end="3674" title="respiratory tract" label="respiratory tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398631" start="3780" end="3789" title="esophageal candidiasis" label="esophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414805" start="3880" end="3888" title="systemic disease" label="systemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491700" start="3931" end="3939" title="fungemia" label="fungemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623289" start="4002" end="4023" title="dysphagia" label="difficulty swallowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455868" start="4025" end="4043" title="odynophagia" label="painful swallowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192288" start="4441" end="4446" title="Human vulva" label="vulva"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221624" start="4534" end="4548" title="cottage cheese" label="cottage cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q382641" start="4843" end="4851" title="phimosis" label="phimosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633590" start="5117" end="5129" title="pruritus ani" label="anal itching"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="5220" end="5233" title="gastric ulcer" label="gastric ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166142" start="5299" end="5302" title="erythematous" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="5375" end="5405" title="sexually transmitted infection" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q269334" start="5468" end="5477" title="dysbiosis" label="dysbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="5579" end="5603" title="irritable bowel syndrome" label="irritable bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="6062" end="6075" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="6104" end="6117" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="6601" end="6604" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="6605" end="6609" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q207367" start="6611" end="6624" title="EBV infectious mononucleosis" label="mononucleosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="6626" end="6632" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="6645" end="6653" title="steroids" label="steroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="6655" end="6661" title="Stress (medicine)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354346" start="6718" end="6745" title="Hormone replacement therapy (menopause)" label="Hormone replacement therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="7539" end="7552" title="carbohydrates" label="carbohydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673202" start="7788" end="7794" title="douche" label="douche"/>
<link wikidata="Q966490" start="7853" end="7860" title="Perturbation (biology)" label="perturb"/>
<link wikidata="Q537478" start="7872" end="7885" title="vaginal flora" label="vaginal flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360072" start="7901" end="7921" title="lactic acid bacteria" label="lactic acid bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q578677" start="7931" end="7943" title="lactobacilli" label="lactobacilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="8048" end="8060" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="8143" end="8160" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="Diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="8176" end="8187" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58" start="8248" end="8254" title="penis" label="penile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="8691" end="8697" title="Vagina" label="Vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="8747" end="8755" title="infant" label="newborns"/>
<link wikidata="Q804521" start="9067" end="9086" title="bacterial vaginosis" label="bacterial vaginosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q900183" start="9548" end="9564" title="microscope slide" label="microscope slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q132298" start="9587" end="9606" title="potassium hydroxide" label="potassium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193129" start="9764" end="9776" title="hyphae" label="pseudohyphae"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="9789" end="9799" title="yeast cell" label="yeast cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q212809" start="10297" end="10306" title="endoscopy" label="endoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134955" start="10422" end="10430" title="duodenum" label="duodenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125312" start="10435" end="10449" title="microbiological culture" label="fungal culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q954757" start="10553" end="10573" title="colony-forming units" label="colony-forming units"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886899" start="10684" end="10700" title="Oral candidiasis" label="Oral candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259645" start="10832" end="10858" title="Denture-related stomatitis" label="Denture-related stomatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456558" start="10930" end="10947" title="Angular cheilitis" label="Angular cheilitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188121" start="11071" end="11092" title="Staphylococcus aureus" label="Staphylococcus aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q644364" start="11127" end="11152" title="Median rhomboid glossitis" label="Median rhomboid glossitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q977090" start="11156" end="11179" title="Candidal vulvovaginitis" label="Candidal vulvovaginitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138584" start="11218" end="11227" title="balanitis" label="balanitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398631" start="11315" end="11337" title="Esophageal candidiasis" label="Esophageal candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q942755" start="11456" end="11468" title="folliculitis" label="folliculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031732" start="11472" end="11491" title="Candidal intertrigo" label="Candidal intertrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896379" start="11495" end="11514" title="Candidal paronychia" label="Candidal paronychia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633590" start="11555" end="11567" title="pruritus ani" label="pruritus ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031911" start="11571" end="11579" title="Candidid" label="Candidid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705799" start="11583" end="11616" title="Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis" label="Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160415" start="11620" end="11652" title="Congenital cutaneous candidiasis" label="Congenital cutaneous candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187359" start="11707" end="11713" title="diaper" label="diaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395385" start="11722" end="11758" title="Erosio interdigitalis blastomycetica" label="Erosio interdigitalis blastomycetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q917620" start="11771" end="11784" title="onychomycosis" label="onychomycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29887808" start="11834" end="11854" title="Systemic candidiasis" label="Systemic candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491700" start="11880" end="11888" title="fungemia" label="fungemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="11907" end="11913" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29887808" start="11917" end="11937" title="Invasive candidiasis" label="Invasive candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435822" start="12106" end="12117" title="neutropenia" label="neutropenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q273510" start="12120" end="12142" title="Antibiotic candidiasis" label="Antibiotic candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q578726" start="13289" end="13310" title="antifungal medication" label="antifungal medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q413546" start="13327" end="13339" title="clotrimazole" label="clotrimazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q251005" start="13341" end="13349" title="nystatin" label="nystatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q411478" start="13351" end="13362" title="fluconazole" label="fluconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q412236" start="13364" end="13376" title="voriconazole" label="voriconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q412223" start="13378" end="13392" title="amphotericin B" label="amphotericin B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718510" start="13398" end="13410" title="echinocandin" label="echinocandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420875" start="13476" end="13487" title="caspofungin" label="caspofungin"/>
<link wikidata="Q878041" start="13590" end="13617" title="clinical practice guideline" label="clinical practice guideline"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="13800" end="13826" title="Antimicrobial resistance" label="antifungal drug resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031732" start="14265" end="14304" title="candidal intertrigo" label="in the skin folds (candidal intertrigo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q251005" start="14368" end="14376" title="nystatin" label="nystatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410534" start="14380" end="14390" title="miconazole" label="miconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q420705" start="14511" end="14525" title="Gentian violet" label="Gentian violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="14552" end="14565" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q180799" start="15397" end="15410" title="suppository" label="suppositories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673202" start="15424" end="15430" title="douche" label="douche"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="15727" end="15736" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q328692" start="15746" end="15755" title="imidazole" label="imidazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q903341" start="15759" end="15767" title="triazole" label="triazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834818" start="15933" end="15947" title="transplacental" label="transplacental"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491700" start="16309" end="16319" title="Candidemia" label="Candidemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="16415" end="16426" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q411478" start="16480" end="16491" title="fluconazole" label="fluconazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718510" start="16498" end="16510" title="echinocandin" label="echinocandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420875" start="16519" end="16530" title="caspofungin" label="caspofungin"/>
<link wikidata="Q412223" start="16544" end="16558" title="Amphotericin B" label="Amphotericin B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094647" start="16822" end="16841" title="intensive care unit" label="intensive care unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="16848" end="16862" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="17185" end="17197" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="17231" end="17235" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="17845" end="17851" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="18150" end="18161" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q251005" start="18675" end="18683" title="nystatin" label="nystatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="19156" end="19161" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="19186" end="19193" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966045" start="19245" end="19269" title="Christine Marie Berkhout" label="Christine Marie Berkhout"/>
<link wikidata="Q221653" start="19300" end="19321" title="University of Utrecht" label="University of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q941227" start="19639" end="19657" title="nomen conservandum" label="nomen conservandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="19929" end="19937" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183171" start="20261" end="20265" title="toga" label="toga"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="20626" end="20642" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="21379" end="21408" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="21576" end="21596" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7039" wikidata="Q6501221" url="?curid=7039" title="Control theory">
<text>Control theory is a field of control engineering and applied mathematics that deals with the control of dynamical systems in engineered processes and machines. The objective is to develop a model or algorithm governing the application of system inputs to drive the system to a desired state, while minimizing any &quot;delay&quot;, &quot;overshoot&quot;, or &quot;steady-state error&quot; and ensuring a level of control stability; often with the aim to achieve a degree of optimality.

To do this, a controller with the requisite corrective behavior is required. This controller monitors the controlled process variable (PV), and compares it with the reference or set point (SP). The difference between actual and desired value of the process variable, called the &quot;error&quot; signal, or SP-PV error, is applied as feedback to generate a control action to bring the controlled process variable to the same value as the set point. Other aspects which are also studied are controllability and observability. Control theory is used in control system engineering to design automation that have revolutionized manufacturing, aircraft, communications and other industries, and created new fields such as robotics. 

Extensive use is usually made of a diagrammatic style known as the block diagram. In it the transfer function, also known as the system function or network function, is a mathematical model of the relation between the input and output based on the differential equations describing the system.

Control theory dates from the 19th century, when the theoretical basis for the operation of governors was first described by James Clerk Maxwell. Control theory was further advanced by Edward Routh in 1874, Charles Sturm and in 1895, Adolf Hurwitz, who all contributed to the establishment of control stability criteria; and from 1922 onwards, the development of PID control theory by Nicolas Minorsky.
Although a major application of mathematical control theory is in control systems engineering, which deals with the design of process control systems for industry, other applications range far beyond this. As the general theory of feedback systems, control theory is useful wherever feedback occurs - thus control theory also has applications in life sciences, computer engineering, sociology and operations research.

==History==


Although control systems of various types date back to antiquity, a more formal analysis of the field began with a dynamics analysis of the centrifugal governor, conducted by the physicist James Clerk Maxwell in 1868, entitled &quot;On Governors&quot;. A centrifugal governor was already used to regulate the velocity of windmills. Maxwell described and analyzed the phenomenon of self-oscillation, in which lags in the system may lead to overcompensation and unstable behavior. This generated a flurry of interest in the topic, during which Maxwell&#x27;s classmate, Edward John Routh, abstracted Maxwell&#x27;s results for the general class of linear systems. Independently, Adolf Hurwitz analyzed system stability using differential equations in 1877, resulting in what is now known as the Routh–Hurwitz theorem.

A notable application of dynamic control was in the area of crewed flight. The Wright brothers made their first successful test flights on December 17, 1903, and were distinguished by their ability to control their flights for substantial periods (more so than the ability to produce lift from an airfoil, which was known). Continuous, reliable control of the airplane was necessary for flights lasting longer than a few seconds.

By World War II, control theory was becoming an important area of research. Irmgard Flügge-Lotz developed the theory of discontinuous automatic control systems, and applied the bang-bang principle to the development of automatic flight control equipment for aircraft. Other areas of application for discontinuous controls included fire-control systems, guidance systems and electronics.

Sometimes, mechanical methods are used to improve the stability of systems. For example, ship stabilizers are fins mounted beneath the waterline and emerging laterally. In contemporary vessels, they may be gyroscopically controlled active fins, which have the capacity to change their angle of attack to counteract roll caused by wind or waves acting on the ship.

The Space Race also depended on accurate spacecraft control, and control theory has also seen an increasing use in fields such as economics and artificial intelligence. Here, one might say that the goal is to find an internal model that obeys the good regulator theorem. So, for example, in economics, the more accurately a (stock or commodities) trading model represents the actions of the market, the more easily it can control that market (and extract &quot;useful work&quot; (profits) from it). In AI, an example might be a chatbot modelling the discourse state of humans: the more accurately it can model the human state (e.g. on a telephone voice-support hotline), the better it can manipulate the human (e.g. into performing the corrective actions to resolve the problem that caused the phone call to the help-line). These last two examples take the narrow historical interpretation of control theory as a set of differential equations modeling and regulating kinetic motion, and broaden it into a vast generalization of a regulator interacting with a plant.

==Open-loop and closed-loop (feedback) control==
==Classical control theory==
==Linear and nonlinear control theory==
The field of control theory can be divided into two branches:
* &quot;Linear control theory&quot; – This applies to systems made of devices which obey the superposition principle, which means roughly that the output is proportional to the input. They are governed by linear differential equations. A major subclass is systems which in addition have parameters which do not change with time, called &quot;linear time invariant&quot; (LTI) systems. These systems are amenable to powerful frequency domain mathematical techniques of great generality, such as the Laplace transform, Fourier transform, Z transform, Bode plot, root locus, and Nyquist stability criterion. These lead to a description of the system using terms like bandwidth, frequency response, eigenvalues, gain, resonant frequencies, zeros and poles, which give solutions for system response and design techniques for most systems of interest. 
* &quot;Nonlinear control theory&quot; – This covers a wider class of systems that do not obey the superposition principle, and applies to more real-world systems because all real control systems are nonlinear. These systems are often governed by nonlinear differential equations. The few mathematical techniques which have been developed to handle them are more difficult and much less general, often applying only to narrow categories of systems. These include limit cycle theory, Poincaré maps, Lyapunov stability theorem, and describing functions. Nonlinear systems are often analyzed using numerical methods on computers, for example by simulating their operation using a simulation language. If only solutions near a stable point are of interest, nonlinear systems can often be linearized by approximating them by a linear system using perturbation theory, and linear techniques can be used.

==Analysis techniques - frequency domain and time domain==
Mathematical techniques for analyzing and designing control systems fall into two different categories:
* &quot;Frequency domain&quot; – In this type the values of the state variables, the mathematical variables representing the system&#x27;s input, output and feedback are represented as functions of frequency. The input signal and the system&#x27;s transfer function are converted from time functions to functions of frequency by a transform such as the Fourier transform, Laplace transform, or Z transform. The advantage of this technique is that it results in a simplification of the mathematics; the &quot;differential equations&quot; that represent the system are replaced by &quot;algebraic equations&quot; in the frequency domain which is much simpler to solve. However, frequency domain techniques can only be used with linear systems, as mentioned above.
* &quot;Time-domain state space representation&quot; – In this type the values of the state variables are represented as functions of time. With this model, the system being analyzed is represented by one or more differential equations. Since frequency domain techniques are limited to linear systems, time domain is widely used to analyze real-world nonlinear systems. Although these are more difficult to solve, modern computer simulation techniques such as simulation languages have made their analysis routine.
In contrast to the frequency domain analysis of the classical control theory, modern control theory utilizes the time-domain state space representation, a mathematical model of a physical system as a set of input, output and state variables related by first-order differential equations. To abstract from the number of inputs, outputs, and states, the variables are expressed as vectors and the differential and algebraic equations are written in matrix form (the latter only being possible when the dynamical system is linear). The state space representation (also known as the &quot;time-domain approach&quot;) provides a convenient and compact way to model and analyze systems with multiple inputs and outputs. With inputs and outputs, we would otherwise have to write down Laplace transforms to encode all the information about a system. Unlike the frequency domain approach, the use of the state-space representation is not limited to systems with linear components and zero initial conditions. &quot;State space&quot; refers to the space whose axes are the state variables. The state of the system can be represented as a point within that space.

==System interfacing - SISO &amp; MIMO==
Control systems can be divided into different categories depending on the number of inputs and outputs.
* Single-input single-output (SISO) – This is the simplest and most common type, in which one output is controlled by one control signal. Examples are the cruise control example above, or an audio system, in which the control input is the input audio signal and the output is the sound waves from the speaker. 
* Multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) – These are found in more complicated systems. For example, modern large telescopes such as the Keck and MMT have mirrors composed of many separate segments each controlled by an actuator. The shape of the entire mirror is constantly adjusted by a MIMO active optics control system using input from multiple sensors at the focal plane, to compensate for changes in the mirror shape due to thermal expansion, contraction, stresses as it is rotated and distortion of the wavefront due to turbulence in the atmosphere. Complicated systems such as nuclear reactors and human cells are simulated by a computer as large MIMO control systems.

===Classical SISO system design ===
The scope of classical control theory is limited to single-input and single-output (SISO) system design, except when analyzing for disturbance rejection using a second input. The system analysis is carried out in the time domain using differential equations, in the complex-s domain with the Laplace transform, or in the frequency domain by transforming from the complex-s domain. Many systems may be assumed to have a second order and single variable system response in the time domain. A controller designed using classical theory often requires on-site tuning due to incorrect design approximations. Yet, due to the easier physical implementation of classical controller designs as compared to systems designed using modern control theory, these controllers are preferred in most industrial applications. The most common controllers designed using classical control theory are PID controllers. A less common implementation may include either or both a Lead or Lag filter. The ultimate end goal is to meet requirements typically provided in the time-domain called the step response, or at times in the frequency domain called the open-loop response. The step response characteristics applied in a specification are typically percent overshoot, settling time, etc. The open-loop response characteristics applied in a specification are typically Gain and Phase margin and bandwidth. These characteristics may be evaluated through simulation including a dynamic model of the system under control coupled with the compensation model.

===Modern MIMO system design===
Modern control theory is carried out in the state space, and can deal with multiple-input and multiple-output (MIMO) systems. This overcomes the limitations of classical control theory in more sophisticated design problems, such as fighter aircraft control, with the limitation that no frequency domain analysis is possible. In modern design, a system is represented to the greatest advantage as a set of decoupled first order differential equations defined using state variables. Nonlinear, multivariable, adaptive and robust control theories come under this division. Matrix methods are significantly limited for MIMO systems where linear independence cannot be assured in the relationship between inputs and outputs. Being fairly new, modern control theory has many areas yet to be explored. Scholars like Rudolf E. Kálmán and Aleksandr Lyapunov are well known among the people who have shaped modern control theory.

==Topics in control theory==

===Stability===

The &quot;stability&quot; of a general dynamical system with no input can be described with Lyapunov stability criteria.
*A linear system is called bounded-input bounded-output (BIBO) stable if its output will stay bounded for any bounded input.
*Stability for nonlinear systems that take an input is input-to-state stability (ISS), which combines Lyapunov stability and a notion similar to BIBO stability.

For simplicity, the following descriptions focus on continuous-time and discrete-time linear systems.

Mathematically, this means that for a causal linear system to be stable all of the poles of its transfer function must have negative-real values, i.e. the real part of each pole must be less than zero. Practically speaking, stability requires that the transfer function complex poles reside
* in the open left half of the complex plane for continuous time, when the Laplace transform is used to obtain the transfer function.
* inside the unit circle for discrete time, when the Z-transform is used.
The difference between the two cases is simply due to the traditional method of plotting continuous time versus discrete time transfer functions. The continuous Laplace transform is in Cartesian coordinates where the formula_1 axis is the real axis and the discrete Z-transform is in circular coordinates where the formula_2 axis is the real axis.

When the appropriate conditions above are satisfied a system is said to be asymptotically stable; the variables of an asymptotically stable control system always decrease from their initial value and do not show permanent oscillations. Permanent oscillations occur when a pole has a real part exactly equal to zero (in the continuous time case) or a modulus equal to one (in the discrete time case). If a simply stable system response neither decays nor grows over time, and has no oscillations, it is marginally stable; in this case the system transfer function has non-repeated poles at the complex plane origin (i.e. their real and complex component is zero in the continuous time case). Oscillations are present when poles with real part equal to zero have an imaginary part not equal to zero.

If a system in question has an impulse response of

:formula_3

then the Z-transform (see this example), is given by

:formula_4

which has a pole in formula_5 (zero imaginary part). This system is BIBO (asymptotically) stable since the pole is &quot;inside&quot; the unit circle.

However, if the impulse response was

:formula_6

then the Z-transform is

:formula_7

which has a pole at formula_8 and is not BIBO stable since the pole has a modulus strictly greater than one.

Numerous tools exist for the analysis of the poles of a system. These include graphical systems like the root locus, Bode plots or the Nyquist plots.

Mechanical changes can make equipment (and control systems) more stable. Sailors add ballast to improve the stability of ships. Cruise ships use antiroll fins that extend transversely from the side of the ship for perhaps 30 feet (10 m) and are continuously rotated about their axes to develop forces that oppose the roll.

===Controllability and observability===
Controllability and observability are main issues in the analysis of a system before deciding the best control strategy to be applied, or whether it is even possible to control or stabilize the system. Controllability is related to the possibility of forcing the system into a particular state by using an appropriate control signal. If a state is not controllable, then no signal will ever be able to control the state. If a state is not controllable, but its dynamics are stable, then the state is termed &quot;stabilizable&quot;. Observability instead is related to the possibility of &quot;observing&quot;, through output measurements, the state of a system. If a state is not observable, the controller will never be able to determine the behavior of an unobservable state and hence cannot use it to stabilize the system. However, similar to the stabilizability condition above, if a state cannot be observed it might still be detectable.

From a geometrical point of view, looking at the states of each variable of the system to be controlled, every &quot;bad&quot; state of these variables must be controllable and observable to ensure a good behavior in the closed-loop system. That is, if one of the eigenvalues of the system is not both controllable and observable, this part of the dynamics will remain untouched in the closed-loop system. If such an eigenvalue is not stable, the dynamics of this eigenvalue will be present in the closed-loop system which therefore will be unstable. Unobservable poles are not present in the transfer function realization of a state-space representation, which is why sometimes the latter is preferred in dynamical systems analysis.

Solutions to problems of an uncontrollable or unobservable system include adding actuators and sensors.

===Control specification===
Several different control strategies have been devised in the past years. These vary from extremely general ones (PID controller), to others devoted to very particular classes of systems (especially robotics or aircraft cruise control).

A control problem can have several specifications. Stability, of course, is always present. The controller must ensure that the closed-loop system is stable, regardless of the open-loop stability. A poor choice of controller can even worsen the stability of the open-loop system, which must normally be avoided. Sometimes it would be desired to obtain particular dynamics in the closed loop: i.e. that the poles have formula_9, where formula_10 is a fixed value strictly greater than zero, instead of simply asking that formula_11.

Another typical specification is the rejection of a step disturbance; including an integrator in the open-loop chain (i.e. directly before the system under control) easily achieves this. Other classes of disturbances need different types of sub-systems to be included.

Other &quot;classical&quot; control theory specifications regard the time-response of the closed-loop system. These include the rise time (the time needed by the control system to reach the desired value after a perturbation), peak overshoot (the highest value reached by the response before reaching the desired value) and others (settling time, quarter-decay). Frequency domain specifications are usually related to robustness (see after).

Modern performance assessments use some variation of integrated tracking error (IAE, ISA, CQI).

===Model identification and robustness===
A control system must always have some robustness property. A robust controller is such that its properties do not change much if applied to a system slightly different from the mathematical one used for its synthesis. This requirement is important, as no real physical system truly behaves like the series of differential equations used to represent it mathematically. Typically a simpler mathematical model is chosen in order to simplify calculations, otherwise, the true system dynamics can be so complicated that a complete model is impossible.

;System identification

The process of determining the equations that govern the model&#x27;s dynamics is called system identification. This can be done off-line: for example, executing a series of measures from which to calculate an approximated mathematical model, typically its transfer function or matrix. Such identification from the output, however, cannot take account of unobservable dynamics. Sometimes the model is built directly starting from known physical equations, for example, in the case of a mass-spring-damper system we know that formula_12. Even assuming that a &quot;complete&quot; model is used in designing the controller, all the parameters included in these equations (called &quot;nominal parameters&quot;) are never known with absolute precision; the control system will have to behave correctly even when connected to a physical system with true parameter values away from nominal.

Some advanced control techniques include an &quot;on-line&quot; identification process (see later). The parameters of the model are calculated (&quot;identified&quot;) while the controller itself is running. In this way, if a drastic variation of the parameters ensues, for example, if the robot&#x27;s arm releases a weight, the controller will adjust itself consequently in order to ensure the correct performance.

;Analysis
Analysis of the robustness of a SISO (single input single output) control system can be performed in the frequency domain, considering the system&#x27;s transfer function and using Nyquist and Bode diagrams. Topics include gain and phase margin and amplitude margin. For MIMO (multi-input multi output) and, in general, more complicated control systems, one must consider the theoretical results devised for each control technique (see next section). I.e., if particular robustness qualities are needed, the engineer must shift their attention to a control technique by including these qualities in its properties.

;Constraints
A particular robustness issue is the requirement for a control system to perform properly in the presence of input and state constraints. In the physical world every signal is limited. It could happen that a controller will send control signals that cannot be followed by the physical system, for example, trying to rotate a valve at excessive speed. This can produce undesired behavior of the closed-loop system, or even damage or break actuators or other subsystems. Specific control techniques are available to solve the problem: model predictive control (see later), and anti-wind up systems. The latter consists of an additional control block that ensures that the control signal never exceeds a given threshold.

==System classifications==

===Linear systems control===

For MIMO systems, pole placement can be performed mathematically using a state space representation of the open-loop system and calculating a feedback matrix assigning poles in the desired positions. In complicated systems this can require computer-assisted calculation capabilities, and cannot always ensure robustness. Furthermore, all system states are not in general measured and so observers must be included and incorporated in pole placement design.

===Nonlinear systems control===

Processes in industries like robotics and the aerospace industry typically have strong nonlinear dynamics. In control theory it is sometimes possible to linearize such classes of systems and apply linear techniques, but in many cases it can be necessary to devise from scratch theories permitting control of nonlinear systems. These, e.g., feedback linearization, backstepping, sliding mode control, trajectory linearization control normally take advantage of results based on Lyapunov&#x27;s theory. Differential geometry has been widely used as a tool for generalizing well-known linear control concepts to the nonlinear case, as well as showing the subtleties that make it a more challenging problem. Control theory has also been used to decipher the neural mechanism that directs cognitive states.

===Decentralized systems control===

When the system is controlled by multiple controllers, the problem is one of decentralized control. Decentralization is helpful in many ways, for instance, it helps control systems to operate over a larger geographical area. The agents in decentralized control systems can interact using communication channels and coordinate their actions.

===Deterministic and stochastic systems control===
A stochastic control problem is one in which the evolution of the state variables is subjected to random shocks from outside the system. A deterministic control problem is not subject to external random shocks.

==Main control strategies==
Every control system must guarantee first the stability of the closed-loop behavior. For linear systems, this can be obtained by directly placing the poles. Nonlinear control systems use specific theories (normally based on Aleksandr Lyapunov&#x27;s Theory) to ensure stability without regard to the inner dynamics of the system. The possibility to fulfill different specifications varies from the model considered and the control strategy chosen.

;List of the main control techniques

*Optimal control is a particular control technique in which the control signal optimizes a certain &quot;cost index&quot;: for example, in the case of a satellite, the jet thrusts needed to bring it to desired trajectory that consume the least amount of fuel. Two optimal control design methods have been widely used in industrial applications, as it has been shown they can guarantee closed-loop stability. These are Model Predictive Control (MPC) and linear-quadratic-Gaussian control (LQG). The first can more explicitly take into account constraints on the signals in the system, which is an important feature in many industrial processes. However, the &quot;optimal control&quot; structure in MPC is only a means to achieve such a result, as it does not optimize a true performance index of the closed-loop control system. Together with PID controllers, MPC systems are the most widely used control technique in process control.
*Robust control deals explicitly with uncertainty in its approach to controller design. Controllers designed using &quot;robust control&quot; methods tend to be able to cope with small differences between the true system and the nominal model used for design. The early methods of Bode and others were fairly robust; the state-space methods invented in the 1960s and 1970s were sometimes found to lack robustness. Examples of modern robust control techniques include H-infinity loop-shaping developed by Duncan McFarlane and Keith Glover, Sliding mode control (SMC) developed by Vadim Utkin, and safe protocols designed for control of large heterogeneous populations of electric loads in Smart Power Grid applications. Robust methods aim to achieve robust performance and/or stability in the presence of small modeling errors.
*Stochastic control deals with control design with uncertainty in the model. In typical stochastic control problems, it is assumed that there exist random noise and disturbances in the model and the controller, and the control design must take into account these random deviations.
*Adaptive control uses on-line identification of the process parameters, or modification of controller gains, thereby obtaining strong robustness properties. Adaptive controls were applied for the first time in the aerospace industry in the 1950s, and have found particular success in that field.
*A hierarchical control system is a type of control system in which a set of devices and governing software is arranged in a hierarchical tree. When the links in the tree are implemented by a computer network, then that hierarchical control system is also a form of networked control system.
*Intelligent control uses various AI computing approaches like artificial neural networks, Bayesian probability, fuzzy logic, machine learning, evolutionary computation and genetic algorithms or a combination of these methods, such as neuro-fuzzy algorithms, to control a dynamic system.
*Self-organized criticality control may be defined as attempts to interfere in the processes by which the self-organized system dissipates energy.

==People in systems and control==

Many active and historical figures made significant contribution to control theory including
* Pierre-Simon Laplace invented the Z-transform in his work on probability theory, now used to solve discrete-time control theory problems. The Z-transform is a discrete-time equivalent of the Laplace transform which is named after him.
* Irmgard Flugge-Lotz developed the theory of discontinuous automatic control and applied it to automatic aircraft control systems.
* Alexander Lyapunov in the 1890s marks the beginning of stability theory.
* Harold S. Black invented the concept of negative feedback amplifiers in 1927. He managed to develop stable negative feedback amplifiers in the 1930s.
* Harry Nyquist developed the Nyquist stability criterion for feedback systems in the 1930s.
* Richard Bellman developed dynamic programming in the 1940s.
* Warren E. Dixon, control theorist and a professor
* Kyriakos G. Vamvoudakis, developed synchronous reinforcement learning algorithms to solve optimal control and game theoretic problems 
* Andrey Kolmogorov co-developed the Wiener–Kolmogorov filter in 1941.
* Norbert Wiener co-developed the Wiener–Kolmogorov filter and coined the term cybernetics in the 1940s.
* John R. Ragazzini introduced digital control and the use of Z-transform in control theory (invented by Laplace) in the 1950s.
* Lev Pontryagin introduced the maximum principle and the bang-bang principle.
* Pierre-Louis Lions developed viscosity solutions into stochastic control and optimal control methods.
* Rudolf E. Kálmán pioneered the state-space approach to systems and control. Introduced the notions of controllability and observability. Developed the Kalman filter for linear estimation.
* Ali H. Nayfeh who was one of the main contributors to nonlinear control theory and published many books on perturbation methods
* Jan C. Willems Introduced the concept of dissipativity, as a generalization of Lyapunov function to input/state/output systems. The construction of the storage function, as the analogue of a Lyapunov function is called, led to the study of the linear matrix inequality (LMI) in control theory. He pioneered the behavioral approach to mathematical systems theory.

==See also==

;Examples of control systems
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

;Topics in control theory
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* s
* 
* 
* 
* 

;Other related topics
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==References==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
*
* 

; For Chemical Engineering

== External links ==
* Control Tutorials for Matlab, a set of worked-through control examples solved by several different methods.
* Control Tuning and Best Practices
* Advanced control structures, free on-line simulators explaining the control theory</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6501221" start="0" end="14" title="Control theory" label="Control theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917288" start="29" end="48" title="control engineering" label="control engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="53" end="72" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q959968" start="93" end="100" title="control system" label="control"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="104" end="120" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756677" start="421" end="430" title="Stability theory" label="stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971426" start="474" end="484" title="Optimal control" label="optimality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501221" start="501" end="511" title="Control theory" label="controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247312" start="604" end="620" title="process variable" label="process variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752097" start="665" end="674" title="Setpoint (control system)" label="set point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331104" start="977" end="992" title="controllability" label="controllability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369844" start="997" end="1010" title="observability" label="observability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917288" start="1038" end="1064" title="control system engineering" label="control system engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="1204" end="1212" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q884718" start="1283" end="1296" title="block diagram" label="block diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q334269" start="1308" end="1325" title="transfer function" label="transfer function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="1464" end="1485" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="1636" end="1655" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q726864" start="1696" end="1708" title="Edward Routh" label="Edward Routh"/>
<link wikidata="Q123485" start="1718" end="1731" title="Jacques Charles François Sturm" label="Charles Sturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q58809" start="1745" end="1758" title="Adolf Hurwitz" label="Adolf Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q716829" start="1874" end="1885" title="PID control" label="PID control"/>
<link wikidata="Q521350" start="1896" end="1912" title="Nicolas Minorsky" label="Nicolas Minorsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1946" end="1958" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917288" start="1980" end="2007" title="Control Systems Engineering" label="control systems engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649571" start="2040" end="2055" title="process control" label="process control"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="2311" end="2330" title="operations research" label="operations research"/>
<link wikidata="Q375647" start="2487" end="2507" title="centrifugal governor" label="centrifugal governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="2536" end="2555" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047845" start="2728" end="2744" title="self-oscillation" label="self-oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q726864" start="2915" end="2932" title="Edward John Routh" label="Edward John Routh"/>
<link wikidata="Q58809" start="3024" end="3037" title="Adolf Hurwitz" label="Adolf Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455015" start="3140" end="3161" title="Routh–Hurwitz theorem" label="Routh–Hurwitz theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="3243" end="3258" title="Wright brothers" label="Wright brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3598" end="3610" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q91675" start="3671" end="3690" title="Irmgard Flügge-Lotz" label="Irmgard Flügge-Lotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432859" start="3772" end="3791" title="bang–bang control" label="bang-bang principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="3814" end="3848" title="autopilot" label="automatic flight control equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="3926" end="3945" title="fire-control system" label="fire-control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707071" start="3948" end="3963" title="guidance system" label="guidance system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="3969" end="3980" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q979701" start="4072" end="4088" title="Stabilizer (ship)" label="ship stabilizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="4352" end="4362" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580300" start="4565" end="4579" title="internal model (motor control)" label="internal model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582892" start="4595" end="4617" title="Good regulator" label="good regulator theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501221" start="5378" end="5387" title="controller (control theory)" label="regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q639588" start="5407" end="5412" title="plant (control theory)" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q959968" start="5603" end="5624" title="Linear control theory" label="Linear control theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="5688" end="5711" title="superposition principle" label="superposition principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129902" start="5800" end="5828" title="linear differential equation" label="linear differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808960" start="5937" end="5958" title="linear time invariant" label="linear time invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q786423" start="6019" end="6035" title="frequency domain" label="frequency domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="6093" end="6110" title="Laplace transform" label="Laplace transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="6112" end="6129" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q135810" start="6131" end="6142" title="Z transform" label="Z transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q245627" start="6144" end="6153" title="Bode plot" label="Bode plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q957693" start="6155" end="6165" title="root locus" label="root locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756793" start="6171" end="6198" title="Nyquist stability criterion" label="Nyquist stability criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="6259" end="6268" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054694" start="6270" end="6288" title="frequency response" label="frequency response"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="6290" end="6300" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q854659" start="6303" end="6307" title="gain (electronics)" label="gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="6309" end="6329" title="resonant frequency" label="resonant frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q899731" start="6331" end="6346" title="zeros and poles" label="zeros and poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707001" start="6450" end="6474" title="Nonlinear control theory" label="Nonlinear control theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="6689" end="6720" title="nonlinear differential equation" label="nonlinear differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545916" start="6905" end="6916" title="limit cycle" label="limit cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q339199" start="6925" end="6937" title="Poincaré map" label="Poincaré map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337858" start="6940" end="6966" title="Lyapunov function" label="Lyapunov stability theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925419" start="6972" end="6991" title="describing function" label="describing function"/>
<link wikidata="Q24262840" start="7037" end="7053" title="numerical method" label="numerical method"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="7084" end="7094" title="simulation" label="simulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521336" start="7119" end="7138" title="simulation language" label="simulation language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520713" start="7226" end="7236" title="linearization" label="linearized"/>
<link wikidata="Q10886678" start="7284" end="7303" title="perturbation theory" label="perturbation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q786423" start="7512" end="7528" title="Frequency domain" label="Frequency domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603913" start="7568" end="7582" title="state variable" label="state variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q50701" start="7602" end="7611" title="variable (mathematics)" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="7702" end="7711" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q334269" start="7752" end="7769" title="transfer function" label="transfer function"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202238" start="7835" end="7844" title="transform (mathematics)" label="transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="7857" end="7874" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="7876" end="7893" title="Laplace transform" label="Laplace transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q135810" start="7898" end="7909" title="Z transform" label="Z transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="8012" end="8033" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50698" start="8089" end="8107" title="algebraic equation" label="algebraic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q230945" start="8274" end="8312" title="Time-domain state space representation" label="Time-domain state space representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603913" start="8352" end="8366" title="state variable" label="state variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="8479" end="8500" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854269" start="8552" end="8558" title="linear function" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521336" start="8726" end="8745" title="simulation language" label="simulation language"/>
<link wikidata="Q230945" start="8906" end="8917" title="state space (controls)" label="state space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307602" start="10082" end="10108" title="Single-input single-output system" label="Single-input single-output"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="10271" end="10283" title="audio system" label="audio system"/>
<link wikidata="Q176862" start="10393" end="10423" title="Multiple-input multiple-output system" label="Multiple-input multiple-output"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="10504" end="10513" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q210997" start="10527" end="10531" title="Keck telescopes" label="Keck"/>
<link wikidata="Q779895" start="10536" end="10539" title="MMT Observatory" label="MMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q423488" start="10610" end="10618" title="actuator" label="actuator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054449" start="10684" end="10697" title="active optics" label="active optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q461533" start="10900" end="10909" title="wavefront" label="wavefront"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="10975" end="10990" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="11002" end="11007" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307602" start="11156" end="11186" title="Single-input single-output system" label="single-input and single-output"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="11339" end="11361" title="differential equations" label="differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="11396" end="11413" title="Laplace transform" label="Laplace transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q716829" start="11984" end="11998" title="PID controller" label="PID controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q230945" start="12713" end="12724" title="State space (controls)" label="state space"/>
<link wikidata="Q176862" start="12744" end="12778" title="Multiple-input multiple-output system" label="multiple-input and multiple-output"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="13096" end="13117" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603913" start="13133" end="13148" title="state variables" label="state variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707001" start="13150" end="13159" title="Nonlinear control" label="Nonlinear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13161" end="13174" title="multivariable control" label="multivariable"/>
<link wikidata="Q235781" start="13176" end="13184" title="adaptive control" label="adaptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q915157" start="13189" end="13203" title="robust control" label="robust control"/>
<link wikidata="Q384687" start="13478" end="13494" title="Rudolf E. Kálmán" label="Rudolf E. Kálmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q310788" start="13499" end="13517" title="Aleksandr Lyapunov" label="Aleksandr Lyapunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="13676" end="13692" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341651" start="13729" end="13747" title="Lyapunov stability" label="Lyapunov stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072174" start="13761" end="13774" title="linear system" label="linear system"/>
<link wikidata="Q744737" start="13785" end="13827" title="BIBO stability" label="bounded-input bounded-output (BIBO) stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267362" start="13852" end="13859" title="bounded function" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="13898" end="13914" title="nonlinear system" label="nonlinear system"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995800" start="13938" end="13962" title="input-to-state stability" label="input-to-state stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q899731" start="14231" end="14236" title="Pole (complex analysis)" label="poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q334269" start="14244" end="14261" title="transfer function" label="transfer function"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="14470" end="14483" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="14514" end="14531" title="Laplace transform" label="Laplace transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q203425" start="14586" end="14597" title="unit circle" label="unit circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q135810" start="14626" end="14637" title="Z-transform" label="Z-transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="14832" end="14853" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="14931" end="14951" title="circular coordinates" label="circular coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341651" start="15071" end="15092" title="asymptotic stability" label="asymptotically stable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15346" end="15353" title="Absolute value#Complex_numbers" label="modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q618684" start="15498" end="15515" title="marginal stability" label="marginally stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139726" start="15826" end="15842" title="impulse response" label="impulse response"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15885" end="15897" title="Z-transform#Example 2 (causal ROC)" label="this example"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165172" start="15961" end="15975" title="imaginary number" label="imaginary part"/>
<link wikidata="Q957693" start="16379" end="16389" title="root locus" label="root locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q245627" start="16391" end="16400" title="Bode plot" label="Bode plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756793" start="16409" end="16421" title="Nyquist plot" label="Nyquist plot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16570" end="16583" title="Ship stability#Stabilizer fins" label="antiroll fins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331104" start="16789" end="16804" title="Controllability" label="Controllability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369844" start="16809" end="16822" title="observability" label="observability"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="17998" end="18009" title="eigenvalues" label="eigenvalues"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="18801" end="18809" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081431" start="19456" end="19466" title="integrator" label="integrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q377672" start="19771" end="19780" title="rise time" label="rise time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102204" start="19875" end="19884" title="overshoot (signal)" label="overshoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983320" start="19975" end="19988" title="settling time" label="settling time"/>
<link wikidata="Q915157" start="20061" end="20071" title="robust control" label="robustness"/>
<link wikidata="Q915157" start="20287" end="20301" title="robust control" label="robust control"/>
<link wikidata="Q598451" start="20699" end="20714" title="system dynamics" label="system dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366192" start="20888" end="20909" title="system identification" label="system identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q334269" start="21056" end="21073" title="transfer function" label="transfer function"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590926" start="21285" end="21303" title="Mass-spring-damper model" label="mass-spring-damper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756793" start="22295" end="22302" title="Nyquist diagram" label="Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q245627" start="22307" end="22319" title="Bode diagram" label="Bode diagram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22337" end="22358" title="Bode plot#Gain margin and phase margin" label="gain and phase margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782962" start="23276" end="23300" title="model predictive control" label="model predictive control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020377" start="23318" end="23338" title="anti-wind up system (control)" label="anti-wind up systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q230945" start="23593" end="23619" title="State space (controls)" label="state space representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="24040" end="24048" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q936518" start="24057" end="24075" title="aerospace industry" label="aerospace industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q672139" start="24351" end="24373" title="feedback linearization" label="feedback linearization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839759" start="24375" end="24387" title="backstepping" label="backstepping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008560" start="24389" end="24409" title="sliding mode control" label="sliding mode control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341651" start="24488" end="24510" title="Lyapunov&amp;#x27;s theory" label="Lyapunov&amp;#x27;s theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="24512" end="24533" title="Differential geometry" label="Differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072174" start="25573" end="25586" title="linear system" label="linear system"/>
<link wikidata="Q310788" start="25708" end="25726" title="Aleksandr Lyapunov" label="Aleksandr Lyapunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971426" start="25972" end="25987" title="Optimal control" label="Optimal control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782962" start="26389" end="26413" title="Model Predictive Control" label="Model Predictive Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798304" start="26424" end="26457" title="linear-quadratic-Gaussian control" label="linear-quadratic-Gaussian control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649571" start="26888" end="26903" title="process control" label="process control"/>
<link wikidata="Q915157" start="26906" end="26920" title="Robust control" label="Robust control"/>
<link wikidata="Q714462" start="27186" end="27190" title="Hendrik Wade Bode" label="Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627863" start="27372" end="27395" title="H-infinity loop-shaping" label="H-infinity loop-shaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384410" start="27430" end="27442" title="Keith Glover" label="Keith Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008560" start="27444" end="27464" title="Sliding mode control" label="Sliding mode control"/>
<link wikidata="Q64500353" start="27484" end="27495" title="Vadim Utkin" label="Vadim Utkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756677" start="27680" end="27689" title="Stability theory" label="stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617811" start="27733" end="27751" title="Stochastic control" label="Stochastic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q235781" start="28015" end="28031" title="Adaptive control" label="Adaptive control"/>
<link wikidata="Q936518" start="28229" end="28247" title="aerospace industry" label="aerospace industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029359" start="28314" end="28341" title="hierarchical control system" label="hierarchical control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q959968" start="28355" end="28369" title="control system" label="control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="28436" end="28448" title="hierarchical" label="hierarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="28449" end="28453" title="tree (data structure)" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="28503" end="28519" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q9336345" start="28577" end="28601" title="networked control system" label="networked control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q835100" start="28604" end="28623" title="Intelligent control" label="Intelligent control"/>
<link wikidata="Q192776" start="28666" end="28692" title="artificial neural networks" label="artificial neural networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q812534" start="28694" end="28714" title="Bayesian probability" label="Bayesian probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q224821" start="28716" end="28727" title="fuzzy logic" label="fuzzy logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="28729" end="28745" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197129" start="28747" end="28771" title="evolutionary computation" label="evolutionary computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187787" start="28776" end="28794" title="genetic algorithms" label="genetic algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165150" start="28838" end="28849" title="neuro-fuzzy" label="neuro-fuzzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="28875" end="28889" title="dynamic system" label="dynamic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018461" start="28892" end="28926" title="Self-organized criticality control" label="Self-organized criticality control"/>
<link wikidata="Q609408" start="28997" end="29011" title="self-organized" label="self-organized"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="29169" end="29189" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q135810" start="29203" end="29214" title="Z-transform" label="Z-transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="29230" end="29248" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="29360" end="29377" title="Laplace transform" label="Laplace transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q91675" start="29406" end="29425" title="Irmgard Flugge-Lotz" label="Irmgard Flugge-Lotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432859" start="29450" end="29481" title="bang-bang control" label="discontinuous automatic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="29500" end="29534" title="autopilot" label="automatic aircraft control systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q310788" start="29538" end="29556" title="Alexander Lyapunov" label="Alexander Lyapunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756677" start="29593" end="29609" title="stability theory" label="stability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585955" start="29613" end="29628" title="Harold Stephen Black" label="Harold S. Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117035" start="29653" end="29680" title="negative feedback amplifier" label="negative feedback amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q316022" start="29765" end="29778" title="Harry Nyquist" label="Harry Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756793" start="29793" end="29820" title="Nyquist stability criterion" label="Nyquist stability criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q441199" start="29858" end="29873" title="Richard Bellman" label="Richard Bellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q380679" start="29884" end="29903" title="dynamic programming" label="dynamic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970165" start="29920" end="29935" title="Warren E. Dixon" label="Warren E. Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29972" end="29995" title="Kyriakos G. Vamvoudakis" label="Kyriakos G. Vamvoudakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="30109" end="30126" title="Andrey Kolmogorov" label="Andrey Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q25523" start="30144" end="30168" title="Wiener filter" label="Wiener–Kolmogorov filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q178577" start="30180" end="30194" title="Norbert Wiener" label="Norbert Wiener"/>
<link wikidata="Q123637" start="30257" end="30268" title="cybernetics" label="cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q740408" start="30285" end="30302" title="John R. Ragazzini" label="John R. Ragazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720568" start="30314" end="30329" title="digital control" label="digital control"/>
<link wikidata="Q135810" start="30345" end="30356" title="Z-transform" label="Z-transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q451319" start="30413" end="30427" title="Lev Pontryagin" label="Lev Pontryagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491629" start="30443" end="30460" title="Pontryagin&amp;#x27;s minimum principle" label="maximum principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432859" start="30469" end="30488" title="Bang-bang control" label="bang-bang principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q334030" start="30492" end="30510" title="Pierre-Louis Lions" label="Pierre-Louis Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935676" start="30521" end="30540" title="viscosity solutions" label="viscosity solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971426" start="30569" end="30584" title="optimal control" label="optimal control"/>
<link wikidata="Q384687" start="30596" end="30612" title="Rudolf E. Kálmán" label="Rudolf E. Kálmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q230930" start="30627" end="30638" title="state-space" label="state-space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331104" start="30698" end="30713" title="controllability" label="controllability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369844" start="30718" end="30731" title="observability" label="observability"/>
<link wikidata="Q846780" start="30747" end="30760" title="Kalman filter" label="Kalman filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724824" start="30786" end="30799" title="Ali H. Nayfeh" label="Ali H. Nayfeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429591" start="30916" end="30930" title="Jan Camiel Willems" label="Jan C. Willems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337858" start="30995" end="31012" title="Lyapunov function" label="Lyapunov function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022760" start="31160" end="31184" title="linear matrix inequality" label="linear matrix inequality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7042" wikidata="Q1417078" url="?curid=7042" title="Joint cracking">
<text>Joint cracking is the manipulation of joints to produce a sound and related &quot;popping&quot; sensation. It is sometimes performed by physical therapists, chiropractors, and osteopaths pursuing a variety of outcomes.

The cracking of joints, especially knuckles, was long believed to lead to arthritis and other joint problems. However, this has been debunked. 

The cracking mechanism and the resulting sound is caused by dissolved gas (nitrogen gas) cavitation bubbles suddenly collapsing inside the joints. This happens when the joint cavity is stretched beyond its normal size. The pressure inside the joint cavity drops and the dissolved gas suddenly comes out of solution and takes gaseous form which makes a distinct popping noise. To be able to crack the same knuckle again requires waiting about 20 minutes before the bubbles dissolve back into the synovial fluid and will be able to form again.

It is possible for voluntary joint cracking by an individual to be considered as part of the obsessive–compulsive disorders spectrum.

==Causes==

For many decades, the physical mechanism that causes the cracking sound as a result of bending, twisting, or compressing joints was uncertain. Suggested causes included:

*Cavitation within the joint—small cavities of partial vacuum form in the synovial fluid and then rapidly collapse, producing a sharp sound.
* Rapid stretching of ligaments.
* Intra-articular (within-joint) adhesions being broken.
*Formation of bubbles of joint air as the joint is expanded.

There were several hypotheses to explain the cracking of joints. Synovial fluid cavitation has some evidence to support it. When a spinal manipulation is performed, the applied force separates the articular surfaces of a fully encapsulated synovial joint, which in turn creates a reduction in pressure within the joint cavity. In this low-pressure environment, some of the gases that are dissolved in the synovial fluid (which are naturally found in all bodily fluids) leave the solution, making a bubble, or cavity (tribonucleation), which rapidly collapses upon itself, resulting in a &quot;clicking&quot; sound. The contents of the resultant gas bubble are thought to be mainly carbon dioxide, oxygen and nitrogen. The effects of this process will remain for a period of time known as the &quot;refractory period&quot;, during which the joint cannot be &quot;re-cracked&quot;, which lasts about 20 minutes, while the gases are slowly reabsorbed into the synovial fluid. There is some evidence that ligament laxity may be associated with an increased tendency to cavitate.

In 2015, research showed that bubbles remained in the fluid after cracking, suggesting that the cracking sound was produced when the bubble within the joint was formed, not when it collapsed. In 2018, a team in France created a mathematical simulation of what happens in a joint just before it cracks. The team concluded that the sound is caused by bubbles&#x27; collapse, and bubbles observed in the fluid are the result of a partial collapse. Due to the theoretical basis and lack of physical experimentation, the scientific community is still not fully convinced of this conclusion.

The snapping of tendons or scar tissue over a prominence (as in snapping hip syndrome) can also generate a loud snapping or popping sound.

==Relation to arthritis==
The common old wives&#x27; tale that cracking one&#x27;s knuckles causes arthritis is without scientific evidence. A study published in 2011 examined the hand radiographs of 215 people (aged 50 to 89). It compared the joints of those who regularly cracked their knuckles to those who did not. The study concluded that knuckle-cracking did not cause hand osteoarthritis, no matter how many years or how often a person cracked their knuckles. This early study has been criticized for not taking into consideration the possibility of confounding factors, such as whether the ability to crack one&#x27;s knuckles is associated with impaired hand functioning rather than being a cause of it.

The medical doctor Donald Unger cracked the knuckles of his left hand every day for more than sixty years, but he did not crack the knuckles of his right hand. No arthritis or other ailments formed in either hand, and for this, he was awarded 2009&#x27;s satirical Ig Nobel Prize in Medicine.

==See also==
*Crepitus—sounds made by joint

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1417078" start="0" end="14" title="Joint cracking" label="Joint cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q9644" start="38" end="43" title="joint" label="joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="136" end="154" title="Physical therapy" label="physical therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q658096" start="157" end="169" title="chiropractor" label="chiropractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q325253" start="176" end="185" title="osteopath" label="osteopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="294" end="303" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201666" start="454" end="464" title="cavitation" label="cavitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="1001" end="1030" title="obsessive–compulsive disorder" label="obsessive–compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201666" start="1227" end="1237" title="Cavitation" label="Cavitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25581" start="1300" end="1314" title="synovial fluid" label="synovial fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967871" start="1433" end="1442" title="Adhesion (medicine)" label="adhesions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339243" start="1482" end="1491" title="pneumatosis" label="joint air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074773" start="1650" end="1669" title="spinal manipulation" label="spinal manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="1892" end="1895" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q75794" start="2017" end="2023" title="Bubble (physics)" label="bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q201666" start="2028" end="2034" title="Cavitation" label="cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049039" start="2036" end="2051" title="tribonucleation" label="tribonucleation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="2200" end="2214" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2216" end="2222" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="2227" end="2235" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736732" start="2317" end="2334" title="Refractory period (physiology)" label="refractory period"/>
<link wikidata="Q25581" start="2476" end="2490" title="synovial fluid" label="synovial fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545848" start="2520" end="2535" title="Ligamentous laxity" label="ligament laxity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138264" start="3246" end="3267" title="snapping hip syndrome" label="snapping hip syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q473033" start="3359" end="3379" title="old wives&amp;#x27; tale" label="old wives&amp;#x27; tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="3421" end="3430" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184253" start="4301" end="4315" title="Ig Nobel Prize" label="Ig Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q615235" start="4344" end="4352" title="Crepitus" label="Crepitus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7043" wikidata="Q83147" url="?curid=7043" title="Chemical formula">
<text>-\overset{\displaystyle H \atop |}{\underset{\underset{\underset{\underset{\underset{\underset{| \atop \displaystyle H}{C}}-H&lt;/chem&gt;
|align=right|width=180
|caption=&quot;n&quot;-Butane structural formulaMolecular formula: Condensed formula: 

Molecular formulae simply indicate the numbers of each type of atom in a molecule of a molecular substance. They are the same as empirical formulae for molecules that only have one atom of a particular type, but otherwise may have larger numbers. An example of the difference is the empirical formula for glucose, which is (&quot;ratio&quot; 1:2:1), while its molecular formula is (&quot;number of atoms&quot; 6:12:6). For water, both formulae are . A molecular formula provides more information about a molecule than its empirical formula, but is more difficult to establish.

=== Structural formula ===

In addition to indicating the number of atoms of each elementa molecule, a structural formula indicates how the atoms are organized, and shows (or implies) the chemical bonds between the atoms. There are multiple types of structural formulas focused on different aspects of the molecular structure.

The two diagrams show two molecules which are structural isomers of each other, since they both have the same molecular formula , but they have different structural formulas as shown.

=== Condensed formula ===

The connectivity of a molecule often has a strong influence on its physical and chemical properties and behavior. Two molecules composed of the same numbers of the same types of atoms (i.e. a pair of isomers) might have completely different chemical and/or physical properties if the atoms are connected differently or in different positions. In such cases, a structural formula is useful, as it illustrates which atoms are bonded to which other ones. From the connectivity, it is often possible to deduce the approximate shape of the molecule.

A condensed (or semi-structural) formula may represent the types and spatial arrangement of bonds in a simple chemical substance, though it does not necessarily specify isomers or complex structures. For example, ethane consists of two carbon atoms single-bonded to each other, with each carbon atom having three hydrogen atoms bonded to it. Its chemical formula can be rendered as . In ethylene there is a double bond between the carbon atoms (and thus each carbon only has two hydrogens), therefore the chemical formula may be written: , and the fact that there is a double bond between the carbons is implicit because carbon has a valence of four. However, a more explicit method is to write or less commonly . The two lines (or two pairs of dots) indicate that a double bond connects the atoms on either side of them.

A triple bond may be expressed with three lines () or three pairs of dots (), and if there may be ambiguity, a single line or pair of dots may be used to indicate a single bond.

Molecules with multiple functional groups that are the same may be expressed by enclosing the repeated group in round brackets. For example, isobutane may be written . This condensed structural formula implies a different connectivity from other molecules that can be formed using the same atoms in the same proportions (isomers). The formula implies a central carbon atom connected to one hydrogen atom and three methyl groups (). The same number of atoms of each element (10 hydrogens and 4 carbons, or ) may be used to make a straight chain molecule, &quot;n&quot;-butane: .

=== Chemical names in answer to limitations of chemical formulae ===

The alkene called but-2-ene has two isomers, which the chemical formula does not identify. The relative position of the two methyl groups must be indicated by additional notation denoting whether the methyl groups are on the same side of the double bond (&quot;cis&quot; or &quot;Z&quot;) or on the opposite sides from each other (&quot;trans&quot; or &quot;E&quot;).

As noted above, in order to represent the full structural formulae of many complex organic and inorganic compounds, chemical nomenclature may be needed which goes well beyond the available resources used above in simple condensed formulae. See IUPAC nomenclature of organic chemistry and IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry 2005 for examples. In addition, linear naming systems such as International Chemical Identifier (InChI) allow a computer to construct a structural formula, and simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES) allows a more human-readable ASCII input. However, all these nomenclature systems go beyond the standards of chemical formulae, and technically are chemical naming systems, not formula systems. 

=== Polymers in condensed formulae ===

For polymers in condensed chemical formulae, parentheses are placed around the repeating unit. For example, a hydrocarbon molecule that is described as , is a molecule with fifty repeating units. If the number of repeating units is unknown or variable, the letter &quot;n&quot; may be used to indicate this formula: .

=== Ions in condensed formulae ===
For ions, the charge on a particular atom may be denoted with a right-hand superscript. For example, , or . The total charge on a charged molecule or a polyatomic ion may also be shown in this way, such as for hydronium, , or sulfate, . Here + and − are used in place of +1 and −1, respectively.

For more complex ions, brackets [ ] are often used to enclose the ionic formula, as in , which is found in compounds such as caesium dodecaborate, . Parentheses ( ) can be nested inside brackets to indicate a repeating unit, as in Hexamminecobalt(III) chloride, . Here, indicates that the ion contains six ammine groups () bonded to cobalt, and [ ] encloses the entire formula of the ion with charge +3. 

This is strictly optional; a chemical formula is valid with or without ionization information, and Hexamminecobalt(III) chloride may be written as or . Brackets, like parentheses, behave in chemistry as they do in mathematics, grouping terms togetherthey are not specifically employed only for ionization states. In the latter case here, the parentheses indicate 6 groups all of the same shape, bonded to another group of size 1 (the cobalt atom), and then the entire bundle, as a group, is bonded to 3 chlorine atoms. In the former case, it is clearer that the bond connecting the chlorines is ionic, rather than covalent.

== Isotopes ==

Although isotopes are more relevant to nuclear chemistry or stable isotope chemistry than to conventional chemistry, different isotopes may be indicated with a prefixed superscript in a chemical formula. For example, the phosphate ion containing radioactive phosphorus-32 is . Also a study involving stable isotope ratios might include the molecule .

A left-hand subscript is sometimes used redundantly to indicate the atomic number. For example, for dioxygen, and for the most abundant isotopic species of dioxygen. This is convenient when writing equations for nuclear reactions, in order to show the balance of charge more clearly.

== Trapped atoms ==
The @ symbol (at sign) indicates an atom or molecule trapped inside a cage but not chemically bound to it. For example, a buckminsterfullerene () with an atom (M) would simply be represented as regardless of whether M was inside the fullerene without chemical bonding or outside, bound to one of the carbon atoms. Using the @ symbol, this would be denoted if M was inside the carbon network. A non-fullerene example is , an ion in which one arsenic (As) atom is trapped in a cage formed by the other 32 atoms.

This notation was proposed in 1991 with the discovery of fullerene cages (endohedral fullerenes), which can trap atoms such as La to form, for example, or . The choice of the symbol has been explained by the authors as being concise, readily printed and transmitted electronically (the at sign is included in ASCII, which most modern character encoding schemes are based on), and the visual aspects suggesting the structure of an endohedral fullerene.

== Non-stoichiometric chemical formulae ==

Chemical formulae most often use integers for each element. However, there is a class of compounds, called non-stoichiometric compounds, that cannot be represented by small integers. Such a formula might be written using decimal fractions, as in , or it might include a variable part represented by a letter, as in , where &quot;x&quot; is normally much less than 1.

== General forms for organic compounds ==
A chemical formula used for a series of compounds that differ from each other by a constant unit is called a &quot;general formula&quot;. It generates a homologous series of chemical formulae. For example, alcohols may be represented by the formula (&quot;n&quot; ≥ 1), giving the homologs methanol, ethanol, propanol for 1 ≤ &quot;n&quot; ≤ 3.

== Hill system ==
The Hill system (or Hill notation) is a system of writing empirical chemical formulae, molecular chemical formulae and components of a condensed formula such that the number of carbon atoms in a molecule is indicated first, the number of hydrogen atoms next, and then the number of all other chemical elements subsequently, in alphabetical order of the chemical symbols. When the formula contains no carbon, all the elements, including hydrogen, are listed alphabetically.

By sorting formulae according to the number of atoms of each element present in the formula according to these rules, with differences in earlier elements or numbers being treated as more significant than differences in any later element or number—like sorting text strings into lexicographical order—it is possible to collate chemical formulae into what is known as Hill system order.

The Hill system was first published by Edwin A. Hill of the United States Patent and Trademark Office in 1900. It is the most commonly used system in chemical databases and printed indexes to sort lists of compounds.

A list of formulae in Hill system order is arranged alphabetically, as above, with single-letter elements coming before two-letter symbols when the symbols begin with the same letter (so &quot;B&quot; comes before &quot;Be&quot;, which comes before &quot;Br&quot;).

The following example formulae are written using the Hill system, and listed in Hill order:

* BrClH2Si
* BrI
* CCl4
* CH3I
* C2H5Br
* H2O4S

== See also ==
* Formula unit
* Glossary of chemical formulae
* Nuclear notation
* Periodic table
* Skeletal formula
* Simplified molecular-input line-entry system

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 

== External links ==
* Hill notation example, from the University of Massachusetts Lowell libraries, including how to sort into Hill system order
* Molecular formula calculation applying Hill notation. The library calculating Hill notation is available on npm.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q134192" start="171" end="191" title="n-Butane" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-Butane"/>
<link wikidata="Q44424" start="1016" end="1029" title="chemical bond" label="chemical bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361732" start="1202" end="1219" title="structural isomer" label="structural isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q72897900" start="1372" end="1384" title="connectivity (graph theory)" label="connectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q127950" start="1568" end="1574" title="isomer" label="isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q496353" start="1728" end="1746" title="structural formula" label="structural formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q911331" start="1890" end="1911" title="molecular geometry" label="shape of the molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q44424" start="2006" end="2011" title="Chemical bond" label="bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q127950" start="2083" end="2089" title="isomer" label="isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q52858" start="2127" end="2133" title="ethane" label="ethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="2301" end="2309" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q258652" start="2681" end="2692" title="double bond" label="double bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q177033" start="2739" end="2750" title="triple bond" label="triple bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="2940" end="2956" title="functional group" label="functional group"/>
<link wikidata="Q174565" start="3028" end="3042" title="parenthesis" label="round brackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q407225" start="3057" end="3066" title="isobutane" label="isobutane"/>
<link wikidata="Q127950" start="3237" end="3243" title="isomer" label="isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407" start="3330" end="3342" title="methyl group" label="methyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q134192" start="3484" end="3490" title="butane" label="butane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554956" start="3583" end="3592" title="but-2-ene" label="but-2-ene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503924" start="4050" end="4071" title="chemical nomenclature" label="chemical nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q192475" start="4178" end="4217" title="IUPAC nomenclature of organic chemistry" label="IUPAC nomenclature of organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078184" start="4222" end="4268" title="IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry" label="IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q203250" start="4326" end="4359" title="International Chemical Identifier" label="International Chemical Identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q466769" start="4424" end="4468" title="simplified molecular-input line-entry system" label="simplified molecular-input line-entry system"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="4718" end="4725" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="4824" end="4835" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="5072" end="5075" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064242" start="5220" end="5234" title="polyatomic ion" label="polyatomic ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q849881" start="5278" end="5287" title="hydronium" label="hydronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q172290" start="5294" end="5301" title="sulfate" label="sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017048" start="5490" end="5510" title="caesium dodecaborate" label="caesium dodecaborate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627616" start="5596" end="5625" title="Hexamminecobalt(III) chloride" label="Hexamminecobalt(III) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064419" start="5671" end="5683" title="Metal ammine complex" label="ammine group"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="5698" end="5704" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q62500" start="6366" end="6371" title="ionic bonding" label="ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="6385" end="6393" title="covalent bond" label="covalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="6421" end="6428" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q243545" start="6451" end="6468" title="nuclear chemistry" label="nuclear chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q878130" start="6472" end="6486" title="stable isotope" label="stable isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359501" start="6581" end="6592" title="superscript" label="superscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="6832" end="6845" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q238323" start="6976" end="6992" title="nuclear reaction" label="nuclear reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q10714" start="7083" end="7090" title="at sign" label="at sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075376" start="7191" end="7211" title="buckminsterfullerene" label="buckminsterfullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="7510" end="7517" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178026" start="7637" end="7646" title="fullerene" label="fullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q385413" start="7654" end="7674" title="endohedral fullerene" label="endohedral fullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801" start="7707" end="7709" title="Lanthanum" label="La"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="7889" end="7894" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="8110" end="8117" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q899734" start="8184" end="8211" title="non-stoichiometric compound" label="non-stoichiometric compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="8298" end="8314" title="decimal fraction" label="decimal fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q741844" start="8640" end="8657" title="homologous series" label="homologous series"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="8693" end="8701" title="alcohols" label="alcohols"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="8777" end="8785" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="8787" end="8794" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q112223958" start="8796" end="8804" title="propanol" label="propanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="9028" end="9034" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="9035" end="9039" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="9046" end="9054" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="9089" end="9097" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="9143" end="9159" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925" start="9178" end="9196" title="alphabetical order" label="alphabetical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="9204" end="9220" title="chemical symbols" label="chemical symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144915" start="9604" end="9625" title="lexicographical order" label="lexicographical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953108" start="9644" end="9651" title="collation" label="collate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9751" end="9764" title="Edwin A. Hill" label="Edwin A. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="9772" end="9813" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="United States Patent and Trademark Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437643" start="10356" end="10368" title="Formula unit" label="Formula unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q32495" start="10371" end="10400" title="Glossary of chemical formulae" label="Glossary of chemical formulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="10403" end="10419" title="Nuclear notation" label="Nuclear notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="10422" end="10436" title="Periodic table" label="Periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q899274" start="10439" end="10455" title="Skeletal formula" label="Skeletal formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q466769" start="10458" end="10502" title="Simplified molecular-input line-entry system" label="Simplified molecular-input line-entry system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7044" wikidata="Q22671" url="?curid=7044" title="Beetle">
<text>Beetles are insects that form the order Coleoptera (), in the superorder Holometabola. Their front pair of wings are hardened into wing-cases, elytra, distinguishing them from most other insects. The Coleoptera, with about 400,000 described species, is the largest of all orders, constituting almost 40% of described insects and 25% of all known animal species; new species are discovered frequently, with estimates suggesting that there are between 0.9 and 2.1 million total species. However, the number of beetle species is challenged by the number of species in dipterans (flies) and hymenopterans (wasps). 

Found in almost every habitat except the sea and the polar regions, they interact with their ecosystems in several ways: beetles often feed on plants and fungi, break down animal and plant debris, and eat other invertebrates. Some species are serious agricultural pests, such as the Colorado potato beetle, while others such as Coccinellidae (ladybirds or ladybugs) eat aphids, scale insects, thrips, and other plant-sucking insects that damage crops. Some others also have unusual characteristics, such as fireflies, which use a light-emitting organ for mating and communication purposes.

Beetles typically have a particularly hard exoskeleton including the elytra, though some such as the rove beetles have very short elytra while blister beetles have softer elytra. The general anatomy of a beetle is quite uniform and typical of insects, although there are several examples of novelty, such as adaptations in water beetles which trap air bubbles under the elytra for use while diving. Beetles are holometabolans, which means that they undergo complete metamorphosis, with a series of conspicuous and relatively abrupt changes in body structure between hatching and becoming adult after a relatively immobile pupal stage. Some, such as stag beetles, have a marked sexual dimorphism, the males possessing enormously enlarged mandibles which they use to fight other males. Many beetles are aposematic, with bright colors and patterns warning of their toxicity, while others are harmless Batesian mimics of such insects. Many beetles, including those that live in sandy places, have effective camouflage.

Beetles are prominent in human culture, from the sacred scarabs of ancient Egypt to beetlewing art and use as pets or fighting insects for entertainment and gambling. Many beetle groups are brightly and attractively colored making them objects of collection and decorative displays. Over 300 species are used as food, mostly as larvae; species widely consumed include mealworms and rhinoceros beetle larvae. However, the major impact of beetles on human life is as agricultural, forestry, and horticultural pests. Serious pest species include the boll weevil of cotton, the Colorado potato beetle, the coconut hispine beetle, the mountain pine beetle, and many others. Most beetles, however, do not cause economic damage and some, such as numerous species of lady beetles, are beneficial by helping to control insect pests. The scientific study of beetles is known as coleopterology.

==Etymology==
The name of the taxonomic order, Coleoptera, comes from the Greek &quot;koleopteros&quot; (κολεόπτερος), given to the group by Aristotle for their elytra, hardened shield-like forewings, from &quot;koleos&quot;, sheath, and &quot;pteron&quot;, wing. The English name beetle comes from the Old English word &quot;bitela&quot;, little biter, related to &quot;bītan&quot; (to bite), leading to Middle English &quot;betylle&quot;. Another Old English name for beetle is &quot;ċeafor&quot;, chafer, used in names such as cockchafer, from the Proto-Germanic *&quot;kebrô&quot; (&quot;beetle&quot;; compare German &quot;Käfer&quot;, Dutch &quot;kever&quot;, Afrikaans &quot;kewer&quot;).

==Distribution and diversity==
Beetles are by far the largest order of insects: the roughly 400,000 species make up about 40% of all insect species so far described, and about 25% of all animal species. A 2015 study provided four independent estimates of the total number of beetle species, giving a mean estimate of some 1.5 million with a &quot;surprisingly narrow range&quot; spanning all four estimates from a minimum of 0.9 to a maximum of 2.1 million beetle species. The four estimates made use of host-specificity relationships (1.5 to 1.9 million), ratios with other taxa (0.9 to 1.2 million), plant:beetle ratios (1.2 to 1.3), and extrapolations based on body size by year of description (1.7 to 2.1 million).

This immense diversity led the evolutionary biologist J. B. S. Haldane to quip, when some theologians asked him what could be inferred about the mind of the Christian God from the works of His Creation, &quot;An inordinate fondness for beetles&quot;.

However, the ranking of beetles as most diverse has been challenged. Multiple studies posit that Diptera (flies) and/or Hymenoptera (sawflies, wasps, ants and bees) may have more species.

Beetles are found in nearly all habitats, including freshwater and coastal habitats, wherever vegetative foliage is found, from trees and their bark to flowers, leaves, and underground near roots - even inside plants in galls, in every plant tissue, including dead or decaying ones. Tropical forest canopies have a large and diverse fauna of beetles, including Carabidae, Chrysomelidae, and Scarabaeidae.

The heaviest beetle, indeed the heaviest insect stage, is the larva of the goliath beetle, &quot;Goliathus goliatus&quot;, which can attain a mass of at least and a length of . Adult male goliath beetles are the heaviest beetle in its adult stage, weighing and measuring up to . Adult elephant beetles, &quot;Megasoma elephas&quot; and &quot;Megasoma actaeon&quot; often reach and .

The longest beetle is the Hercules beetle &quot;Dynastes hercules&quot;, with a maximum overall length of at least 16.7 cm (6.6 in) including the very long pronotal horn. The smallest recorded beetle and the smallest free-living insect (), is the featherwing beetle &quot;Scydosella musawasensis&quot; which may measure as little as 325 μm in length.

==Evolution==
===Late Paleozoic and Triassic===

The oldest known beetle is &quot;Coleopsis&quot;, from the earliest Permian (Asselian) of Germany, around 295 million years ago. Early beetles from the Permian, which are collectively grouped into the &quot;Protocoleoptera&quot; are thought to have been xylophagous (wood eating) and wood boring. Fossils from this time have been found in Siberia and Europe, for instance in the red slate fossil beds of Niedermoschel near Mainz, Germany. Further fossils have been found in Obora, Czech Republic and Tshekarda in the Ural mountains, Russia. However, there are only a few fossils from North America before the middle Permian, although both Asia and North America had been united to Euramerica. The first discoveries from North America made in the Wellington Formation of Oklahoma were published in 2005 and 2008. The earliest members of modern beetle lineages appeared during the Late Permian. In the Permian–Triassic extinction event at the end of the Permian, most &quot;protocoleopteran&quot; lineages became extinct. Beetle diversity did not recover to pre-extinction levels until the Middle Triassic.

===Jurassic===
During the Jurassic (), there was a dramatic increase in the diversity of beetle families, including the development and growth of carnivorous and herbivorous species. The Chrysomeloidea diversified around the same time, feeding on a wide array of plant hosts from cycads and conifers to angiosperms. Close to the Upper Jurassic, the Cupedidae decreased, but the diversity of the early plant-eating species increased. Most recent plant-eating beetles feed on flowering plants or angiosperms, whose success contributed to a doubling of plant-eating species during the Middle Jurassic. However, the increase of the number of beetle families during the Cretaceous does not correlate with the increase of the number of angiosperm species. Around the same time, numerous primitive weevils (e.g. Curculionoidea) and click beetles (e.g. Elateroidea) appeared. The first jewel beetles (e.g. Buprestidae) are present, but they remained rare until the Cretaceous. The first scarab beetles were not coprophagous but presumably fed on rotting wood with the help of fungus; they are an early example of a mutualistic relationship.

There are more than 150 important fossil sites from the Jurassic, the majority in Eastern Europe and North Asia. Outstanding sites include Solnhofen in Upper Bavaria, Germany, Karatau in South Kazakhstan, the Yixian formation in Liaoning, North China, as well as the Jiulongshan formation and further fossil sites in Mongolia. In North America there are only a few sites with fossil records of insects from the Jurassic, namely the shell limestone deposits in the Hartford basin, the Deerfield basin and the Newark basin.

===Cretaceous===
The Cretaceous saw the fragmenting of the southern landmass, with the opening of the southern Atlantic Ocean and the isolation of New Zealand, while South America, Antarctica, and Australia grew more distant. The diversity of Cupedidae and Archostemata decreased considerably. Predatory ground beetles (Carabidae) and rove beetles (Staphylinidae) began to distribute into different patterns; the Carabidae predominantly occurred in the warm regions, while the Staphylinidae and click beetles (Elateridae) preferred temperate climates. Likewise, predatory species of Cleroidea and Cucujoidea hunted their prey under the bark of trees together with the jewel beetles (Buprestidae). The diversity of jewel beetles increased rapidly, as they were the primary consumers of wood, while longhorn beetles (Cerambycidae) were rather rare: their diversity increased only towards the end of the Upper Cretaceous. The first coprophagous beetles are from the Upper Cretaceous and may have lived on the excrement of herbivorous dinosaurs. The first species where both larvae and adults are adapted to an aquatic lifestyle are found. Whirligig beetles (Gyrinidae) were moderately diverse, although other early beetles (e.g. Dytiscidae) were less, with the most widespread being the species of Coptoclavidae, which preyed on aquatic fly larvae.
A 2020 review of the palaeoecological interpretations of fossil beetles from Cretaceous ambers has suggested that saproxylicity was the most common feeding strategy, with fungivorous species in particular appearing to dominate.

Many fossil sites worldwide contain beetles from the Cretaceous. Most are in Europe and Asia and belong to the temperate climate zone during the Cretaceous. Lower Cretaceous sites include the Crato fossil beds in the Araripe basin in the Ceará, North Brazil, as well as overlying Santana formation; the latter was near the equator at that time. In Spain, important sites are near Montsec and Las Hoyas. In Australia, the Koonwarra fossil beds of the Korumburra group, South Gippsland, Victoria, are noteworthy. Major sites from the Upper Cretaceous include Kzyl-Dzhar in South Kazakhstan and Arkagala in Russia.

===Cenozoic===

Beetle fossils are abundant in the Cenozoic; by the Quaternary (up to 1.6 mya), fossil species are identical to living ones, while from the Late Miocene (5.7 mya) the fossils are still so close to modern forms that they are most likely the ancestors of living species. The large oscillations in climate during the Quaternary caused beetles to change their geographic distributions so much that current location gives little clue to the biogeographical history of a species. It is evident that geographic isolation of populations must often have been broken as insects moved under the influence of changing climate, causing mixing of gene pools, rapid evolution, and extinctions, especially in middle latitudes.

==Phylogeny==
The very large number of beetle species poses special problems for classification. Some families contain tens of thousands of species, and need to be divided into subfamilies and tribes. Polyphaga is the largest suborder, containing more than 300,000 described species in more than 170 families, including rove beetles (Staphylinidae), scarab beetles (Scarabaeidae), blister beetles (Meloidae), stag beetles (Lucanidae) and true weevils (Curculionidae). These polyphagan beetle groups can be identified by the presence of cervical sclerites (hardened parts of the head used as points of attachment for muscles) absent in the other suborders.
Adephaga contains about 10 families of largely predatory beetles, includes ground beetles (Carabidae), water beetles (Dytiscidae) and whirligig beetles (Gyrinidae). In these insects, the testes are tubular and the first abdominal sternum (a plate of the exoskeleton) is divided by the hind coxae (the basal joints of the beetle&#x27;s legs).
Archostemata contains four families of mainly wood-eating beetles, including reticulated beetles (Cupedidae) and the telephone-pole beetle.
The Archostemata have an exposed plate called the metatrochantin in front of the basal segment or coxa of the hind leg. Myxophaga contains about 65 described species in four families, mostly very small, including Hydroscaphidae and the genus &quot;Sphaerius&quot;. The myxophagan beetles are small and mostly alga-feeders. Their mouthparts are characteristic in lacking galeae and having a mobile tooth on their left mandible.

The consistency of beetle morphology, in particular their possession of elytra, has long suggested that Coleoptera is monophyletic, though there have been doubts about the arrangement of the suborders, namely the Adephaga, Archostemata, Myxophaga and Polyphaga within that clade. The twisted-wing parasites, Strepsiptera, are thought to be a sister group to the beetles, having split from them in the Early Permian.

Molecular phylogenetic analysis confirms that the Coleoptera are monophyletic. Duane McKenna et al. (2015) used eight nuclear genes for 367 species from 172 of 183 Coleopteran families. They split the Adephaga into 2 clades, Hydradephaga and Geadephaga, broke up the Cucujoidea into 3 clades, and placed the Lymexyloidea within the Tenebrionoidea. The Polyphaga appear to date from the Triassic. Most extant beetle families appear to have arisen in the Cretaceous. The cladogram is based on McKenna (2015). The number of species in each group (mainly superfamilies) is shown in parentheses, and boldface if over 10,000. English common names are given where possible. Dates of origin of major groups are shown in italics in millions of years ago (mya).

==External morphology==
Beetles are generally characterized by a particularly hard exoskeleton and hard forewings (elytra) not usable for flying. Almost all beetles have mandibles that move in a horizontal plane. The mouthparts are rarely suctorial, though they are sometimes reduced; the maxillae always bear palps. The antennae usually have 11 or fewer segments, except in some groups like the Cerambycidae (longhorn beetles) and the Rhipiceridae (cicada parasite beetles). The coxae of the legs are usually located recessed within a coxal cavity. The genitalic structures are telescoped into the last abdominal segment in all extant beetles. Beetle larvae can often be confused with those of other holometabolan groups. The beetle&#x27;s exoskeleton is made up of numerous plates, called sclerites, separated by thin sutures. This design provides armored defenses while maintaining flexibility. The general anatomy of a beetle is quite uniform, although specific organs and appendages vary greatly in appearance and function between the many families in the order. Like all insects, beetles&#x27; bodies are divided into three sections: the head, the thorax, and the abdomen. Because there are so many species, identification is quite difficult, and relies on attributes including the shape of the antennae, the tarsal formulae and shapes of these small segments on the legs, the mouthparts, and the ventral plates (sterna, pleura, coxae). In many species accurate identification can only be made by examination of the unique male genitalic structures.

===Head===
The head, having mouthparts projecting forward or sometimes downturned, is usually heavily sclerotized and is sometimes very large. The eyes are compound and may display remarkable adaptability, as in the case of the aquatic whirligig beetles (Gyrinidae), where they are split to allow a view both above and below the waterline. A few Longhorn beetles (Cerambycidae) and weevils as well as some fireflies (Rhagophthalmidae) have divided eyes, while many have eyes that are notched, and a few have ocelli, small, simple eyes usually farther back on the head (on the vertex); these are more common in larvae than in adults. The anatomical organization of the compound eyes may be modified and depends on whether a species is primarily crepuscular, or diurnally or nocturnally active. Ocelli are found in the adult carpet beetle (as a single central ocellus in Dermestidae), some rove beetles (Omaliinae), and the Derodontidae.

Beetle antennae are primarily organs of sensory perception and can detect motion, odor and chemical substances, but may also be used to physically feel a beetle&#x27;s environment. Beetle families may use antennae in different ways. For example, when moving quickly, tiger beetles may not be able to see very well and instead hold their antennae rigidly in front of them in order to avoid obstacles.
Certain Cerambycidae use antennae to balance, and blister beetles may use them for grasping. Some aquatic beetle species may use antennae for gathering air and passing it under the body whilst submerged. Equally, some families use antennae during mating, and a few species use them for defense. In the cerambycid &quot;Onychocerus albitarsis&quot;, the antennae have venom injecting structures used in defense, which is unique among arthropods. Antennae vary greatly in form, sometimes between the sexes, but are often similar within any given family. Antennae may be , , , , (either on one side or both, bipectinate), or . The physical variation of antennae is important for the identification of many beetle groups. The Curculionidae have elbowed or geniculate antennae. Feather like flabellate antennae are a restricted form found in the Rhipiceridae and a few other families. The Silphidae have a capitate antennae with a spherical head at the tip. The Scarabaeidae typically have lamellate antennae with the terminal segments extended into long flat structures stacked together. The Carabidae typically have thread-like antennae. The antennae arises between the eye and the mandibles and in the Tenebrionidae, the antennae rise in front of a notch that breaks the usually circular outline of the compound eye. They are segmented and usually consist of 11 parts, the first part is called the scape and the second part is the pedicel. The other segments are jointly called the flagellum.

Beetles have mouthparts like those of grasshoppers. The mandibles appear as large pincers on the front of some beetles. The mandibles are a pair of hard, often tooth-like structures that move horizontally to grasp, crush, or cut food or enemies (see defence, below). Two pairs of finger-like appendages, the maxillary and labial palpi, are found around the mouth in most beetles, serving to move food into the mouth. In many species, the mandibles are sexually dimorphic, with those of the males enlarged enormously compared with those of females of the same species.

===Thorax===
The thorax is segmented into the two discernible parts, the pro- and pterothorax. The pterothorax is the fused meso- and metathorax, which are commonly separated in other insect species, although flexibly articulate from the prothorax. When viewed from below, the thorax is that part from which all three pairs of legs and both pairs of wings arise. The abdomen is everything posterior to the thorax. When viewed from above, most beetles appear to have three clear sections, but this is deceptive: on the beetle&#x27;s upper surface, the middle section is a hard plate called the pronotum, which is only the front part of the thorax; the back part of the thorax is concealed by the beetle&#x27;s wings. This further segmentation is usually best seen on the abdomen.

===Legs===
The multisegmented legs end in two to five small segments called tarsi. Like many other insect orders, beetles have claws, usually one pair, on the end of the last tarsal segment of each leg. While most beetles use their legs for walking, legs have been variously adapted for other uses. Aquatic beetles including the Dytiscidae (diving beetles), Haliplidae, and many species of Hydrophilidae, the legs, often the last pair, are modified for swimming, typically with rows of long hairs. Male diving beetles have suctorial cups on their forelegs that they use to grasp females. Other beetles have fossorial legs widened and often spined for digging. Species with such adaptations are found among the scarabs, ground beetles, and clown beetles (Histeridae). The hind legs of some beetles, such as flea beetles (within Chrysomelidae) and flea weevils (within Curculionidae), have enlarged femurs that help them leap.

===Wings===
The forewings of beetles are not used for flight, but form elytra which cover the hind part of the body and protect the hindwings. The elytra are usually hard shell-like structures which must be raised to allow the hindwings to move for flight. However, in the soldier beetles (Cantharidae), the elytra are soft, earning this family the name of leatherwings. Other soft wing beetles include the net-winged beetle &quot;Calopteron discrepans&quot;, which has brittle wings that rupture easily in order to release chemicals for defense.

Beetles&#x27; flight wings are crossed with veins and are folded after landing, often along these veins, and stored below the elytra. A fold (&quot;jugum&quot;) of the membrane at the base of each wing is characteristic. Some beetles have lost the ability to fly. These include some ground beetles (Carabidae) and some true weevils (Curculionidae), as well as desert- and cave-dwelling species of other families. Many have the two elytra fused together, forming a solid shield over the abdomen. In a few families, both the ability to fly and the elytra have been lost, as in the glow-worms (Phengodidae), where the females resemble larvae throughout their lives. The presence of elytra and wings does not always indicate that the beetle will fly. For example, the tansy beetle walks between habitats despite being physically capable of flight.

===Abdomen===
The abdomen is the section behind the metathorax, made up of a series of rings, each with a hole for breathing and respiration, called a spiracle, composing three different segmented sclerites: the tergum, pleura, and the sternum. The tergum in almost all species is membranous, or usually soft and concealed by the wings and elytra when not in flight. The pleura are usually small or hidden in some species, with each pleuron having a single spiracle. The sternum is the most widely visible part of the abdomen, being a more or less sclerotized segment. The abdomen itself does not have any appendages, but some (for example, Mordellidae) have articulating sternal lobes.

==Anatomy and physiology==
===Digestive system===
The digestive system of beetles is primarily adapted for a herbivorous diet. Digestion takes place mostly in the anterior midgut, although in predatory groups like the Carabidae, most digestion occurs in the crop by means of midgut enzymes. In the Elateridae, the larvae are liquid feeders that extraorally digest their food by secreting enzymes. The alimentary canal basically consists of a short, narrow pharynx, a widened expansion, the crop, and a poorly developed gizzard. This is followed by the midgut, that varies in dimensions between species, with a large amount of cecum, and the hindgut, with varying lengths. There are typically four to six Malpighian tubules.

===Nervous system===
The nervous system in beetles contains all the types found in insects, varying between different species, from three thoracic and seven or eight abdominal ganglia which can be distinguished to that in which all the thoracic and abdominal ganglia are fused to form a composite structure.

===Respiratory system===
Like most insects, beetles inhale air, for the oxygen it contains, and exhale carbon dioxide, via a tracheal system. Air enters the body through spiracles, and circulates within the haemocoel in a system of tracheae and tracheoles, through whose walls the gases can diffuse.

Diving beetles, such as the Dytiscidae, carry a bubble of air with them when they dive. Such a bubble may be contained under the elytra or against the body by specialized hydrophobic hairs. The bubble covers at least some of the spiracles, permitting air to enter the tracheae. The function of the bubble is not only to contain a store of air but to act as a physical gill. The air that it traps is in contact with oxygenated water, so as the animal&#x27;s consumption depletes the oxygen in the bubble, more oxygen can diffuse in to replenish it. Carbon dioxide is more soluble in water than either oxygen or nitrogen, so it readily diffuses out faster than in. Nitrogen is the most plentiful gas in the bubble, and the least soluble, so it constitutes a relatively static component of the bubble and acts as a stable medium for respiratory gases to accumulate in and pass through. Occasional visits to the surface are sufficient for the beetle to re-establish the constitution of the bubble.

===Circulatory system===
Like other insects, beetles have open circulatory systems, based on hemolymph rather than blood. As in other insects, a segmented tube-like heart is attached to the dorsal wall of the hemocoel. It has paired inlets or &quot;ostia&quot; at intervals down its length, and circulates the hemolymph from the main cavity of the haemocoel and out through the anterior cavity in the head.

===Specialized organs===
Different glands are specialized for different pheromones to attract mates. Pheromones from species of Rutelinae are produced from epithelial cells lining the inner surface of the apical abdominal segments; amino acid-based pheromones of Melolonthinae are produced from eversible glands on the abdominal apex. Other species produce different types of pheromones. Dermestids produce esters, and species of Elateridae produce fatty acid-derived aldehydes and acetates. To attract a mate, fireflies (Lampyridae) use modified fat body cells with transparent surfaces backed with reflective uric acid crystals to produce light by bioluminescence. Light production is highly efficient, by oxidation of luciferin catalyzed by enzymes (luciferases) in the presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and oxygen, producing oxyluciferin, carbon dioxide, and light.

Tympanal organs or hearing organs consist of a membrane (tympanum) stretched across a frame backed by an air sac and associated sensory neurons, are found in two families. Several species of the genus &quot;Cicindela&quot; (Carabidae) have hearing organs on the dorsal surfaces of their first abdominal segments beneath the wings; two tribes in the Dynastinae (within the Scarabaeidae) have hearing organs just beneath their pronotal shields or neck membranes. Both families are sensitive to ultrasonic frequencies, with strong evidence indicating they function to detect the presence of bats by their ultrasonic echolocation.

==Reproduction and development==
Beetles are members of the superorder Holometabola, and accordingly most of them undergo complete metamorphosis. The typical form of metamorphosis in beetles passes through four main stages: the egg, the larva, the pupa, and the imago or adult. The larvae are commonly called grubs and the pupa sometimes is called the chrysalis. In some species, the pupa may be enclosed in a cocoon constructed by the larva towards the end of its final instar. Some beetles, such as typical members of the families Meloidae and Rhipiphoridae, go further, undergoing hypermetamorphosis in which the first instar takes the form of a triungulin.

===Mating===
Some beetles have intricate mating behaviour. Pheromone communication is often important in locating a mate.
Different species use different pheromones. Scarab beetles such as the Rutelinae use pheromones derived from fatty acid synthesis and others use pheromones from organic compounds, while other scarabs such as the Melolonthinae use amino acids and terpenoids. Another way beetles find mates is seen in the fireflies (Lampyridae) which are bioluminescent, with abdominal light-producing organs. The males and females engage in a complex dialog before mating; each species has a unique combination of flight patterns, duration, composition, and intensity of the light produced.

Before mating, males and females may stridulate, or vibrate the objects they are on. In the Meloidae, the male climbs onto the dorsum of the female and strokes his antennae on her head, palps, and antennae. In &quot;Eupompha&quot;, the male draws his antennae along his longitudinal vertex. They may not mate at all if they do not perform the precopulatory ritual. This mating behavior may be different amongst dispersed populations of the same species. For example, the mating of a Russian population of tansy beetle (&quot;Chrysolina graminis&quot;) is preceded by an elaborate ritual involving the male tapping the female&#x27;s eyes, pronotum and antennae with its antennae, which is not evident in the population of this species in the United Kingdom.

In another example, the intromittent organ of male thistle tortoise beetles is a long, tube-like structure called the flagellum which is thin and curved. When not in use, the flagellum is stored inside the abdomen of the male and can extend out to be longer than the male when needed. During mating, this organ bends to the complex shape of the female reproductive organ, which includes a coiled duct that the male must penetrate with the organ. Furthermore, these physical properties of the thistle tortioise beetle have been studied because the ability of a thin, flexible structure to harden without buckling or rupturing is mechanically challenging and may have important implications for the development of microscopic catheters in modern medicine.

Competition can play a part in the mating rituals of species such as burying beetles (&quot;Nicrophorus&quot;), the insects fighting to determine which can mate. Many male beetles are territorial and fiercely defend their territories from intruding males. In such species, the male often has horns on the head or thorax, making its body length greater than that of a female. Copulation is generally quick, but in some cases lasts for several hours. During copulation, sperm cells are transferred to the female to fertilize the egg.

===Life cycle===
====Egg====
Essentially all beetles lay eggs, though some myrmecophilous Aleocharinae and some Chrysomelinae which live in mountains or the subarctic are ovoviviparous, laying eggs which hatch almost immediately. Beetle eggs generally have smooth surfaces and are soft, though the Cupedidae have hard eggs. Eggs vary widely between species: the eggs tend to be small in species with many instars (larval stages), and in those that lay large numbers of eggs.
A female may lay from several dozen to several thousand eggs during her lifetime, depending on the extent of parental care. This ranges from the simple laying of eggs under a leaf, to the parental care provided by scarab beetles, which house, feed and protect their young. The Attelabidae roll leaves and lay their eggs inside the roll for protection.

====Larva====
The larva is usually the principal feeding stage of the beetle life cycle. Larvae tend to feed voraciously once they emerge from their eggs. Some feed externally on plants, such as those of certain leaf beetles, while others feed within their food sources. Examples of internal feeders are most Buprestidae and longhorn beetles. The larvae of many beetle families are predatory like the adults (ground beetles, ladybirds, rove beetles). The larval period varies between species, but can be as long as several years. The larvae of skin beetles undergo a degree of reversed development when starved, and later grow back to the previously attained level of maturity. The cycle can be repeated many times (see Biological immortality). Larval morphology is highly varied amongst species, with well-developed and sclerotized heads, distinguishable thoracic and abdominal segments (usually the tenth, though sometimes the eighth or ninth).

Beetle larvae can be differentiated from other insect larvae by their hardened, often darkened heads, the presence of chewing mouthparts, and spiracles along the sides of their bodies. Like adult beetles, the larvae are varied in appearance, particularly between beetle families. Beetles with somewhat flattened, highly mobile larvae include the ground beetles and rove beetles; their larvae are described as campodeiform. Some beetle larvae resemble hardened worms with dark head capsules and minute legs. These are elateriform larvae, and are found in the click beetle (Elateridae) and darkling beetle (Tenebrionidae) families. Some elateriform larvae of click beetles are known as wireworms. Beetles in the Scarabaeoidea have short, thick larvae described as scarabaeiform, more commonly known as grubs.

All beetle larvae go through several instars, which are the developmental stages between each moult. In many species, the larvae simply increase in size with each successive instar as more food is consumed. In some cases, however, more dramatic changes occur. Among certain beetle families or genera, particularly those that exhibit parasitic lifestyles, the first instar (the planidium) is highly mobile to search out a host, while the following instars are more sedentary and remain on or within their host. This is known as hypermetamorphosis; it occurs in the Meloidae, Micromalthidae, and Ripiphoridae. The blister beetle &quot;Epicauta vittata&quot; (Meloidae), for example, has three distinct larval stages. Its first stage, the triungulin, has longer legs to go in search of the eggs of grasshoppers. After feeding for a week it moults to the second stage, called the caraboid stage, which resembles the larva of a carabid beetle. In another week it moults and assumes the appearance of a scarabaeid larva—the scarabaeidoid stage. Its penultimate larval stage is the pseudo-pupa or the coarcate larva, which will overwinter and pupate until the next spring.

The larval period can vary widely. A fungus feeding staphylinid &quot;Phanerota fasciata&quot; undergoes three moults in 3.2 days at room temperature while &quot;Anisotoma&quot; sp. (Leiodidae) completes its larval stage in the fruiting body of slime mold in 2 days and possibly represents the fastest growing beetles. Dermestid beetles, &quot;Trogoderma inclusum&quot; can remain in an extended larval state under unfavourable conditions, even reducing their size between moults. A larva is reported to have survived for 3.5 years in an enclosed container.

====Pupa and adult====
As with all holometabolans, beetle larvae pupate, and from these pupae emerge fully formed, sexually mature adult beetles, or imagos. Pupae never have mandibles (they are adecticous). In most pupae, the appendages are not attached to the body and are said to be exarate; in a few beetles (Staphylinidae, Ptiliidae etc.) the appendages are fused with the body (termed as obtect pupae).

Adults have extremely variable lifespans, from weeks to years, depending on the species. Some wood-boring beetles can have extremely long life-cycles. It is believed that when furniture or house timbers are infested by beetle larvae, the timber already contained the larvae when it was first sawn up. A birch bookcase 40 years old released adult &quot;Eburia quadrigeminata&quot; (Cerambycidae), while &quot;Buprestis aurulenta&quot; and other Buprestidae have been documented as emerging as much as 51 years after manufacture of wooden items.

==Behaviour==
===Locomotion===
The elytra allow beetles to both fly and move through confined spaces, doing so by folding the delicate wings under the elytra while not flying, and folding their wings out just before takeoff. The unfolding and folding of the wings is operated by muscles attached to the wing base; as long as the tension on the radial and cubital veins remains, the wings remain straight. Some beetle species (many Cetoniinae; some Scarabaeinae, Curculionidae and Buprestidae) fly with the elytra closed, with the metathoracic wings extended under the lateral elytra margins. The altitude reached by beetles in flight varies. One study investigating the flight altitude of the ladybird species &quot;Coccinella septempunctata&quot; and &quot;Harmonia axyridis&quot; using radar showed that, whilst the majority in flight over a single location were at 150–195 m above ground level, some reached altitudes of over 1100 m.

Many rove beetles have greatly reduced elytra, and while they are capable of flight, they most often move on the ground: their soft bodies and strong abdominal muscles make them flexible, easily able to wriggle into small cracks.

Aquatic beetles use several techniques for retaining air beneath the water&#x27;s surface. Diving beetles (Dytiscidae) hold air between the abdomen and the elytra when diving. Hydrophilidae have hairs on their under surface that retain a layer of air against their bodies. Adult crawling water beetles use both their elytra and their hind coxae (the basal segment of the back legs) in air retention, while whirligig beetles simply carry an air bubble down with them whenever they dive.

===Communication===
Beetles have a variety of ways to communicate, including the use of pheromones. The mountain pine beetle emits a pheromone to attract other beetles to a tree. The mass of beetles are able to overcome the chemical defenses of the tree. After the tree&#x27;s defenses have been exhausted, the beetles emit an anti-aggregation pheromone. This species can stridulate to communicate, but others may use sound to defend themselves when attacked.

===Parental care===

Parental care is found in a few families of beetle, perhaps for protection against adverse conditions and predators. The rove beetle &quot;Bledius spectabilis&quot; lives in salt marshes, so the eggs and larvae are endangered by the rising tide. The maternal beetle patrols the eggs and larvae, burrowing to keep them from flooding and asphyxiating, and protects them from the predatory carabid beetle &quot;Dicheirotrichus gustavii&quot; and from the parasitoidal wasp &quot;Barycnemis blediator&quot;, which kills some 15% of the larvae.

Burying beetles are attentive parents, and participate in cooperative care and feeding of their offspring. Both parents work to bury small animal carcass to serve as a food resource for their young and build a brood chamber around it. The parents prepare the carcass and protect it from competitors and from early decomposition. After their eggs hatch, the parents keep the larvae clean of fungus and bacteria and help the larvae feed by regurgitating food for them.

Some dung beetles provide parental care, collecting herbivore dung and laying eggs within that food supply, an instance of mass provisioning. Some species do not leave after this stage, but remain to safeguard their offspring.

Most species of beetles do not display parental care behaviors after the eggs have been laid.

Subsociality, where females guard their offspring, is well-documented in two families of Chrysomelidae, Cassidinae and Chrysomelinae.

===Eusociality===
Eusociality involves cooperative brood care (including brood care of offspring from other individuals), overlapping generations within a colony of adults, and a division of labor into reproductive and non-reproductive groups. Few organisms outside Hymenoptera exhibit this behavior; the only beetle to do so is the weevil &quot;Austroplatypus incompertus&quot;. This Australian species lives in horizontal networks of tunnels, in the heartwood of &quot;Eucalyptus&quot; trees. It is one of more than 300 species of wood-boring Ambrosia beetles which distribute the spores of ambrosia fungi. The fungi grow in the beetles&#x27; tunnels, providing food for the beetles and their larvae; female offspring remain in the tunnels and maintain the fungal growth, probably never reproducing. Cooperative brood care is also found in the bess beetles (Passalidae) where the larvae feed on the semi-digested faeces of the adults.

===Feeding===
Beetles are able to exploit a wide diversity of food sources available in their many habitats. Some are omnivores, eating both plants and animals. Other beetles are highly specialized in their diet. Many species of leaf beetles, longhorn beetles, and weevils are very host-specific, feeding on only a single species of plant. Ground beetles and rove beetles (Staphylinidae), among others, are primarily carnivorous and catch and consume many other arthropods and small prey, such as earthworms and snails. While most predatory beetles are generalists, a few species have more specific prey requirements or preferences. In some species, digestive ability relies upon a symbiotic relationship with fungi - some beetles have yeasts living their guts, including some yeasts previously undiscovered anywhere else.

Decaying organic matter is a primary diet for many species. This can range from dung, which is consumed by coprophagous species (such as certain scarab beetles in the Scarabaeidae), to dead animals, which are eaten by necrophagous species (such as the carrion beetles, Silphidae). Some beetles found in dung and carrion are in fact predatory. These include members of the Histeridae and Silphidae, preying on the larvae of coprophagous and necrophagous insects. Many beetles feed under bark, some feed on wood while others feed on fungi growing on wood or leaf-litter. Some beetles have special mycangia, structures for the transport of fungal spores.

==Ecology==

===Anti-predator adaptations===
Beetles, both adults and larvae, are the prey of many animal predators including mammals from bats to rodents, birds, lizards, amphibians, fishes, dragonflies, robberflies, reduviid bugs, ants, other beetles, and spiders. Beetles use a variety of anti-predator adaptations to defend themselves. These include camouflage and mimicry against predators that hunt by sight, toxicity, and defensive behaviour.

====Camouflage====
Camouflage is common and widespread among beetle families, especially those that feed on wood or vegetation, such as leaf beetles (Chrysomelidae, which are often green) and weevils. In some species, sculpturing or various colored scales or hairs cause beetles such as the avocado weevil &quot;Heilipus apiatus&quot; to resemble bird dung or other inedible objects. Many beetles that live in sandy environments blend in with the coloration of that substrate.

====Mimicry and aposematism====

Some longhorn beetles (Cerambycidae) are effective Batesian mimics of wasps. Beetles may combine coloration with behavioural mimicry, acting like the wasps they already closely resemble. Many other beetles, including ladybirds, blister beetles, and lycid beetles secrete distasteful or toxic substances to make them unpalatable or poisonous, and are often aposematic, where bright or contrasting coloration warn off predators; many beetles and other insects mimic these chemically protected species.


Chemical defense is important in some species, usually being advertised by bright aposematic colors. Some Tenebrionidae use their posture for releasing noxious chemicals to warn off predators. Chemical defenses may serve purposes other than just protection from vertebrates, such as protection from a wide range of microbes. Some species sequester chemicals from the plants they feed on, incorporating them into their own defenses.

Other species have special glands to produce deterrent chemicals. The defensive glands of carabid ground beetles produce a variety of hydrocarbons, aldehydes, phenols, quinones, esters, and acids released from an opening at the end of the abdomen. African carabid beetles (for example, &quot;Anthia&quot;) employ the same chemicals as ants: formic acid. Bombardier beetles have well-developed pygidial glands that empty from the sides of the intersegment membranes between the seventh and eighth abdominal segments. The gland is made of two containing chambers, one for hydroquinones and hydrogen peroxide, the other holding hydrogen peroxide and catalase enzymes. These chemicals mix and result in an explosive ejection, reaching a temperature of around , with the breakdown of hydroquinone to hydrogen, oxygen, and quinone. The oxygen propels the noxious chemical spray as a jet that can be aimed accurately at predators.

====Other defenses====
Large ground-dwelling beetles such as Carabidae, the rhinoceros beetle and the longhorn beetles defend themselves using strong mandibles, or heavily sclerotised (armored) spines or horns to deter or fight off predators. Many species of weevil that feed out in the open on leaves of plants react to attack by employing a drop-off reflex. Some combine it with thanatosis, in which they close up their appendages and &quot;play dead&quot;. The click beetles (Elateridae) can suddenly catapult themselves out of danger by releasing the energy stored by a click mechanism, which consists of a stout spine on the prosternum and a matching groove in the mesosternum. Some species startle an attacker by producing sounds through a process known as stridulation.

===Parasitism===
A few species of beetles are ectoparasitic on mammals. One such species, &quot;Platypsyllus castoris&quot;, parasitises beavers (&quot;Castor&quot; spp.). This beetle lives as a parasite both as a larva and as an adult, feeding on epidermal tissue and possibly on skin secretions and wound exudates. They are strikingly flattened dorsoventrally, no doubt as an adaptation for slipping between the beavers&#x27; hairs. They are wingless and eyeless, as are many other ectoparasites. Others are kleptoparasites of other invertebrates, such as the small hive beetle (&quot;Aethina tumida&quot;) that infests honey bee nests, while many species are parasitic inquilines or commensal in the nests of ants. A few groups of beetles are primary parasitoids of other insects, feeding off of, and eventually killing their hosts.

===Pollination===
Beetle-pollinated flowers are usually large, greenish or off-white in color, and heavily scented. Scents may be spicy, fruity, or similar to decaying organic material. Beetles were most likely the first insects to pollinate flowers. Most beetle-pollinated flowers are flattened or dish-shaped, with pollen easily accessible, although they may include traps to keep the beetle longer. The plants&#x27; ovaries are usually well protected from the biting mouthparts of their pollinators. The beetle families that habitually pollinate flowers are the Buprestidae, Cantharidae, Cerambycidae, Cleridae, Dermestidae, Lycidae, Melyridae, Mordellidae, Nitidulidae and Scarabaeidae. Beetles may be particularly important in some parts of the world such as semiarid areas of southern Africa and southern California and the montane grasslands of KwaZulu-Natal in South Africa.

===Mutualism===
Mutualism is well known in a few beetles, such as the ambrosia beetle, which partners with fungi to digest the wood of dead trees. The beetles excavate tunnels in dead trees in which they cultivate fungal gardens, their sole source of nutrition. After landing on a suitable tree, an ambrosia beetle excavates a tunnel in which it releases spores of its fungal symbiont. The fungus penetrates the plant&#x27;s xylem tissue, digests it, and concentrates the nutrients on and near the surface of the beetle gallery, so the weevils and the fungus both benefit. The beetles cannot eat the wood due to toxins, and uses its relationship with fungi to help overcome the defenses of its host tree in order to provide nutrition for their larvae. Chemically mediated by a bacterially produced polyunsaturated peroxide, this mutualistic relationship between the beetle and the fungus is coevolved.
===Tolerance of extreme environments===

About 90% of beetle species enter a period of adult diapause, a quiet phase with reduced metabolism to tide unfavourable environmental conditions. Adult diapause is the most common form of diapause in Coleoptera. To endure the period without food (often lasting many months) adults prepare by accumulating reserves of lipids, glycogen, proteins and other substances needed for resistance to future hazardous changes of environmental conditions. This diapause is induced by signals heralding the arrival of the unfavourable season; usually the cue is photoperiodic. Short (decreasing) day length serves as a signal of approaching winter and induces winter diapause (hibernation). A study of hibernation in the Arctic beetle &quot;Pterostichus brevicornis&quot; showed that the body fat levels of adults were highest in autumn with the alimentary canal filled with food, but empty by the end of January. This loss of body fat was a gradual process, occurring in combination with dehydration.

All insects are poikilothermic, so the ability of a few beetles to live in extreme environments depends on their resilience to unusually high or low temperatures. The bark beetle &quot;Pityogenes chalcographus&quot; can survive whilst overwintering beneath tree bark; the Alaskan beetle &quot;Cucujus clavipes puniceus&quot; is able to withstand ; its larvae may survive . At these low temperatures, the formation of ice crystals in internal fluids is the biggest threat to survival to beetles, but this is prevented through the production of antifreeze proteins that stop water molecules from grouping together. The low temperatures experienced by &quot;Cucujus clavipes&quot; can be survived through their deliberate dehydration in conjunction with the antifreeze proteins. This concentrates the antifreezes several fold. The hemolymph of the mealworm beetle &quot;Tenebrio molitor&quot; contains several antifreeze proteins. The Alaskan beetle &quot;Upis ceramboides&quot; can survive −60 °C: its cryoprotectants are xylomannan, a molecule consisting of a sugar bound to a fatty acid, and the sugar-alcohol, threitol.

Conversely, desert dwelling beetles are adapted to tolerate high temperatures. For example, the Tenebrionid beetle &quot;Onymacris rugatipennis&quot; can withstand . Tiger beetles in hot, sandy areas are often whitish (for example, &quot;Habroscelimorpha dorsalis&quot;), to reflect more heat than a darker color would. These beetles also exhibits behavioural adaptions to tolerate the heat: they are able to stand erect on their tarsi to hold their bodies away from the hot ground, seek shade, and turn to face the sun so that only the front parts of their heads are directly exposed.

The fogstand beetle of the Namib Desert, &quot;Stenocara gracilipes&quot;, is able to collect water from fog, as its elytra have a textured surface combining hydrophilic (water-loving) bumps and waxy, hydrophobic troughs. The beetle faces the early morning breeze, holding up its abdomen; droplets condense on the elytra and run along ridges towards their mouthparts. Similar adaptations are found in several other Namib desert beetles such as &quot;Onymacris unguicularis&quot;.

Some terrestrial beetles that exploit shoreline and floodplain habitats have physiological adaptations for surviving floods. In the event of flooding, adult beetles may be mobile enough to move away from flooding, but larvae and pupa often cannot. Adults of &quot;Cicindela togata&quot; are unable to survive immersion in water, but larvae are able to survive a prolonged period, up to 6 days, of anoxia during floods. Anoxia tolerance in the larvae may have been sustained by switching to anaerobic metabolic pathways or by reducing metabolic rate. Anoxia tolerance in the adult carabid beetle &quot;Pelophilia borealis&quot; was tested in laboratory conditions and it was found that they could survive a continuous period of up to 127 days in an atmosphere of 99.9% nitrogen at 0 °C.

===Migration===
Many beetle species undertake annual mass movements which are termed as migrations. These include the pollen beetle &quot;Meligethes aeneus&quot; and many species of coccinellids. These mass movements may also be opportunistic, in search of food, rather than seasonal. A 2008 study of an unusually large outbreak of Mountain Pine Beetle (&quot;Dendroctonus ponderosae&quot;) in British Columbia found that beetles were capable of flying 30–110 km per day in densities of up to 18,600 beetles per hectare.

==Relationship to humans==
===In ancient cultures===

Several species of dung beetle, especially the sacred scarab, &quot;Scarabaeus sacer&quot;, were revered in Ancient Egypt. The hieroglyphic image of the beetle may have had existential, fictional, or ontologic significance. Images of the scarab in bone, ivory, stone, Egyptian faience, and precious metals are known from the Sixth Dynasty and up to the period of Roman rule. The scarab was of prime significance in the funerary cult of ancient Egypt. The scarab was linked to Khepri, the god of the rising sun, from the supposed resemblance of the rolling of the dung ball by the beetle to the rolling of the sun by the god. Some of ancient Egypt&#x27;s neighbors adopted the scarab motif for seals of varying types. The best-known of these are the Judean LMLK seals, where eight of 21 designs contained scarab beetles, which were used exclusively to stamp impressions on storage jars during the reign of Hezekiah. Beetles are mentioned as a symbol of the sun, as in ancient Egypt, in Plutarch&#x27;s 1st century &quot;Moralia&quot;. The Greek Magical Papyri of the 2nd century BC to the 5th century AD describe scarabs as an ingredient in a spell.

Pliny the Elder discusses beetles in his &quot;Natural History&quot;, describing the stag beetle: &quot;Some insects, for the preservation of their wings, are covered with (elytra)—the beetle, for instance, the wing of which is peculiarly fine and frail. To these insects a sting has been denied by Nature; but in one large kind we find horns of a remarkable length, two-pronged at the extremities, and forming pincers, which the animal closes when it is its intention to bite.&quot; The stag beetle is recorded in a Greek myth by Nicander and recalled by Antoninus Liberalis in which Cerambus is turned into a beetle: &quot;He can be seen on trunks and has hook-teeth, ever moving his jaws together. He is black, long and has hard wings like a great dung beetle&quot;. The story concludes with the comment that the beetles were used as toys by young boys, and that the head was removed and worn as a pendant.

===As pests===
About 75% of beetle species are phytophagous in both the larval and adult stages. Many feed on economically important plants and stored plant products, including trees, cereals, tobacco, and dried fruits. Some, such as the boll weevil, which feeds on cotton buds and flowers, can cause extremely serious damage to agriculture. The boll weevil crossed the Rio Grande near Brownsville, Texas, to enter the United States from Mexico around 1892, and had reached southeastern Alabama by 1915. By the mid-1920s, it had entered all cotton-growing regions in the US, traveling per year. It remains the most destructive cotton pest in North America. Mississippi State University has estimated, since the boll weevil entered the United States, it has cost cotton producers about $13 billion, and in recent times about $300 million per year.

The bark beetle, elm leaf beetle and the Asian longhorned beetle (&quot;Anoplophora glabripennis&quot;) are among the species that attack elm trees. Bark beetles (Scolytidae) carry Dutch elm disease as they move from infected breeding sites to healthy trees. The disease has devastated elm trees across Europe and North America.

Some species of beetle have evolved immunity to insecticides. For example, the Colorado potato beetle, &quot;Leptinotarsa decemlineata&quot;, is a destructive pest of potato plants. Its hosts include other members of the Solanaceae, such as nightshade, tomato, eggplant and capsicum, as well as the potato. Different populations have between them developed resistance to all major classes of insecticide. The Colorado potato beetle was evaluated as a tool of entomological warfare during World War II, the idea being to use the beetle and its larvae to damage the crops of enemy nations. Germany tested its Colorado potato beetle weaponisation program south of Frankfurt, releasing 54,000 beetles.

The death watch beetle, &quot;Xestobium rufovillosum&quot; (Ptinidae), is a serious pest of older wooden buildings in Europe. It attacks hardwoods such as oak and chestnut, always where some fungal decay has taken or is taking place. The actual introduction of the pest into buildings is thought to take place at the time of construction.

Other pests include the coconut hispine beetle, &quot;Brontispa longissima&quot;, which feeds on young leaves, seedlings and mature coconut trees, causing serious economic damage in the Philippines. The mountain pine beetle is a destructive pest of mature or weakened lodgepole pine, sometimes affecting large areas of Canada.

===As beneficial resources===
Beetles can be beneficial to human economics by controlling the populations of pests. The larvae and adults of some species of lady beetles (Coccinellidae) feed on aphids that are pests. Other lady beetles feed on scale insects, whitefly and mealybugs. If normal food sources are scarce, they may feed on small caterpillars, young plant bugs, or honeydew and nectar. Ground beetles (Carabidae) are common predators of many insect pests, including fly eggs, caterpillars, and wireworms. Ground beetles can help to control weeds by eating their seeds in the soil, reducing the need for herbicides to protect crops. The effectiveness of some species in reducing certain plant populations has resulted in the deliberate introduction of beetles in order to control weeds. For example, the genus &quot;Calligrapha&quot; is native to North America but has been used to control &quot;Parthenium hysterophorus&quot; in India and &quot;Ambrosia artemisiifolia&quot; in Russia.

Dung beetles (Scarabidae) have been successfully used to reduce the populations of pestilent flies, such as &quot;Musca vetustissima&quot; and &quot;Haematobia exigua&quot; which are serious pests of cattle in Australia. The beetles make the dung unavailable to breeding pests by quickly rolling and burying it in the soil, with the added effect of improving soil fertility, tilth, and nutrient cycling. The Australian Dung Beetle Project (1965–1985), introduced species of dung beetle to Australia from South Africa and Europe to reduce populations of &quot;Musca vetustissima&quot;, following successful trials of this technique in Hawaii. The American Institute of Biological Sciences reports that dung beetles, such as &quot;Euoniticellus intermedius&quot;, save the United States cattle industry an estimated US$380 million annually through burying above-ground livestock feces.

The Dermestidae are often used in taxidermy and in the preparation of scientific specimens, to clean soft tissue from bones. Larvae feed on and remove cartilage along with other soft tissue.

===As food and medicine===

Beetles are the most widely eaten insects, with about 344 species used as food, usually at the larval stage. The mealworm (the larva of the darkling beetle) and the rhinoceros beetle are among the species commonly eaten. A wide range of species is also used in folk medicine to treat those suffering from a variety of disorders and illnesses, though this is done without clinical studies supporting the efficacy of such treatments.

===As biodiversity indicators===

Due to their habitat specificity, many species of beetles have been suggested as suitable as indicators, their presence, numbers, or absence providing a measure of habitat quality. Predatory beetles such as the tiger beetles (Cicindelidae) have found scientific use as an indicator taxon for measuring regional patterns of biodiversity. They are suitable for this as their taxonomy is stable; their life history is well described; they are large and simple to observe when visiting a site; they occur around the world in many habitats, with species specialised to particular habitats; and their occurrence by species accurately indicates other species, both vertebrate and invertebrate. According to the habitats, many other groups such as the rove beetles in human-modified habitats, dung beetles in savannas and saproxylic beetles in forests have been suggested as potential indicator species.

===In art and adornment===


Many beetles have durable elytra that has been used as material in art, with beetlewing the best example. Sometimes, they are incorporated into ritual objects for their religious significance. Whole beetles, either as-is or encased in clear plastic, are made into objects ranging from cheap souvenirs such as key chains to expensive fine-art jewellery. In parts of Mexico, beetles of the genus &quot;Zopherus&quot; are made into living brooches by attaching costume jewelry and golden chains, which is made possible by the incredibly hard elytra and sedentary habits of the genus.

===In entertainment===
Fighting beetles are used for entertainment and gambling. This sport exploits the territorial behavior and mating competition of certain species of large beetles. In the Chiang Mai district of northern Thailand, male &quot;Xylotrupes&quot; rhinoceros beetles are caught in the wild and trained for fighting. Females are held inside a log to stimulate the fighting males with their pheromones. These fights may be competitive and involve gambling both money and property. In South Korea the Dytiscidae species &quot;Cybister tripunctatus&quot; is used in a roulette-like game.

Beetles are sometimes used as instruments: the Onabasulu of Papua New Guinea historically used the &quot;&quot;hugu&quot;&quot; weevil &quot;Rhynchophorus ferrugineus&quot; as a musical instrument by letting the human mouth serve as a variable resonance chamber for the wing vibrations of the live adult beetle.

===As pets===
Some species of beetle are kept as pets, for example diving beetles (Dytiscidae) may be kept in a domestic fresh water tank.

In Japan the practice of keeping horned rhinoceros beetles (Dynastinae) and stag beetles (Lucanidae) is particularly popular amongst young boys. Such is the popularity in Japan that vending machines dispensing live beetles were developed in 1999, each holding up to 100 stag beetles.

===As things to collect===
Beetle collecting became extremely popular in the Victorian era. The naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace collected (by his own count) a total of 83,200 beetles during the eight years described in his 1869 book &quot;The Malay Archipelago&quot;, including 2,000 species new to science.

===As inspiration for technologies===
Several coleopteran adaptations have attracted interest in biomimetics with possible commercial applications. The bombardier beetle&#x27;s powerful repellent spray has inspired the development of a fine mist spray technology, claimed to have a low carbon impact compared to aerosol sprays. Moisture harvesting behavior by the Namib desert beetle (&quot;Stenocara gracilipes&quot;) has inspired a self-filling water bottle which utilises hydrophilic and hydrophobic materials to benefit people living in dry regions with no regular rainfall.

Living beetles have been used as cyborgs. A Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency funded project implanted electrodes into &quot;Mecynorhina torquata&quot; beetles, allowing them to be remotely controlled via a radio receiver held on its back, as proof-of-concept for surveillance work. Similar technology has been applied to enable a human operator to control the free-flight steering and walking gaits of &quot;Mecynorhina torquata&quot; as well as graded turning, backward walking and feedback control of &quot;Zophobas morio&quot;.

Research published in 2020 sought to create a robotic camera backpack for beetles. Miniature cameras weighing 248 mg were attached to live beetles of the Tenebrionid genera &quot;Asbolus&quot; and &quot;Eleodes&quot;. The cameras filmed over a 60° range for up to 6 hours.

===In conservation===
Since beetles form such a large part of the world&#x27;s biodiversity, their conservation is important, and equally, loss of habitat and biodiversity is essentially certain to impact on beetles. Many species of beetles have very specific habitats and long life cycles that make them vulnerable. Some species are highly threatened while others are already feared extinct. Island species tend to be more susceptible as in the case of &quot;Helictopleurus undatus&quot; of Madagascar which is thought to have gone extinct during the late 20th century. Conservationists have attempted to arouse a liking for beetles with flagship species like the stag beetle, &quot;Lucanus cervus&quot;, and tiger beetles (Cicindelidae). In Japan the Genji firefly, &quot;Luciola cruciata&quot;, is extremely popular, and in South Africa the Addo elephant dung beetle offers promise for broadening ecotourism beyond the big five tourist mammal species. Popular dislike of pest beetles, too, can be turned into public interest in insects, as can unusual ecological adaptations of species like the fairy shrimp hunting beetle, &quot;Cicinis bruchi&quot;.

==Notes==
==See also==
*Beetle Monuments

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Coleoptera from the Tree of Life Web Project
* &quot;Käfer der Welt&quot;
* Coleoptera Atlas 
* Beetles – Coleoptera</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="0" end="7" title="Beetle" label="Beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="12" end="18" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="34" end="39" title="Taxonomic rank" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="40" end="50" title="Beetle" label="Coleoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q304358" start="73" end="85" title="Holometabola" label="Holometabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q658398" start="143" end="149" title="elytra" label="elytra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="565" end="574" title="Fly" label="dipterans"/>
<link wikidata="Q22651" start="587" end="600" title="Hymenoptera" label="hymenopterans"/>
<link wikidata="Q60670" start="665" end="677" title="polar region" label="polar region"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="705" end="714" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="766" end="771" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="823" end="835" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156954" start="895" end="917" title="Colorado potato beetle" label="Colorado potato beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="940" end="953" title="Coccinellidae" label="Coccinellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="982" end="987" title="aphid" label="aphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q209602" start="990" end="1002" title="scale insect" label="scale insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q185628" start="1005" end="1011" title="thrips" label="thrips"/>
<link wikidata="Q25420" start="1119" end="1128" title="fireflies" label="fireflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="1246" end="1257" title="exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q658398" start="1272" end="1278" title="elytra" label="elytra"/>
<link wikidata="Q467400" start="1304" end="1316" title="rove beetles" label="rove beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q297115" start="1346" end="1360" title="blister beetle" label="blister beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="1394" end="1401" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386379" start="1526" end="1538" title="water beetle" label="water beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q304358" start="1614" end="1626" title="holometabola" label="holometabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33753" start="1669" end="1682" title="metamorphosis" label="metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="1825" end="1829" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q208786" start="1852" end="1863" title="stag beetle" label="stag beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="1880" end="1897" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="1940" end="1949" title="Mandible (insect mouthpart)" label="mandibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q619751" start="2004" end="2014" title="aposematic" label="aposematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111075" start="2101" end="2116" title="Batesian mimics" label="Batesian mimics"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="2206" end="2216" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16702264" start="2241" end="2257" title="insects in culture" label="in human culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442735" start="2268" end="2282" title="Scarab (artifact)" label="sacred scarabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2286" end="2299" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880214" start="2303" end="2313" title="beetlewing" label="beetlewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39201" start="2329" end="2332" title="pet" label="pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037238" start="2337" end="2353" title="insect fighting" label="fighting insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046284" start="2523" end="2535" title="entomophagy" label="used as food"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="2547" end="2552" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q225965" start="2587" end="2595" title="mealworm" label="mealworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q641142" start="2601" end="2618" title="rhinoceros beetle" label="rhinoceros beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="2726" end="2731" title="Pest (organism)" label="pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q217336" start="2766" end="2777" title="boll weevil" label="boll weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156954" start="2793" end="2815" title="Colorado potato beetle" label="Colorado potato beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442017" start="2821" end="2843" title="Brontispa longissima" label="coconut hispine beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q819902" start="2849" end="2869" title="mountain pine beetle" label="mountain pine beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="2978" end="2989" title="lady beetle" label="lady beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779152" start="3087" end="3101" title="coleopterology" label="coleopterology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3178" end="3183" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3245" end="3254" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q658398" start="3265" end="3271" title="elytra" label="elytra"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3407" end="3418" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="3509" end="3523" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q28175" start="3634" end="3644" title="cockchafer" label="cockchafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="4574" end="4590" title="J. B. S. Haldane" label="J. B. S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="4610" end="4621" title="theologians" label="theologians"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="4677" end="4690" title="Christian God" label="Christian God"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046" start="5322" end="5331" title="Carabidae" label="Carabidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q193407" start="5333" end="5346" title="Chrysomelidae" label="Chrysomelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q186946" start="5352" end="5364" title="Scarabaeidae" label="Scarabaeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="5429" end="5434" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q492946" start="5442" end="5456" title="goliath beetle" label="goliath beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188718" start="5652" end="5667" title="elephant beetle" label="elephant beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188718" start="5676" end="5692" title="Megasoma elephas" label="Megasoma elephas"/>
<link wikidata="Q644737" start="5709" end="5725" title="Megasoma actaeon" label="Megasoma actaeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q503799" start="5777" end="5792" title="Hercules beetle" label="Hercules beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q123439" start="5907" end="5915" title="Prothorax" label="pronotal"/>
<link wikidata="Q244217" start="5998" end="6016" title="featherwing beetle" label="featherwing beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21092625" start="6023" end="6046" title="Scydosella musawasensis" label="Scydosella musawasensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="6088" end="6090" title="μm" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q21215039" start="6185" end="6194" title="Coleopsis" label="Coleopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q740340" start="6229" end="6237" title="Asselian" label="Asselian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683990" start="6359" end="6374" title="Protocoleoptera" label="Protocoleoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851532" start="6406" end="6417" title="xylophagous" label="xylophagous"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032385" start="6436" end="6447" title="Woodboring beetle" label="wood boring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077376" start="6761" end="6775" title="middle Permian" label="middle Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132033" start="6833" end="6843" title="Euramerica" label="Euramerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394812" start="6898" end="6918" title="Wellington Formation" label="Wellington Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077390" start="7031" end="7043" title="Late Permian" label="Late Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="7052" end="7085" title="Permian–Triassic extinction event" label="Permian–Triassic extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q929395" start="7240" end="7255" title="Middle Triassic" label="Middle Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="7284" end="7292" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q920316" start="7445" end="7459" title="Chrysomeloidea" label="Chrysomeloidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="7538" end="7543" title="cycad" label="cycad"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="7549" end="7556" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="7561" end="7571" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q500054" start="7840" end="7855" title="Middle Jurassic" label="Middle Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q383963" start="8063" end="8077" title="Curculionoidea" label="Curculionoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066902" start="8103" end="8114" title="Elateroidea" label="Elateroidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q503892" start="8156" end="8167" title="Buprestidae" label="Buprestidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8365" end="8376" title="#Mutualism" label="mutualistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q572949" start="8531" end="8540" title="Solnhofen" label="Solnhofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="8550" end="8557" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="8585" end="8595" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="8621" end="8629" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="8709" end="8717" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="8936" end="8946" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q131126" start="9172" end="9184" title="Archostemata" label="Archostemata"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046" start="9328" end="9337" title="Carabidae" label="Carabidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q467400" start="9392" end="9405" title="Staphylinidae" label="Staphylinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457" start="9410" end="9422" title="click beetle" label="click beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q656630" start="9498" end="9507" title="Cleroidea" label="Cleroidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q651038" start="9512" end="9522" title="Cucujoidea" label="Cucujoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q503892" start="9583" end="9595" title="jewel beetle" label="jewel beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q205295" start="9712" end="9727" title="longhorn beetle" label="longhorn beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q205295" start="9730" end="9742" title="Cerambycidae" label="Cerambycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382345" start="10210" end="10223" title="Coptoclavidae" label="Coptoclavidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851532" start="10375" end="10385" title="saproxylic" label="saproxylic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331325" start="10432" end="10443" title="fungivorous" label="fungivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q40123" start="10728" end="10733" title="Ceará" label="Ceará"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628507" start="10870" end="10877" title="Montsec" label="Montsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021453" start="10882" end="10891" title="Las Hoyas" label="Las Hoyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567356" start="10958" end="10973" title="South Gippsland" label="South Gippsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="11171" end="11181" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495247" start="11259" end="11271" title="Late Miocene" label="Late Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="11392" end="11421" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="large oscillations in climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372154" start="11912" end="11926" title="Linnaean taxonomy" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q147877" start="12032" end="12041" title="Polyphaga" label="Polyphaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q467400" start="12151" end="12162" title="rove beetle" label="rove beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186946" start="12197" end="12209" title="Scarabaeidae" label="Scarabaeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q297115" start="12212" end="12226" title="blister beetle" label="blister beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208786" start="12240" end="12251" title="stag beetle" label="stag beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415384" start="12283" end="12296" title="Curculionidae" label="Curculionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q590175" start="12376" end="12384" title="sclerite" label="sclerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q131060" start="12487" end="12495" title="Adephaga" label="Adephaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046" start="12562" end="12575" title="ground beetle" label="ground beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q327149" start="12605" end="12615" title="Dytiscidae" label="Dytiscidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q756089" start="12621" end="12637" title="whirligig beetle" label="whirligig beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="12674" end="12680" title="testes" label="testes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="12741" end="12752" title="exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133438" start="12777" end="12782" title="Arthropod leg" label="coxae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131126" start="12829" end="12841" title="Archostemata" label="Archostemata"/>
<link wikidata="Q133150" start="12906" end="12924" title="reticulated beetle" label="reticulated beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q132978" start="12946" end="12967" title="telephone-pole beetle" label="telephone-pole beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133005" start="13089" end="13098" title="Myxophaga" label="Myxophaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q135123" start="13182" end="13196" title="Hydroscaphidae" label="Hydroscaphidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q606681" start="13217" end="13226" title="Sphaerius" label="Sphaerius"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="13423" end="13433" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q658398" start="13469" end="13475" title="elytra" label="elytra"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="13515" end="13527" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="13588" end="13597" title="Taxonomic rank" label="suborders"/>
<link wikidata="Q131060" start="13610" end="13618" title="Adephaga" label="Adephaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q131126" start="13620" end="13632" title="Archostemata" label="Archostemata"/>
<link wikidata="Q133005" start="13634" end="13643" title="Myxophaga" label="Myxophaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q147877" start="13648" end="13657" title="Polyphaga" label="Polyphaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="13670" end="13675" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q327144" start="13705" end="13717" title="Strepsiptera" label="Strepsiptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q642169" start="13798" end="13811" title="Early Permian" label="Early Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="14283" end="14292" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="14650" end="14661" title="exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q658398" start="14682" end="14688" title="elytra" label="elytra"/>
<link wikidata="Q590175" start="15358" end="15366" title="sclerite" label="sclerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="15477" end="15484" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415392" start="15544" end="15553" title="appendage" label="appendage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686736" start="15882" end="15896" title="tarsal formula" label="tarsal formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292753" start="16226" end="16237" title="Sclerotin" label="sclerotized"/>
<link wikidata="Q942537" start="16280" end="16288" title="compound eye" label="compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q756089" start="16379" end="16388" title="Gyrinidae" label="Gyrinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q205295" start="16470" end="16485" title="Longhorn beetle" label="Longhorn beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q205295" start="16488" end="16500" title="Cerambycidae" label="Cerambycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248823" start="16541" end="16557" title="Rhagophthalmidae" label="Rhagophthalmidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364287" start="16632" end="16638" title="ocelli" label="ocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364" start="16654" end="16657" title="eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425673" start="16700" end="16706" title="Vertex (anatomy)" label="vertex"/>
<link wikidata="Q220932" start="16993" end="17004" title="Dermestidae" label="Dermestidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946931" start="17026" end="17035" title="Omaliinae" label="Omaliinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023957" start="17046" end="17058" title="Derodontidae" label="Derodontidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q204664" start="17068" end="17076" title="antenna (biology)" label="antennae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352850" start="17780" end="17802" title="Onychocerus albitarsis" label="Onychocerus albitarsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="17894" end="17903" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324240" start="18966" end="18976" title="Insect mouthparts" label="mouthparts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398431" start="18991" end="19002" title="grasshopper" label="grasshopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="19009" end="19018" title="mandible (insect)" label="mandibles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19203" end="19210" title="#Anti-predator adaptations" label="defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423946" start="19549" end="19558" title="segmentation (biology)" label="segmented"/>
<link wikidata="Q123439" start="20115" end="20123" title="pronotum" label="pronotum"/>
<link wikidata="Q276572" start="20231" end="20236" title="insect wing" label="wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133438" start="20332" end="20336" title="arthropod leg" label="legs"/>
<link wikidata="Q327149" start="20631" end="20658" title="Dytiscidae" label="Dytiscidae (diving beetles)"/>
<link wikidata="Q259362" start="20660" end="20670" title="Haliplidae" label="Haliplidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q839281" start="20692" end="20705" title="Hydrophilidae" label="Hydrophilidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="20909" end="20918" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q596252" start="21041" end="21053" title="clown beetle" label="clown beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q596252" start="21056" end="21066" title="Histeridae" label="Histeridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q373530" start="21108" end="21119" title="flea beetle" label="flea beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425266" start="21282" end="21288" title="insect flight" label="flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q514243" start="21518" end="21529" title="Cantharidae" label="Cantharidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q248608" start="21635" end="21652" title="net-winged beetle" label="net-winged beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q14927852" start="21659" end="21680" title="Calopteron discrepans" label="Calopteron discrepans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248829" start="22355" end="22364" title="glow-worm" label="glow-worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q690737" start="22367" end="22378" title="Phengodidae" label="Phengodidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491923" start="22399" end="22414" title="Larviform female" label="resemble larvae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301929" start="22540" end="22552" title="tansy beetle" label="tansy beetle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22639" end="22646" title="Abdomen#Arthropoda" label="abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q31060267" start="22772" end="22780" title="Spiracle (arthropods)" label="spiracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q609477" start="23262" end="23273" title="Mordellidae" label="Mordellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="23363" end="23379" title="Digestion" label="digestive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940081" start="23481" end="23487" title="midgut" label="midgut"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046" start="23527" end="23536" title="Carabidae" label="Carabidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457" start="23607" end="23617" title="Elateridae" label="Elateridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q174778" start="23765" end="23772" title="pharynx" label="pharynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q477734" start="23828" end="23835" title="gizzard" label="gizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q185317" start="23935" end="23940" title="cecum" label="cecum"/>
<link wikidata="Q725889" start="24013" end="24030" title="Malpighian tubule" label="Malpighian tubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="24059" end="24073" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="24415" end="24421" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="24446" end="24460" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="24468" end="24483" title="invertebrate trachea" label="tracheal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q31060267" start="24513" end="24521" title="Spiracle (arthropods)" label="spiracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="24575" end="24583" title="Invertebrate trachea" label="tracheae"/>
<link wikidata="Q327149" start="24672" end="24682" title="Dytiscidae" label="Dytiscidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="24815" end="24826" title="hydrophobic" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25003" end="25016" title="Gill#Plastron" label="physical gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="25697" end="25720" title="open circulatory system" label="open circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q485675" start="25732" end="25741" title="hemolymph" label="hemolymph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25848" end="25856" title="circulatory system#Nonhuman" label="hemocoel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258274" start="26175" end="26184" title="Rutelinae" label="Rutelinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="26203" end="26218" title="epithelial cell" label="epithelial cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q785080" start="26310" end="26323" title="Melolonthinae" label="Melolonthinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q220932" start="26435" end="26444" title="Dermestid" label="Dermestid"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="26454" end="26459" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457" start="26477" end="26487" title="Elateridae" label="Elateridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="26496" end="26523" title="aldehyde" label="fatty acid-derived aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="26529" end="26536" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25420" start="26569" end="26579" title="Lampyridae" label="Lampyridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q179924" start="26697" end="26712" title="bioluminescence" label="bioluminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q63390514" start="26768" end="26777" title="Firefly luciferin" label="luciferin"/>
<link wikidata="Q95385166" start="26800" end="26810" title="luciferase" label="luciferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="26832" end="26854" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q369745" start="26883" end="26895" title="oxyluciferin" label="oxyluciferin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784041" start="26925" end="26939" title="Tympanal organ" label="Tympanal organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165862" start="27132" end="27141" title="Cicindela" label="Cicindela"/>
<link wikidata="Q641142" start="27274" end="27284" title="Dynastinae" label="Dynastinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q186946" start="27297" end="27309" title="Scarabaeidae" label="Scarabaeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="27613" end="27623" title="Order (biology)" label="superorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q304358" start="27624" end="27636" title="Holometabola" label="Holometabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33753" start="27684" end="27697" title="metamorphosis" label="metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="27781" end="27784" title="egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="27790" end="27795" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="27801" end="27805" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="27815" end="27820" title="imago" label="imago"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="27862" end="27867" title="Larva" label="grubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="28024" end="28030" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q297115" start="28086" end="28094" title="Meloidae" label="Meloidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q590486" start="28099" end="28112" title="Rhipiphoridae" label="Rhipiphoridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q590871" start="28137" end="28155" title="hypermetamorphosis" label="hypermetamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201285" start="28202" end="28212" title="triungulin" label="triungulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="28274" end="28283" title="Pheromone" label="Pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905656" start="28381" end="28395" title="White worm beetle" label="Scarab beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258274" start="28408" end="28417" title="Rutelinae" label="Rutelinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q900209" start="28446" end="28466" title="fatty acid synthesis" label="fatty acid synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q785080" start="28549" end="28562" title="Melolonthinae" label="Melolonthinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="28567" end="28577" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25420" start="28641" end="28650" title="fireflies" label="fireflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q179924" start="28674" end="28688" title="bioluminescent" label="bioluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248479" start="29128" end="29136" title="Eupompha" label="Eupompha"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="29395" end="29401" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301929" start="29417" end="29429" title="tansy beetle" label="tansy beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="29653" end="29667" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11789797" start="29694" end="29712" title="intromittent organ" label="intromittent organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q136153" start="29721" end="29744" title="thistle tortoise beetle" label="thistle tortoise beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="29788" end="29797" title="flagellum" label="flagellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9597" start="29876" end="29883" title="abdomen" label="abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="30022" end="30040" title="reproductive organ" label="reproductive organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="30394" end="30402" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45767" start="30425" end="30436" title="Competition (biology)" label="Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q589455" start="30494" end="30508" title="burying beetle" label="burying beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="30609" end="30620" title="Territory (animal)" label="territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="30893" end="30903" title="Spermatozoon" label="sperm cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="30938" end="30947" title="fertilize" label="fertilize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090511" start="31033" end="31047" title="myrmecophilous" label="myrmecophilous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953097" start="31048" end="31060" title="Aleocharinae" label="Aleocharinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134997" start="31070" end="31083" title="Chrysomelinae" label="Chrysomelinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q192805" start="31129" end="31142" title="ovoviviparous" label="ovoviviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q133150" start="31256" end="31265" title="Cupedidae" label="Cupedidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q186946" start="31647" end="31661" title="scarab beetles" label="scarab beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q542516" start="31710" end="31721" title="Attelabidae" label="Attelabidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="31804" end="31809" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="31863" end="31873" title="Biological life cycle" label="life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q503892" start="32095" end="32106" title="Buprestidae" label="Buprestidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q220932" start="32330" end="32341" title="skin beetle" label="skin beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660153" start="32506" end="32528" title="Biological immortality" label="Biological immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q31060267" start="32876" end="32884" title="Spiracle (arthropods)" label="spiracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457" start="33292" end="33304" title="click beetle" label="click beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q615799" start="33322" end="33337" title="darkling beetle" label="darkling beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q132379" start="33444" end="33457" title="Scarabaeoidea" label="Scarabaeoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="33579" end="33585" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389887" start="33636" end="33641" title="ecdysis" label="moult"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201285" start="33919" end="33928" title="planidium" label="planidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q590871" start="34069" end="34087" title="hypermetamorphosis" label="hypermetamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q297115" start="34106" end="34114" title="Meloidae" label="Meloidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13171513" start="34116" end="34130" title="Micromalthidae" label="Micromalthidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q590486" start="34136" end="34148" title="Ripiphoridae" label="Ripiphoridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q937565" start="34175" end="34191" title="Epicauta vittata" label="Epicauta vittata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201285" start="34278" end="34288" title="triungulin" label="triungulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046" start="34465" end="34479" title="Carabidae" label="carabid beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186946" start="34539" end="34555" title="Scarabaeidae" label="scarabaeid larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q14885429" start="34779" end="34797" title="Phanerota fasciata" label="Phanerota fasciata"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="35356" end="35360" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="35417" end="35422" title="imago" label="imago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261528" start="35462" end="35472" title="adecticous" label="adecticous"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="35553" end="35560" title="exarate" label="exarate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35661" end="35667" title="Pupa#Position in life cycle" label="obtect"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="35980" end="35985" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332103" start="36029" end="36050" title="Eburia quadrigeminata" label="Eburia quadrigeminata"/>
<link wikidata="Q205295" start="36058" end="36070" title="Cerambycidae" label="Cerambycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14834043" start="36085" end="36104" title="Buprestis aurulenta" label="Buprestis aurulenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q503892" start="36121" end="36132" title="Buprestidae" label="Buprestidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q768400" start="36653" end="36663" title="Cetoniinae" label="Cetoniinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412715" start="36670" end="36682" title="Scarabaeinae" label="Scarabaeinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415384" start="36684" end="36697" title="Curculionidae" label="Curculionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q503892" start="36702" end="36713" title="Buprestidae" label="Buprestidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q159543" start="36938" end="36963" title="Coccinella septempunctata" label="Coccinella septempunctata"/>
<link wikidata="Q499627" start="36980" end="36997" title="Harmonia axyridis" label="Harmonia axyridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386379" start="37679" end="37691" title="water beetle" label="water beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133438" start="37730" end="37734" title="Arthropod leg" label="coxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q756089" start="37797" end="37813" title="whirligig beetle" label="whirligig beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="37966" end="37975" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q819902" start="37982" end="38002" title="mountain pine beetle" label="mountain pine beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q610560" start="38250" end="38260" title="stridulate" label="stridulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114623" start="38499" end="38518" title="Bledius spectabilis" label="Bledius spectabilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="38534" end="38544" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="38600" end="38604" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="38696" end="38708" title="asphyxiating" label="asphyxiating"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860320" start="38768" end="38792" title="Dicheirotrichus gustavii" label="Dicheirotrichus gustavii"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="38812" end="38824" title="parasitism" label="parasitoidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866002" start="38836" end="38856" title="Barycnemis blediator" label="Barycnemis blediator"/>
<link wikidata="Q589455" start="38901" end="38915" title="Burying beetle" label="Burying beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q861966" start="39374" end="39385" title="dung beetle" label="dung beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784080" start="39492" end="39509" title="mass provisioning" label="mass provisioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="39845" end="39856" title="Eusociality" label="Eusociality"/>
<link wikidata="Q22651" start="40093" end="40104" title="Hymenoptera" label="Hymenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034609" start="40173" end="40199" title="Austroplatypus incompertus" label="Austroplatypus incompertus"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="40212" end="40221" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="40279" end="40288" title="heartwood" label="heartwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="40298" end="40308" title="Eucalyptus" label="Eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20972612" start="40372" end="40387" title="Ambrosia beetle" label="Ambrosia beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q227894" start="40687" end="40697" title="Passalidae" label="Passalidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="40883" end="40891" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046" start="41105" end="41118" title="Ground beetle" label="Ground beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q467400" start="41124" end="41135" title="rove beetle" label="rove beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q467400" start="41138" end="41151" title="Staphylinidae" label="Staphylinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="41227" end="41236" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="41447" end="41456" title="symbiotic" label="symbiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="41475" end="41480" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="41669" end="41673" title="Feces" label="dung"/>
<link wikidata="Q320011" start="41696" end="41708" title="coprophagous" label="coprophagous"/>
<link wikidata="Q861966" start="41734" end="41747" title="dung beetle" label="scarab beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186946" start="41756" end="41768" title="Scarabaeidae" label="Scarabaeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q172867" start="41807" end="41819" title="necrophagous" label="necrophagous"/>
<link wikidata="Q303626" start="41841" end="41855" title="carrion beetle" label="carrion beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q303626" start="41858" end="41867" title="Silphidae" label="Silphidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q596252" start="41961" end="41971" title="Histeridae" label="Histeridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q303626" start="41976" end="41985" title="Silphidae" label="Silphidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q320011" start="42012" end="42024" title="coprophagous" label="coprophagous"/>
<link wikidata="Q172867" start="42029" end="42041" title="necrophagous" label="necrophagous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946849" start="42184" end="42192" title="mycangia" label="mycangia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="42348" end="42356" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="42368" end="42375" title="mammals" label="mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="42381" end="42384" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="42389" end="42395" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="42398" end="42403" title="birds" label="birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="42405" end="42411" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="42414" end="42424" title="amphibians" label="amphibians"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="42426" end="42432" title="fishes" label="fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="42434" end="42445" title="dragonflies" label="dragonflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q837089" start="42447" end="42458" title="robberflies" label="robberflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q768510" start="42460" end="42473" title="Reduviidae" label="reduviid bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="42475" end="42478" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="42500" end="42506" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q277614" start="42534" end="42558" title="anti-predator adaptation" label="anti-predator adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="42596" end="42606" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q192627" start="42611" end="42618" title="mimicry" label="mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q193407" start="42829" end="42840" title="leaf beetle" label="leaf beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q383963" start="42885" end="42891" title="weevil" label="weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q37153" start="42984" end="42991" title="avocado" label="avocado"/>
<link wikidata="Q54984393" start="43005" end="43021" title="Heilipus apiatus" label="Heilipus apiatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q205295" start="43209" end="43224" title="longhorn beetle" label="longhorn beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111075" start="43255" end="43270" title="Batesian mimics" label="Batesian mimics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="43274" end="43278" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="43421" end="43430" title="ladybirds" label="ladybirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q297115" start="43432" end="43446" title="blister beetle" label="blister beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q248608" start="43453" end="43466" title="Lycidae" label="lycid beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q619751" start="43560" end="43570" title="aposematic" label="aposematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242894" start="43600" end="43610" title="animal coloration" label="coloration"/>
<link wikidata="Q615799" start="43812" end="43825" title="Tenebrionidae" label="Tenebrionidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="44273" end="44284" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="44287" end="44295" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="44298" end="44304" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q412382" start="44307" end="44314" title="quinone" label="quinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="44317" end="44322" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="44329" end="44333" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308472" start="44431" end="44437" title="Anthia" label="Anthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161233" start="44480" end="44491" title="formic acid" label="formic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221944" start="44493" end="44510" title="Bombardier beetle" label="Bombardier beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q419164" start="44709" end="44721" title="hydroquinone" label="hydroquinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="44727" end="44744" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824566" start="44786" end="44794" title="catalase" label="catalase"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046" start="45125" end="45134" title="Carabidae" label="Carabidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q641142" start="45140" end="45157" title="rhinoceros beetle" label="rhinoceros beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q920112" start="45214" end="45223" title="Mandible (insect)" label="mandibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098451" start="45445" end="45455" title="thanatosis" label="thanatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457" start="45543" end="45553" title="Elateridae" label="Elateridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q610560" start="45827" end="45839" title="stridulation" label="stridulation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45888" end="45901" title="Parasitism#Basic concepts" label="ectoparasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064126" start="45938" end="45959" title="Platypsyllus castoris" label="Platypsyllus castoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="45988" end="46006" title="Beaver" label="&amp;quot;Castor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q698040" start="46404" end="46421" title="small hive beetle" label="small hive beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="46464" end="46473" title="honey bee" label="honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555376" start="46514" end="46523" title="inquiline" label="inquiline"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582057" start="46528" end="46558" title="myrmecophily in Staphylinidae" label="commensal in the nests of ants"/>
<link wikidata="Q595663" start="46596" end="46606" title="parasitoid" label="parasitoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25041039" start="47048" end="47053" title="Pollination trap" label="traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q503892" start="47244" end="47255" title="Buprestidae" label="Buprestidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q514243" start="47257" end="47268" title="Cantharidae" label="Cantharidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q205295" start="47270" end="47282" title="Cerambycidae" label="Cerambycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q377988" start="47284" end="47292" title="Cleridae" label="Cleridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q220932" start="47294" end="47305" title="Dermestidae" label="Dermestidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q248608" start="47307" end="47314" title="Lycidae" label="Lycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189209" start="47316" end="47325" title="Melyridae" label="Melyridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q609477" start="47327" end="47338" title="Mordellidae" label="Mordellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q178592" start="47340" end="47351" title="Nitidulidae" label="Nitidulidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q186946" start="47356" end="47368" title="Scarabaeidae" label="Scarabaeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="47481" end="47500" title="southern California" label="southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="47531" end="47544" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="47579" end="47588" title="Mutualism (biology)" label="Mutualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20972612" start="47633" end="47648" title="ambrosia beetle" label="ambrosia beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="47939" end="47947" title="symbiont" label="symbiont"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="48454" end="48462" title="coevolve" label="coevolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q913288" start="48558" end="48566" title="diapause" label="diapause"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="49056" end="49069" title="photoperiodic" label="photoperiodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14205887" start="49235" end="49259" title="Pterostichus brevicornis" label="Pterostichus brevicornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="49340" end="49356" title="alimentary canal" label="alimentary canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25582391" start="49513" end="49525" title="poikilotherm" label="poikilotherm"/>
<link wikidata="Q720458" start="49664" end="49675" title="bark beetle" label="bark beetle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49682" end="49706" title="Pityogenes chalcographus" label="Pityogenes chalcographus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129028" start="49790" end="49797" title="Cucujus" label="Cucujus"/>
<link wikidata="Q485675" start="50325" end="50334" title="hemolymph" label="hemolymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q225965" start="50364" end="50380" title="Tenebrio molitor" label="Tenebrio molitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q421541" start="50404" end="50422" title="antifreeze protein" label="antifreeze protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898325" start="50450" end="50466" title="Upis ceramboides" label="Upis ceramboides"/>
<link wikidata="Q692267" start="50497" end="50511" title="cryoprotectant" label="cryoprotectant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045460" start="50517" end="50527" title="xylomannan" label="xylomannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="50556" end="50561" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="50573" end="50583" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q415347" start="50608" end="50616" title="threitol" label="threitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q615799" start="50715" end="50726" title="Tenebrionid" label="Tenebrionid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50740" end="50762" title="Onymacris rugatipennis" label="Onymacris rugatipennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13650352" start="50857" end="50882" title="Habroscelimorpha dorsalis" label="Habroscelimorpha dorsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131377" start="51233" end="51245" title="Namib Desert" label="Namib Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398452" start="51253" end="51273" title="Stenocara gracilipes" label="Stenocara gracilipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q85761472" start="51292" end="51314" title="fog collection" label="collect water from fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="51364" end="51375" title="hydrophilic" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="51407" end="51418" title="hydrophobic" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398440" start="51656" end="51678" title="Onymacris unguicularis" label="Onymacris unguicularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409824" start="51951" end="51967" title="Cicindela togata" label="Cicindela togata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="52084" end="52090" title="Hypoxia (environmental)" label="anoxia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52288" end="52307" title="Pelophilia borealis" label="Pelophilia borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564671" start="52612" end="52629" title="Meligethes aeneus" label="Meligethes aeneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="52656" end="52668" title="Coccinellidae" label="coccinellids"/>
<link wikidata="Q819902" start="52834" end="52857" title="Dendroctonus ponderosae" label="Dendroctonus ponderosae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="52868" end="52884" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750802" start="53118" end="53134" title="Scarabaeus sacer" label="Scarabaeus sacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="53158" end="53171" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="53304" end="53309" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q253664" start="53318" end="53334" title="Egyptian faience" label="Egyptian faience"/>
<link wikidata="Q215940" start="53526" end="53532" title="Khepri" label="Khepri"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="53556" end="53559" title="sun" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442735" start="53743" end="53748" title="scaraboid seal" label="seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246331" start="53806" end="53815" title="LMLK seal" label="LMLK seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q244912" start="53955" end="53963" title="Hezekiah" label="Hezekiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="54035" end="54043" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q651941" start="54069" end="54076" title="Moralia" label="Moralia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186625" start="54088" end="54108" title="Greek Magical Papyri" label="Greek Magical Papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="54200" end="54215" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="54247" end="54262" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q190491" start="54285" end="54296" title="Lucanus cervus" label="stag beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q658398" start="54373" end="54379" title="elytra" label="elytra"/>
<link wikidata="Q363818" start="54731" end="54739" title="Nicander" label="Nicander"/>
<link wikidata="Q443765" start="54756" end="54775" title="Antoninus Liberalis" label="Antoninus Liberalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664963" start="54785" end="54793" title="Cerambus" label="Cerambus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217336" start="55349" end="55360" title="boll weevil" label="boll weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="55481" end="55491" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q51693" start="55497" end="55508" title="Brownsville, Texas" label="Brownsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="55510" end="55515" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="55530" end="55543" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="55549" end="55555" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="55598" end="55605" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939211" start="55768" end="55796" title="Mississippi State University" label="Mississippi State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q720458" start="55963" end="55974" title="bark beetle" label="bark beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307509" start="55976" end="55991" title="elm leaf beetle" label="elm leaf beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q312378" start="56031" end="56055" title="Anoplophora glabripennis" label="Anoplophora glabripennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="56097" end="56100" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q720458" start="56122" end="56132" title="Scolytidae" label="Scolytidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q845598" start="56140" end="56157" title="Dutch elm disease" label="Dutch elm disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q156954" start="56368" end="56390" title="Colorado potato beetle" label="Colorado potato beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q134172" start="56510" end="56520" title="Solanaceae" label="Solanaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134172" start="56530" end="56540" title="nightshade" label="nightshade"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="56542" end="56548" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540" start="56550" end="56558" title="eggplant" label="eggplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q201959" start="56563" end="56571" title="capsicum" label="capsicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q902927" start="56748" end="56769" title="entomological warfare" label="entomological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="56777" end="56789" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="56950" end="56959" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074662" start="56992" end="57010" title="death watch beetle" label="death watch beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17504738" start="57048" end="57056" title="Ptinidae" label="Ptinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="57125" end="57133" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="57143" end="57146" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q129324" start="57151" end="57159" title="chestnut" label="chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442017" start="57382" end="57402" title="Brontispa longissima" label="Brontispa longissima"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="57431" end="57437" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385709" start="57439" end="57448" title="seedlings" label="seedlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="57460" end="57467" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="57514" end="57525" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q819902" start="57531" end="57551" title="mountain pine beetle" label="mountain pine beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165091" start="57596" end="57610" title="lodgepole pine" label="lodgepole pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="57813" end="57824" title="lady beetle" label="lady beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="57827" end="57840" title="Coccinellidae" label="Coccinellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="57850" end="57855" title="aphid" label="aphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q209602" start="57900" end="57912" title="scale insect" label="scale insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q815617" start="57915" end="57923" title="whitefly" label="whitefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q143569" start="57928" end="57936" title="mealybug" label="mealybug"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="57997" end="58008" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q864705" start="58017" end="58026" title="plant bug" label="plant bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q751760" start="58032" end="58040" title="honeydew (secretion)" label="honeydew"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="58045" end="58051" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27046" start="58053" end="58066" title="Ground beetle" label="Ground beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="58091" end="58099" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="58207" end="58211" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="58270" end="58279" title="herbicide" label="herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897730" start="58482" end="58493" title="Calligrapha" label="Calligrapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595850" start="58562" end="58586" title="Parthenium hysterophorus" label="Parthenium hysterophorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q682164" start="58612" end="58635" title="Ambrosia artemisiifolia" label="Ambrosia artemisiifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861966" start="58654" end="58666" title="Dung beetles" label="Dung beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328282" start="58768" end="58786" title="Musca vetustissima" label="Musca vetustissima"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631410" start="58803" end="58820" title="Haematobia exigua" label="Haematobia exigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="58864" end="58873" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824100" start="59062" end="59092" title="Australian Dung Beetle Project" label="Australian Dung Beetle Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="59288" end="59294" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677544" start="59300" end="59341" title="American Institute of Biological Sciences" label="American Institute of Biological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920826" start="59383" end="59408" title="Euoniticellus intermedius" label="Euoniticellus intermedius"/>
<link wikidata="Q220932" start="59543" end="59554" title="Dermestidae" label="Dermestidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q243237" start="59573" end="59582" title="taxidermy" label="taxidermy"/>
<link wikidata="Q225965" start="59872" end="59880" title="mealworm" label="mealworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q615799" start="59899" end="59914" title="darkling beetle" label="darkling beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q641142" start="59924" end="59941" title="rhinoceros beetle" label="rhinoceros beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="60020" end="60033" title="folk medicine" label="folk medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16718297" start="60452" end="60464" title="Cicindelidae" label="Cicindelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880214" start="61229" end="61239" title="beetlewing" label="beetlewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763557" start="61552" end="61560" title="Zopherus" label="Zopherus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658015" start="61581" end="61594" title="living brooch" label="living brooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037238" start="61783" end="61813" title="insect fighting" label="for entertainment and gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="61927" end="61937" title="Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935578" start="61980" end="61990" title="Xylotrupes" label="Xylotrupes"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="62231" end="62242" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q327149" start="62247" end="62257" title="Dytiscidae" label="Dytiscidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332584" start="62272" end="62293" title="Cybister tripunctatus" label="Cybister tripunctatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="62394" end="62410" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q105559777" start="62439" end="62455" title="Hugu (instrument)" label="&amp;quot;hugu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q310256" start="62475" end="62500" title="Rhynchophorus ferrugineus" label="Rhynchophorus ferrugineus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330561" start="62578" end="62595" title="resonance chamber" label="resonance chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q39201" start="62696" end="62699" title="pet" label="pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q327149" start="62730" end="62740" title="Dytiscidae" label="Dytiscidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="62790" end="62795" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q641142" start="62847" end="62857" title="Dynastinae" label="Dynastinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q208786" start="62877" end="62886" title="Lucanidae" label="Lucanidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="62969" end="62985" title="vending machines" label="vending machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="63149" end="63162" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q160627" start="63179" end="63200" title="Alfred Russel Wallace" label="Alfred Russel Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q940414" start="63312" end="63333" title="The Malay Archipelago" label="The Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145644" start="63479" end="63490" title="biomimetics" label="biomimetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221944" start="63534" end="63551" title="bombardier beetle" label="bombardier beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398452" start="63773" end="63793" title="Stenocara gracilipes" label="Stenocara gracilipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="63857" end="63868" title="hydrophilic" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="63873" end="63884" title="hydrophobic" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63995" end="64001" title="cyborg#Animal_cyborgs" label="cyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="64006" end="64047" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804905" start="64095" end="64115" title="Mecynorhina torquata" label="Mecynorhina torquata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804905" start="64379" end="64399" title="Mecynorhina torquata" label="Mecynorhina torquata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548987" start="64480" end="64494" title="Zophobas morio" label="Zophobas morio"/>
<link wikidata="Q615799" start="64657" end="64668" title="Tenebrionid" label="Tenebrionid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26713555" start="64682" end="64689" title="Asbolus (beetle)" label="Asbolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938538" start="64706" end="64713" title="Eleodes" label="Eleodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190491" start="65461" end="65475" title="Lucanus cervus" label="Lucanus cervus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16718297" start="65502" end="65514" title="Cicindelidae" label="Cicindelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258699" start="65551" end="65567" title="Luciola cruciata" label="Luciola cruciata"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="65677" end="65687" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q196164" start="65699" end="65730" title="big five game" label="big five tourist mammal species"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65910" end="65924" title="Cicinis bruchi" label="Cicinis bruchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11823532" start="65957" end="65973" title="Beetle Monuments" label="Beetle Monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300489" start="66083" end="66107" title="Tree of Life Web Project" label="Tree of Life Web Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7045" wikidata="Q6505" url="?curid=7045" title="Concorde">
<text>Concorde () is a retired Anglo-French supersonic airliner jointly developed and manufactured by Sud Aviation (later Aérospatiale) and the British Aircraft Corporation (BAC).

Studies started in 1954, and France and the United Kingdom signed a treaty establishing the development project on 29 November 1962, as the programme cost was estimated at £70 million (£ in ).
Construction of the six prototypes began in February 1965, and the first flight took off from Toulouse on 2 March 1969.

The market was predicted for 350 aircraft, and the manufacturers received up to 100 option orders from many major airlines.
On 9 October 1975, it received its French Certificate of Airworthiness, and from the UK CAA on 5 December.
Concorde is a tailless aircraft design with a narrow fuselage permitting 4-abreast seating for 92 to 128 passengers, an ogival delta wing and a droop nose for landing visibility.
It is powered by four Rolls-Royce/Snecma Olympus 593 turbojets with variable engine intake ramps, and reheat for take-off and acceleration to supersonic speed.
Constructed out of aluminium, it was the first airliner to have analogue fly-by-wire flight controls. 

The airliner had transatlantic range while supercruising at twice the speed of sound for 75% of the distance.
Delays and cost overruns increased the programme cost to £1.5–2.1 billion in 1976, (£– in ).
Concorde entered service on 21 January 1976 with Air France from Paris-Roissy and British Airways from London Heathrow.
Transatlantic flights were the main market, to Washington Dulles from 24 May, and to New York JFK from 17 October 1977.
Air France and British Airways remained the sole customers with seven airframes each, for a total production of twenty.
Supersonic flight more than halved travel times, but sonic booms over the ground limited it to transoceanic flights only.
Its only competitor was the Tupolev Tu-144, carrying passengers from November 1977 until a May 1978 crash, while a potential competitor, the Boeing 2707, was cancelled in 1971 before any prototypes were built.
On 25 July 2000, Air France Flight 4590 crashed shortly after take-off with all 109 occupants and four on the ground killed. This was the only fatal incident involving Concorde; commercial service was suspended until November 2001. The surviving aircraft were retired in 2003, 27 years after commercial operations had begun. All but 2 of the 20 aircraft built have been preserved and are on display across Europe and North America.

==Development==

===Early studies===
In the early 1950s, Arnold Hall, director of the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), asked Morien Morgan to form a committee to study supersonic transport (SST). The group met in February 1954 and delivered their first report in April 1955. Robert T. Jones&#x27; work at NACA had demonstrated that the drag at supersonic speeds was strongly related to the span of the wing. This led to the use of short-span, thin trapezoidal wings such as those seen on the control surfaces of many missiles, or aircraft such as the Lockheed F-104 Starfighter interceptor or the planned Avro 730 strategic bomber that the team studied. The team outlined a baseline configuration that resembled an enlarged Avro 730.

This short wingspan produced little lift at low speed, resulting in long take-off runs and high landing speeds. In an SST design, this would have required enormous engine power to lift off from existing runways and, to provide the fuel needed, &quot;some horribly large aeroplanes&quot; resulted. Based on this, the group considered the concept of an SST infeasible, and instead suggested continued low-level studies into supersonic aerodynamics.

===Slender deltas===
Soon after, Johanna Weber and Dietrich Küchemann at the RAE published a series of reports on a new wing planform, known in the UK as the &quot;slender delta&quot;. The team, including Eric Maskell whose report &quot;Flow Separation in Three Dimensions&quot; contributed to an understanding of separated flow, worked with the fact that delta wings can produce strong vortices on their upper surfaces at high angles of attack. The vortex will lower the air pressure and cause lift. This had been noticed by Chuck Yeager in the Convair XF-92, but its qualities had not been fully appreciated. Weber suggested that the effect could be used to improve low speed performance.

Küchemann&#x27;s and Weber&#x27;s papers changed the entire nature of supersonic design. The delta had already been used on aircraft, but these designs used planforms that were not much different from a swept wing of the same span. Weber noted that the lift from the vortex was increased by the length of the wing it had to operate over, which suggested that the effect would be maximised by extending the wing along the fuselage as far as possible. Such a layout would still have good supersonic performance, but also have reasonable take-off and landing speeds using vortex generation. The aircraft would have to take off and land very &quot;nose high&quot; to generate the required vortex lift, which led to questions about the low speed handling qualities of such a design.

Küchemann presented the idea at a meeting where Morgan was also present. Test pilot Eric Brown recalls Morgan&#x27;s reaction to the presentation, saying that he immediately seized on it as the solution to the SST problem. Brown considers this moment as being the birth of the Concorde project.

===Supersonic Transport Aircraft Committee===
On 1 October 1956 the Ministry of Supply asked Morgan to form a new study group, the Supersonic Transport Aircraft Committee (STAC) (sometimes referred to as the Supersonic Transport Advisory Committee), to develop a practical SST design and find industry partners to build it. At the first meeting, on 5 November 1956, the decision was made to fund the development of a test-bed aircraft to examine the low-speed performance of the slender delta, a contract that eventually produced the Handley Page HP.115. This aircraft demonstrated safe control at speeds as low as , about one third that of the F-104 Starfighter.

STAC stated that an SST would have economic performance similar to existing subsonic types. Lift is not generated the same way at supersonic and subsonic speeds, with the lift-to-drag ratio for supersonic designs being about half that of subsonic designs. The aircraft would need more thrust than a subsonic design of the same size. But although they would use more fuel in cruise, they would be able to fly more revenue-earning flights in a given time, so fewer aircraft would be needed to service a particular route. This would remain economically advantageous as long as fuel represented a small percentage of operational costs.

STAC suggested that two designs naturally fell out of their work, a transatlantic model flying at about Mach 2, and a shorter-range version flying at Mach 1.2. Morgan suggested that a 150-passenger transatlantic SST would cost about £75 to £90 million to develop, and be in service in 1970. The smaller 100-passenger short-range version would cost perhaps £50 to £80 million, and be ready for service in 1968. To meet this schedule, development would need to begin in 1960, with production contracts let in 1962. Morgan suggested that the US was already involved in a similar project, and that if the UK failed to respond it would be locked out of an airliner market that he believed would be dominated by SST aircraft.

In 1959, a study contract was awarded to Hawker Siddeley and Bristol for preliminary designs based on the slender delta, which developed as the HSA.1000 and Bristol 198. Armstrong Whitworth also responded with an internal design, the M-Wing, for the lower-speed shorter-range category. Both the STAC group and the government were looking for partners to develop the designs. In September 1959, Hawker approached Lockheed, and after the creation of British Aircraft Corporation in 1960, the former Bristol team immediately started talks with Boeing, General Dynamics, Douglas Aircraft, and Sud Aviation.

===Ogee planform selected===
Küchemann and others at the RAE continued their work on the slender delta throughout this period, considering three basic shapes; the classic straight-edge delta, the &quot;gothic delta&quot; that was rounded outward to appear like a gothic arch, and the &quot;ogival wing&quot; that was compound-rounded into the shape of an ogee. Each of these planforms had advantages and disadvantages. As they worked with these shapes, a practical concern grew to become so important that it forced selection of one of these designs.
Generally the wing&#x27;s centre of pressure (CP, or &quot;lift point&quot;) should be close to the aircraft&#x27;s centre of gravity (CG, or &quot;balance point&quot;) to reduce the amount of control force required to pitch the aircraft. As the aircraft layout changes during the design phase, it is common for the CG to move fore or aft. With a normal wing design this can be addressed by moving the wing slightly fore or aft to account for this. With a delta wing running most of the length of the fuselage, this was no longer easy; moving the wing would leave it in front of the nose or behind the tail. Studying the various layouts in terms of CG changes, both during design and changes due to fuel use during flight, the ogee planform immediately came to the fore.

To test the new wing, NASA assisted the team by modifying a Douglas F5D Skylancer to mimic the wing selection. In 1965 the NASA test aircraft successfully tested the wing, and found that it reduced landing speeds noticeably over the standard delta wing. NASA also ran simulations at Ames that showed the aircraft would exhibit a sudden change in pitch when entering ground effect. Ames test pilots later participated in a joint cooperative test with the French and British test pilots and found that the simulations had been correct, and this information was added to pilot training.

===Partnership with Sud Aviation===
France had its own SST plans. In the late 1950s, the government requested designs from the government-owned Sud Aviation and Nord Aviation, as well as Dassault. All three returned designs based on Küchemann and Weber&#x27;s slender delta; Nord suggested a ramjet powered design flying at Mach 3, and the other two were jet-powered Mach 2 designs that were similar to each other. Of the three, the Sud Aviation Super-Caravelle won the design contest with a medium-range design deliberately sized to avoid competition with transatlantic US designs they assumed were already on the drawing board.

As soon as the design was complete, in April 1960, Pierre Satre, the company&#x27;s technical director, was sent to Bristol to discuss a partnership. Bristol was surprised to find that the Sud team had designed a similar aircraft after considering the SST problem and coming to the same conclusions as the Bristol and STAC teams in terms of economics. It was later revealed that the original STAC report, marked &quot;For UK Eyes Only&quot;, had secretly been passed to France to win political favour. Sud made minor changes to the paper and presented it as their own work.

France had no modern large jet engines and had already decided to buy a British design (as they had on the earlier subsonic Caravelle). As neither company had experience in the use of heat-resistant metals for airframes, a maximum speed of around Mach 2 was selected so aluminium could be used – above this speed, the friction with the air heats the metal so much that it begins to soften. This lower speed would also speed development and allow their design to fly before the Americans. Everyone involved agreed that Küchemann&#x27;s ogee-shaped wing was the right one.

The British team was still focused on a 150-passenger design serving transatlantic routes, while France was deliberately avoiding these. Common components could be used in both designs, with the shorter range version using a clipped fuselage and four engines, and the longer one a stretched fuselage and six engines, leaving only the wing to be extensively re-designed. The teams continued to meet in 1961, and by this time it was clear that the two aircraft would be very similar in spite of different ranges and seating arrangements. A single design emerged that differed mainly in fuel load. More powerful Bristol Siddeley Olympus engines, being developed for the TSR-2, allowed either design to be powered by only four engines.

===Cabinet response, treaty===
While the development teams met, the French Minister of Public Works and Transport Robert Buron was meeting with the UK Minister of Aviation Peter Thorneycroft, and Thorneycroft told the cabinet that France was much more serious about a partnership than any of the US companies. The various US companies had proved uninterested, likely due to the belief that the government would be funding development and would frown on any partnership with a European company, and the risk of &quot;giving away&quot; US technological leadership to a European partner.

When the STAC plans were presented to the UK cabinet, the economic considerations were considered highly questionable, especially as these were based on development costs, now estimated to be , which were repeatedly overrun in the industry. The Treasury Ministry presented a negative view, suggesting that there was no way the project would have any positive financial returns for the government, especially in light that &quot;the industry&#x27;s past record of over-optimistic estimating (including the recent history of the TSR.2) suggests that it would be prudent to consider&quot; the cost &quot;to turn out much too low.&quot;

This led to an independent review of the project by the Committee on Civil Scientific Research and Development, which met on the topic between July and September 1962. The committee rejected the economic arguments, including considerations of supporting the industry made by Thorneycroft. Their report in October stated that it was unlikely there would be any direct positive economic outcome, but that the project should still be considered because everyone else was going supersonic, and they were concerned they would be locked out of future markets. It appeared the project would not be likely to significantly affect other, more important, research efforts.

At the time, the UK was pressing for admission to the European Economic Community, and this became the main rationale for moving ahead with the aircraft. The development project was negotiated as an international treaty between the two countries rather than a commercial agreement between companies and included a clause, originally asked for by the UK government, imposing heavy penalties for cancellation. This treaty was signed on 29 November 1962. Charles de Gaulle vetoed the UK&#x27;s entry into the European Community in a speech on 25 January 1963.

===Naming===
At Charles de Gaulle&#x27;s January 1963 press conference the aircraft was first called &#x27;Concorde&#x27;. The name was suggested by the eighteen-year-old son of F.G. Clark, the publicity manager at BAC&#x27;s Filton plant. Reflecting the treaty between the British and French governments that led to Concorde&#x27;s construction, the name &quot;Concorde&quot; is from the French word &quot;&quot; (), which has an English equivalent, &quot;&quot;. Both words mean &quot;agreement&quot;, &quot;harmony&quot;, or &quot;union&quot;. The name was changed to &quot;Concord&quot; by Harold Macmillan in response to a perceived slight by de Gaulle. At the French roll-out in Toulouse in late 1967, the British Minister of Technology, Tony Benn, announced that he would change the spelling back to &quot;Concorde&quot;. This created a nationalist uproar that died down when Benn stated that the suffixed &quot;e&quot; represented &quot;Excellence, England, Europe, and Entente (Cordiale)&quot;. In his memoirs, he recounted a letter from a Scotsman claiming, &quot;you talk about &#x27;E&#x27; for England, but part of it is made in Scotland.&quot; Given Scotland&#x27;s contribution of providing the nose cone for the aircraft, Benn replied, &quot;it was also &#x27;E&#x27; for &#x27;Écosse&#x27; (the French name for Scotland) – and I might have added &#x27;e&#x27; for extravagance and &#x27;e&#x27; for escalation as well!&quot;

In common usage in the United Kingdom, the type is known as &quot;Concorde&quot; without an article, rather than &quot; Concorde&quot; or &quot; Concorde&quot;.

===Sales efforts===
Advertisements for Concorde during the late 1960s placed in publications such as &quot;Aviation Week &amp; Space Technology&quot; predicted a market for 350 aircraft by 1980. The new consortium intended to produce one long-range and one short-range version, but prospective customers showed no interest in the short-range version, thus it was later dropped.

Concorde&#x27;s costs spiralled during development to more than six times the original projections, arriving at a unit cost of £23 million in 1977 (equivalent to £ million in ). Its sonic boom made travelling supersonically over land impossible without causing complaints from citizens. World events also dampened Concorde sales prospects; the 1973–74 stock market crash and the 1973 oil crisis had made airlines cautious about aircraft with high fuel consumption, and new wide-body aircraft, such as the Boeing 747, had recently made subsonic aircraft significantly more efficient and presented a low-risk option for airlines. While carrying a full load, Concorde achieved 15.8 passenger miles per gallon of fuel, while the Boeing 707 reached 33.3 pm/g, the Boeing 747 46.4 pm/g, and the McDonnell Douglas DC-10 53.6 pm/g. A trend in favour of cheaper airline tickets also caused airlines such as Qantas to question Concorde&#x27;s market suitability. During the early 2000s, &quot;Flight International&quot; described Concorde as being &quot;one of aerospace&#x27;s most ambitious but commercially flawed projects&quot;,

The consortium received orders (non-binding options) for more than 100 of the long-range version from the major airlines of the day: Pan Am, BOAC, and Air France were the launch customers, with six aircraft each. Other airlines in the order book included Panair do Brasil, Continental Airlines, Japan Airlines, Lufthansa, American Airlines, United Airlines, Air India, Air Canada, Braniff, Singapore Airlines, Iran Air, Olympic Airways, Qantas, CAAC Airlines, Middle East Airlines, and TWA. At the time of the first flight, the options list contained 74 options from 16 airlines:

===Testing===
The design work was supported by a research programme studying the flight characteristics of low ratio delta wings. A supersonic Fairey Delta 2 was modified to carry the ogee planform, and, renamed as the BAC 221, used for tests of the high-speed flight envelope; the Handley Page HP.115 also provided valuable information on low-speed performance.

Construction of two prototypes began in February 1965: 001, built by Aérospatiale at Toulouse, and 002, by BAC at Filton, Bristol. 001 made its first test flight from Toulouse on 2 March 1969, piloted by André Turcat, and first went supersonic on 1 October. The first UK-built Concorde flew from Filton to RAF Fairford on 9 April 1969, piloted by Brian Trubshaw. Both prototypes were presented to the public on 7–8 June 1969 at the Paris Air Show. As the flight programme progressed, 001 embarked on a sales and demonstration tour on 4 September 1971, which was also the first transatlantic crossing of Concorde. Concorde 002 followed on 2 June 1972 with a tour of the Middle and Far East. Concorde 002 made the first visit to the United States in 1973, landing at Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport to mark the airport&#x27;s opening.
Concorde had initially held a great deal of customer interest, but the project was hit by order cancellations. The Paris Le Bourget air show crash of the competing Soviet Tupolev Tu-144 had shocked potential buyers, and public concern over the environmental issues of supersonic aircraftthe sonic boom, take-off noise and pollutionhad produced a change in the public opinion of SSTs. By 1976 the remaining buyers were from four countries: Britain, France, China, and Iran. Only Air France and British Airways (the successor to BOAC) took up their orders, with the two governments taking a cut of any profits.

The US government cut federal funding for the Boeing 2707, its supersonic transport programme, in 1971; Boeing did not complete its two 2707 prototypes. The US, India, and Malaysia all ruled out Concorde supersonic flights over the noise concern, although some of these restrictions were later relaxed. Professor Douglas Ross characterised restrictions placed upon Concorde operations by President Jimmy Carter&#x27;s administration as having been an act of protectionism of American aircraft manufacturers.

===Programme cost===
The original programme cost estimate was £70 million in 1962, (£ in ). After cost overruns and delays the programme eventually cost between £1.5 and £2.1 billion in 1976, (£ – in ). This cost was the main reason the production run was much smaller than expected.

==Design==
===General features===
Concorde is an ogival delta winged aircraft with four Olympus engines based on those employed in the RAF&#x27;s Avro Vulcan strategic bomber. It has an unusual tailless configuration for a commercial aircraft, as does the Tupolev Tu-144. Concorde was the first airliner to have a fly-by-wire flight-control system (in this case, analogue); the avionics system Concorde used was unique because it was the first commercial aircraft to employ hybrid circuits. The principal designer for the project was Pierre Satre, with Sir Archibald Russell as his deputy.

Concorde pioneered the following technologies:

For high speed and optimisation of flight:
* Double delta (ogee/ogival) shaped wings
* Variable engine air intake ramp system controlled by digital computers
* Supercruise capability

For weight-saving and enhanced performance:
* Mach 2.02 (~) cruising speed for optimum fuel consumption (supersonic drag minimum and turbojet engines are more efficient at higher speed); fuel consumption at and at altitude of was .
* Mainly aluminium construction using a high-temperature alloy similar to that developed for aero-engine pistons. This material gave low weight and allowed conventional manufacture (higher speeds would have ruled out aluminium)
* Full-regime autopilot and autothrottle allowing &quot;hands off&quot; control of the aircraft from climb out to landing
* Fully electrically controlled analogue fly-by-wire flight controls systems
* High-pressure hydraulic system using for lighter hydraulic components. 
* Air data computer (ADC) for the automated monitoring and transmission of aerodynamic measurements (total pressure, static pressure, angle of attack, side-slip).
* Fully electrically controlled analogue brake-by-wire system
* No auxiliary power unit, as Concorde would only visit large airports where ground air start carts were available.

===Powerplant===


A symposium titled &quot;Supersonic-Transport Implications&quot; was hosted by the Royal Aeronautical Society on 8 December 1960. Various views were put forward on the likely type of powerplant for a supersonic transport, such as podded or buried installation and turbojet or ducted-fan engines. Concorde needed to fly long distances to be economically viable; this required high efficiency from the powerplant. Turbofan engines were rejected due to their larger cross-section producing excessive drag (but would be studied for future SSTs). Olympus turbojet technology was already available for development to meet the design requirements. Rolls-Royce proposed developing the RB.169 to power Concorde during its initial design phase, but developing a wholly-new engine for a single aircraft would have been extremely costly, so the existing BSEL Olympus Mk 320 turbojet engine, which was already flying in the BAC TSR-2 supersonic strike bomber prototype, was chosen instead.

Boundary layer management in the podded installation was put forward as simpler with only an inlet cone, however, Dr. Seddon of the RAE favoured a more integrated buried installation. One concern of placing two or more engines behind a single intake was that an intake failure could lead to a double or triple engine failure. While a ducted fan over the turbojet would reduce noise, its larger cross-section also incurred more drag. Acoustics specialists were confident that a turbojet&#x27;s noise could be reduced and SNECMA made advances in silencer design during the programme. The Olympus Mk.622 with reduced jet velocity was proposed to reduce the noise but was not pursued. By 1974, the spade silencers which projected into the exhaust were reported to be ineffective but &quot;entry-into-service aircraft are likely to meet their noise guarantees&quot;.

The powerplant configuration selected for Concorde highlighted airfield noise, boundary layer management and interactions between adjacent engines and the requirement that the powerplant, at Mach 2, tolerate pushovers, sideslips, pull-ups and throttle slamming without surging. Extensive development testing with design changes and changes to intake and engine control laws addressed most of the issues except airfield noise and the interaction between adjacent powerplants at speeds above Mach 1.6 which meant Concorde &quot;had to be certified aerodynamically as a twin-engined aircraft above Mach 1.6&quot;.

Situated behind the wing leading edge, the engine intake had a wing boundary layer ahead of it. Two-thirds were diverted and the remaining third which entered the intake did not adversely affect the intake efficiency except during pushovers when the boundary layer thickened and caused surging. Wind tunnel testing helped define leading-edge modifications ahead of the intakes which solved the problem. Each engine had its own intake and the nacelles were paired with a splitter plate between them to minimise the chance of one powerplant influencing the other. Only above was an engine surge likely to affect the adjacent engine.

The air intake design for Concorde&#x27;s engines was especially critical. The intakes had to slow down supersonic inlet air to subsonic speeds with high-pressure recovery to ensure efficient operation at cruising speed while providing low distortion levels (to prevent engine surge) and maintaining high efficiency for all likely ambient temperatures in cruise. They had to provide adequate subsonic performance for diversion cruise and low engine-face distortion at take-off. They also had to provide an alternative path for excess intake of air during engine throttling or shutdowns. The variable intake features required to meet all these requirements consisted of front and rear ramps, a dump door, an auxiliary inlet and a ramp bleed to the exhaust nozzle.

As well as supplying air to the engine, the intake also supplied air through the ramp bleed to the propelling nozzle. The nozzle ejector (or aerodynamic) design, with variable exit area and secondary flow from the intake, contributed to good expansion efficiency from take-off to cruise. Concorde&#x27;s Air Intake Control Units (AICUs) made use of a digital processor for intake control. It was the first use of a digital processor with full authority control of an essential system in a passenger aircraft. It was developed by BAC&#x27;s Electronics and Space Systems division after the analogue AICUs (developed by Ultra Electronics) fitted to the prototype aircraft were found to lack sufficient accuracy. Ultra Electronics also developed Concorde&#x27;s thrust-by-wire engine control system.

Engine failure causes problems on conventional subsonic aircraft; not only does the aircraft lose thrust on that side but the engine creates drag, causing the aircraft to yaw and bank in the direction of the failed engine. If this had happened to Concorde at supersonic speeds, it theoretically could have caused a catastrophic failure of the airframe. Although computer simulations predicted considerable problems, in practice Concorde could shut down both engines on the same side of the aircraft at Mach 2 without difficulties. During an engine failure the required air intake is virtually zero. So, on Concorde, engine failure was countered by the opening of the auxiliary spill door and the full extension of the ramps, which deflected the air downwards past the engine, gaining lift and minimising drag. Concorde pilots were routinely trained to handle double-engine failure. Concorde used reheat (afterburners) only at take-off and to pass through the transonic speed range, between Mach 0.95 and 1.7.

===Heating problems===
Kinetic heating from the high speed boundary layer caused the skin to heat up during supersonic flight. Every surface, such as windows and panels, was warm to the touch by the end of the flight. Apart from the engine bay, the hottest part of any supersonic aircraft&#x27;s structure is the nose, due to aerodynamic heating. Hiduminium R.R. 58, an aluminium alloy, was used throughout the aircraft because it was relatively cheap and easy to work with. The highest temperature it could sustain over the life of the aircraft was , which limited the top speed to Mach 2.02. Concorde went through two cycles of cooling and heating during a flight, first cooling down as it gained altitude at subsonic speed, then heating up accelerating to cruise speed, finally cooling again when descending and slowing down before heating again in low altitude air before landing. This had to be factored into the metallurgical and fatigue modelling. A test rig was built that repeatedly heated up a full-size section of the wing, and then cooled it, and periodically samples of metal were taken for testing. The airframe was designed for a life of 45,000 flying hours.
As the fuselage heated up it expanded by as much as . The most obvious manifestation of this was a gap that opened up on the flight deck between the flight engineer&#x27;s console and the bulkhead. On some aircraft that conducted a retiring supersonic flight, the flight engineers placed their caps in this expanded gap, wedging the cap when the airframe shrank again. To keep the cabin cool, Concorde used the fuel as a heat sink for the heat from the air conditioning. The same method also cooled the hydraulics. During supersonic flight a visor was used to keep high temperature air from flowing over the cockpit skin.

Concorde had livery restrictions; the majority of the surface had to be covered with a highly reflective white paint to avoid overheating the aluminium structure due to heating effects. The white finish reduced the skin temperature by . In 1996, Air France briefly painted F-BTSD in a predominantly blue livery, with the exception of the wings, in a promotional deal with Pepsi. In this paint scheme, Air France was advised to remain at for no more than 20 minutes at a time, but there was no restriction at speeds under Mach 1.7. F-BTSD was used because it was not scheduled for any long flights that required extended Mach 2 operations.

===Structural issues===
Due to its high speeds, large forces were applied to the aircraft during turns, causing distortion of the aircraft&#x27;s structure. There were concerns over maintaining precise control at supersonic speeds. Both of these issues were resolved by ratio changes between the inboard and outboard elevon deflections, varying at differing speeds including supersonic. Only the innermost elevons, attached to the stiffest area of the wings, were used at higher speeds. The narrow fuselage flexed, which was apparent to rear passengers looking along the length of the cabin.

When any aircraft passes the critical mach of its airframe, the centre of pressure shifts rearwards. This causes a pitch-down moment on the aircraft if the centre of gravity remains where it was. The wings were designed to reduce this, but there was still a shift of about . This could have been countered by the use of trim controls, but at such high speeds, this would have increased drag which would have been unacceptable. Instead, the distribution of fuel along the aircraft was shifted during acceleration and deceleration to move the centre of gravity, effectively acting as an auxiliary trim control.

===Range===
To fly non-stop across the Atlantic Ocean, Concorde required the greatest supersonic range of any aircraft. This was achieved by a combination of powerplants which were efficient at twice the speed of sound, a slender fuselage with high fineness ratio, and a complex wing shape for a high lift-to-drag ratio. Only a modest payload could be carried and the aircraft was trimmed without using deflected control surfaces, to avoid the drag that would incur.

Nevertheless, soon after Concorde began flying, a Concorde &quot;B&quot; model was designed with slightly larger fuel capacity and slightly larger wings with leading edge slats to improve aerodynamic performance at all speeds, with the objective of expanding the range to reach markets in new regions. It would have higher thrust engines with noise reducing features and no environmentally-objectionable afterburner. Preliminary design studies showed that an engine with a 25% gain in efficiency over the Rolls-Royce/Snecma Olympus 593 could be produced. This would have given additional range and a greater payload, making new commercial routes possible. This was cancelled due in part to poor sales of Concorde, but also to the rising cost of aviation fuel in the 1970s.

===Radiation concerns===
Concorde&#x27;s high cruising altitude meant people on board received almost twice the flux of extraterrestrial ionising radiation as those travelling on a conventional long-haul flight. Upon Concorde&#x27;s introduction, it was speculated that this exposure during supersonic travels would increase the likelihood of skin cancer. Due to the proportionally reduced flight time, the overall equivalent dose would normally be less than a conventional flight over the same distance. Unusual solar activity might lead to an increase in incident radiation. To prevent incidents of excessive radiation exposure, the flight deck had a radiometer and an instrument to measure the rate of increase or decrease of radiation. If the radiation level became too high, Concorde would descend below .

===Cabin pressurisation===
Airliner cabins were usually maintained at a pressure equivalent to elevation. Concorde&#x27;s pressurisation was set to an altitude at the lower end of this range, . Concorde&#x27;s maximum cruising altitude was ; subsonic airliners typically cruise below .

A sudden reduction in cabin pressure is hazardous to all passengers and crew. Above , a sudden cabin depressurisation would leave a &quot;time of useful consciousness&quot; up to 10–15 seconds for a conditioned athlete. At Concorde&#x27;s altitude, the air density is very low; a breach of cabin integrity would result in a loss of pressure severe enough that the plastic emergency oxygen masks installed on other passenger jets would not be effective and passengers would soon suffer from hypoxia despite quickly donning them. Concorde was equipped with smaller windows to reduce the rate of loss in the event of a breach, a reserve air supply system to augment cabin air pressure, and a rapid descent procedure to bring the aircraft to a safe altitude. The FAA enforces minimum emergency descent rates for aircraft and noting Concorde&#x27;s higher operating altitude, concluded that the best response to pressure loss would be a rapid descent. Continuous positive airway pressure would have delivered pressurised oxygen directly to the pilots through masks.

===Flight characteristics===
While subsonic commercial jets took eight hours to fly from Paris to New York (seven hours from New York to Paris), the average supersonic flight time on the transatlantic routes was just under 3.5 hours. Concorde had a maximum cruising altitude of and an average cruise speed of , more than twice the speed of conventional aircraft.

With no other civil traffic operating at its cruising altitude of about , Concorde had exclusive use of dedicated oceanic airways, or &quot;tracks&quot;, separate from the North Atlantic Tracks, the routes used by other aircraft to cross the Atlantic. Due to the significantly less variable nature of high altitude winds compared to those at standard cruising altitudes, these dedicated SST tracks had fixed co-ordinates, unlike the standard routes at lower altitudes, whose co-ordinates are replotted twice daily based on forecast weather patterns (jetstreams). Concorde would also be cleared in a block, allowing for a slow climb from during the oceanic crossing as the fuel load gradually decreased. In regular service, Concorde employed an efficient &quot;cruise-climb&quot; flight profile following take-off.

The delta-shaped wings required Concorde to adopt a higher angle of attack at low speeds than conventional aircraft, but it allowed the formation of large low-pressure vortices over the entire upper wing surface, maintaining lift. The normal landing speed was . Because of this high angle, during a landing approach Concorde was on the backside of the drag force curve, where raising the nose would increase the rate of descent; the aircraft was thus largely flown on the throttle and was fitted with an autothrottle to reduce the pilot&#x27;s workload.

===Brakes and undercarriage===
Because of the way Concorde&#x27;s delta-wing generated lift, the undercarriage had to be unusually strong and tall to allow for the angle of attack at low speed. At rotation, Concorde would rise to a high angle of attack, about 18 degrees. Prior to rotation, the wing generated almost no lift, unlike typical aircraft wings. Combined with the high airspeed at rotation ( indicated airspeed), this increased the stresses on the main undercarriage in a way that was initially unexpected during the development and required a major redesign. Due to the high angle needed at rotation, a small set of wheels was added aft to prevent tailstrikes. The main undercarriage units swing towards each other to be stowed but due to their great height also needed to contract in length telescopically before swinging to clear each other when stowed.

The four main wheel tyres on each bogie unit are inflated to . The twin-wheel nose undercarriage retracts forwards and its tyres are inflated to a pressure of , and the wheel assembly carries a spray deflector to prevent standing water from being thrown up into the engine intakes. The tyres are rated to a maximum speed on the runway of . 

The high take-off speed of required Concorde to have upgraded brakes. Like most airliners, Concorde has anti-skid braking to prevent the tyres from losing traction when the brakes are applied. The brakes, developed by Dunlop, were the first carbon-based brakes used on an airliner. The use of carbon over equivalent steel brakes provided a weight-saving of . Each wheel has multiple discs which are cooled by electric fans. Wheel sensors include brake overload, brake temperature, and tyre deflation. After a typical landing at Heathrow, brake temperatures were around . Landing Concorde required a minimum of runway length; the shortest runway Concorde ever landed on carrying commercial passengers was Cardiff Airport. Concorde G-AXDN (101) made its final landing at Duxford Aerodrome on 20 August 1977, which had a runway length of just at the time. This was the last aircraft to land at Duxford before the runway was shortened later that year.

===Droop nose===
Concorde&#x27;s drooping nose, developed by Marshall&#x27;s of Cambridge, enabled the aircraft to switch from being streamlined to reduce drag and achieve optimal aerodynamic efficiency during flight, to not obstructing the pilot&#x27;s view during taxi, take-off, and landing operations. Due to the high angle of attack, the long pointed nose obstructed the view and necessitated the ability to droop. The droop nose was accompanied by a moving visor that retracted into the nose prior to being lowered. When the nose was raised to horizontal, the visor would rise in front of the cockpit windscreen for aerodynamic streamlining.
A controller in the cockpit allowed the visor to be retracted and the nose to be lowered to 5° below the standard horizontal position for taxiing and take-off. Following take-off and after clearing the airport, the nose and visor were raised. Prior to landing, the visor was again retracted and the nose lowered to 12.5° below horizontal for maximal visibility. Upon landing the nose was raised to the 5° position to avoid the possibility of damage due to collision with ground vehicles, and then raised fully before engine shutdown to prevent pooling of internal condensation within the radome seeping down into the aircraft&#x27;s pitot/ADC system probes.

The US Federal Aviation Administration had objected to the restrictive visibility of the visor used on the first two prototype Concordes, which had been designed before a suitable high-temperature window glass had become available, and thus requiring alteration before the FAA would permit Concorde to serve US airports. This led to the redesigned visor used in the production and the four pre-production aircraft (101, 102, 201, and 202). The nose window and visor glass, needed to endure temperatures in excess of at supersonic flight, were developed by Triplex.
==Operational history==

===First flights and routes flown===
Concorde began scheduled flights with British Airways and Air France on 21 January 1976. 

Concorde operated on various routes, including London–Bahrain, London–New York, London–Miami, and London–Barbados (with British Airways), and Paris–Dakar–Rio de Janeiro, Paris–Azores–Caracas, Paris–New York, and Paris–Washington (with Air France), but faced challenges such as bans and low profitability. Later, British Airways repositioned Concorde as a super-premium service and it then became profitable.

===Retirement===
In 2003, Air France and British Airways announced the retirement of Concorde, due to rising maintenance costs, low passenger numbers following the 25 July 2000 crash, and the slump in air travel following the September 11 attacks.

Air France flew its last commercial flight on 30 May 2003 with British Airways retiring its Concorde fleet on 24 October 2003.

===Operators===
* Air France
* British Airways
* Braniff International Airways operated Concordes at subsonic speed between Dulles International Airport and Dallas Fort Worth International Airport, from January 1979 until May 1980, using its own flight and cabin crew, under its own insurance and operator&#x27;s license. Stickers containing a US registration were placed over the French and British registrations of the aircraft during each rotation, and a placard was temporarily placed behind the cockpit to signify the operator and operator&#x27;s license in command.
* Singapore Airlines had its livery placed on the left side of Concorde G-BOAD, and held a joint marketing agreement which saw Singapore insignias on the cabin fittings, as well as the airline&#x27;s &quot;Singapore Girl&quot; stewardesses jointly sharing cabin duty with British Airways flight attendants. All flight crew, operations, and insurances remained solely under British Airways however, and at no point did Singapore Airlines operate Concorde services under its own operator&#x27;s certification, nor wet-lease an aircraft. This arrangement initially only lasted for three flights, conducted between 9–13 December 1977; it later resumed on 24 January 1979, and operated until 1 November 1980. The Singapore livery was used on G-BOAD from 1977 to 1980.

==Accidents and incidents==

===Air France Flight 4590===
On 25 July 2000, Air France Flight 4590, registration F-BTSC, crashed in Gonesse, France, after departing from Charles de Gaulle Airport en route to John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City, killing all 100 passengers and nine crew members on board as well as four people on the ground. It was the only fatal accident involving Concorde. This crash also damaged Concorde&#x27;s reputation and caused both British Airways and Air France to temporarily ground their fleets. According to the official investigation conducted by the Bureau of Enquiry and Analysis for Civil Aviation Safety (BEA), the crash was caused by a metallic strip that had fallen from a Continental Airlines DC-10 that had taken off minutes earlier. This fragment punctured a tyre on Concorde&#x27;s left main wheel bogie during take-off. The tyre exploded, and a piece of rubber hit the fuel tank, which caused a fuel leak and led to a fire. The crew shut down engine number 2 in response to a fire warning, and with engine number 1 surging and producing little power, the aircraft was unable to gain altitude or speed. The aircraft entered a rapid pitch-up then a sudden descent, rolling left and crashing tail-low into the Hôtelissimo Les Relais Bleus Hotel in Gonesse. 

Before the accident, Concorde had been arguably the safest operational passenger airliner in the world with zero passenger deaths, but there had been two prior non-fatal accidents and a rate of tyre damage 30 times higher than subsonic airliners from 1995 to 2000. Safety improvements made after the crash included more secure electrical controls, Kevlar lining on the fuel tanks and specially developed burst-resistant tyres. The first flight with the modifications departed from London Heathrow on 17 July 2001, piloted by BA Chief Concorde Pilot Mike Bannister. In a flight of 3 hours 20 minutes over the mid-Atlantic towards Iceland, Bannister attained Mach 2.02 and then returned to RAF Brize Norton. The test flight, intended to resemble the London–New York route, was declared a success and was watched on live TV, and by crowds on the ground at both locations.

The first flight with passengers after the 2000 grounding landed shortly before the World Trade Center attacks in the United States. This was not a commercial flight: all the passengers were BA employees. Normal commercial operations resumed on 7 November 2001 by BA and AF (aircraft G-BOAE and F-BTSD), with service to New York JFK, where Mayor Rudy Giuliani greeted the passengers.

===Other accidents and incidents===
On 12 April 1989, Concorde G-BOAF, on a chartered flight from Christchurch, New Zealand, to Sydney, Australia, suffered a structural failure at supersonic speed. As the aircraft was climbing and accelerating through Mach 1.7, a &quot;thud&quot; was heard. The crew did not notice any handling problems, and they assumed the thud they heard was a minor engine surge. No further difficulty was encountered until descent through at Mach 1.3, when a vibration was felt throughout the aircraft, lasting two to three minutes. Most of the upper rudder had separated from the aircraft at this point. Aircraft handling was unaffected, and the aircraft made a safe landing at Sydney. The UK&#x27;s Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) concluded that the skin of the rudder had been separating from the rudder structure over a period before the accident due to moisture seepage past the rivets in the rudder. Production staff had not followed proper procedures during an earlier modification of the rudder; the procedures were difficult to adhere to. The aircraft was repaired and returned to service.

On 21 March 1992, G-BOAB while flying British Airways Flight 001 from London to New York, also suffered a structural failure at supersonic speed. While cruising at Mach 2, at approximately , the crew heard a &quot;thump&quot;. No difficulties in handling were noticed, and no instruments gave any irregular indications. This crew also suspected there had been a minor engine surge. One hour later, during descent and while decelerating below Mach 1.4, a sudden &quot;severe&quot; vibration began throughout the aircraft. The vibration worsened when power was added to the No 2 engine. The crew shut down the No 2 engine and made a successful landing in New York, noting that increased rudder control was needed to keep the aircraft on its intended approach course. Again, the skin had separated from the structure of the rudder, which led to most of the upper rudder detaching in flight. The AAIB concluded that repair materials had leaked into the structure of the rudder during a recent repair, weakening the bond between the skin and the structure of the rudder, leading to it breaking up in flight. The large size of the repair had made it difficult to keep repair materials out of the structure, and prior to this accident, the severity of the effect of these repair materials on the structure and skin of the rudder was not appreciated.

The 2010 trial involving Continental Airlines over the crash of Flight 4590 established that from 1976 until Flight 4590 there had been 57 tyre failures involving Concordes during takeoffs, including a near-crash at Dulles International Airport on 14 June 1979 involving Air France Flight 54 where a tyre blowout pierced the plane&#x27;s fuel tank and damaged a left engine and electrical cables, with the loss of two of the craft&#x27;s hydraulic systems.

==Aircraft on display==
Twenty Concorde aircraft were built: two prototypes, two pre-production aircraft, two development aircraft and 14 production aircraft for commercial service. With the exception of two of the production aircraft, all are preserved, mostly in museums. One aircraft was scrapped in 1994, and another was destroyed in the Air France Flight 4590 crash in 2000.

==Comparable aircraft==
===Tu-144===


Concorde was one of only two supersonic jetliner models to operate commercially; the other was the Soviet-built Tupolev Tu-144, which operated in the late 1970s. The Tu-144 was nicknamed &quot;Concordski&quot; by Western European journalists for its outward similarity to Concorde. Soviet espionage efforts allegedly stole Concorde blueprints to assist in the design of the Tu-144. As a result of a rushed development programme, the first Tu-144 prototype was substantially different from the preproduction machines, but both were cruder than Concorde. The Tu-144&quot;S&quot; had a significantly shorter range than Concorde. Jean Rech, Sud Aviation, attributed this to two things, a very heavy powerplant with an intake twice as long as that on Concorde, and low-bypass turbofan engines with too high a bypass ratio which needed afterburning for cruise. The aircraft had poor control at low speeds because of a simpler wing design. The Tu-144 required braking parachutes to land. The Tu-144 had two crashes, one at the 1973 Paris Air Show, and another during a pre-delivery test flight in May 1978.

Passenger service commenced in November 1977, but after the 1978 crash the aircraft was taken out of passenger service after only 55 flights, which carried an average of 58 passengers. The Tu-144 had an inherently unsafe structural design as a consequence of an automated production method chosen to simplify and speed up manufacturing. The Tu-144 program was cancelled by the Soviet government on 1 July 1983.

===SST and others===

The main competing designs for the US government-funded supersonic transport (SST) were the swing-wing Boeing 2707 and the compound delta wing Lockheed L-2000. These were to have been larger, with seating for up to 300 people. The Boeing 2707 was selected for development. Concorde first flew in 1969, the year Boeing began building 2707 mockups after changing the design to a cropped delta wing; the cost of this and other changes helped to kill the project. The operation of US military aircraft such as the Mach 3+ North American XB-70 Valkyrie prototypes and Convair B-58 Hustler strategic nuclear bomber had shown that sonic booms were capable of reaching the ground, and the experience from the Oklahoma City sonic boom tests led to the same environmental concerns that hindered the commercial success of Concorde. The American government cancelled its SST project in 1971 having spent more than $1 billion without any aircraft being built.

==Impact==

===Environmental===
Before Concorde&#x27;s flight trials, developments in the civil aviation industry were largely accepted by governments and their respective electorates. Opposition to Concorde&#x27;s noise, particularly on the east coast of the United States, forged a new political agenda on both sides of the Atlantic, with scientists and technology experts across a multitude of industries beginning to take the environmental and social impact more seriously. Although Concorde led directly to the introduction of a general noise abatement programme for aircraft flying out of John F. Kennedy Airport, many found that Concorde was quieter than expected, partly due to the pilots temporarily throttling back their engines to reduce noise during overflight of residential areas. Even before commercial flights started, it had been claimed that Concorde was quieter than many other aircraft. In 1971, BAC&#x27;s technical director stated, &quot;It is certain on present evidence and calculations that in the airport context, production Concordes will be no worse than aircraft now in service and will in fact be better than many of them.&quot;

Concorde produced nitrogen oxides in its exhaust, which, despite complicated interactions with other ozone-depleting chemicals, are understood to result in degradation to the ozone layer at the stratospheric altitudes it cruised. It has been pointed out that other, lower-flying, airliners produce ozone during their flights in the troposphere, but vertical transit of gases between the layers is restricted. The small fleet meant overall ozone-layer degradation caused by Concorde was negligible. In 1995, David Fahey, of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the United States, warned that a fleet of 500 supersonic aircraft with exhausts similar to Concorde might produce a 2 per cent drop in global ozone levels, much higher than previously thought. Each 1 per cent drop in ozone is estimated to increase the incidence of non-melanoma skin cancer worldwide by 2 per cent. Dr Fahey said if these particles are produced by highly oxidised sulphur in the fuel, as he believed, then removing sulphur in the fuel will reduce the ozone-destroying impact of supersonic transport.

Concorde&#x27;s technical leap forward boosted the public&#x27;s understanding of conflicts between technology and the environment as well as awareness of the complex decision analysis processes that surround such conflicts. In France, the use of acoustic fencing alongside TGV tracks might not have been achieved without the 1970s controversy over aircraft noise. In the UK, the CPRE has issued tranquillity maps since 1990.

===Public perception===
Concorde was normally perceived as a privilege of the rich, but special circular or one-way (with return by other flight or ship) charter flights were arranged to bring a trip within the means of moderately well-off enthusiasts. As a symbol of national pride, an example from the BA fleet made occasional flypasts at selected Royal events, major air shows and other special occasions, sometimes in formation with the Red Arrows. On the final day of commercial service, public interest was so great that grandstands were erected at Heathrow Airport. Significant numbers of people attended the final landings; the event received widespread media coverage.

The aircraft was usually referred to by the British as simply &quot;Concorde&quot;. In France it was known as &quot;le Concorde&quot; due to &quot;le&quot;, the definite article, used in French grammar to introduce the name of a ship or aircraft, and the capital being used to distinguish a proper name from a common noun of the same spelling. In French, the common noun &quot;concorde&quot; means &quot;agreement, harmony, or peace&quot;. Concorde&#x27;s pilots and British Airways in official publications often refer to Concorde both in the singular and plural as &quot;she&quot; or &quot;her&quot;.

In 2006, 37 years after its first test flight, Concorde was announced the winner of the Great British Design Quest organised by the BBC (through &quot;The Culture Show&quot;) and the Design Museum. A total of 212,000 votes were cast with Concorde beating other British design icons such as the Mini, mini skirt, Jaguar E-Type car, the Tube map, the World Wide Web, the K2 red telephone box and the Supermarine Spitfire.

===Special missions===
The heads of France and the United Kingdom flew in Concorde many times. Presidents Georges Pompidou, Valéry Giscard d&#x27;Estaing and François Mitterrand regularly used Concorde as French flagship aircraft on foreign visits. Elizabeth II and Prime Ministers Edward Heath, Jim Callaghan, Margaret Thatcher, John Major and Tony Blair took Concorde in some charter flights such as the Queen&#x27;s trips to Barbados on her Silver Jubilee in 1977, in 1987 and in 2003, to the Middle East in 1984 and to the United States in 1991. Pope John Paul II flew on Concorde in May 1989.

Concorde sometimes made special flights for demonstrations, air shows (such as the Farnborough, Paris-Le Bourget, Oshkosh AirVenture and MAKS air shows) as well as parades and celebrations (for example, of Zurich Airport&#x27;s anniversary in 1998). The aircraft were also used for private charters (including by the President of Zaire Mobutu Sese Seko on multiple occasions), for advertising companies (including for the firm OKI), for Olympic torch relays (1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville) and for observing solar eclipses, including the solar eclipse of 30 June 1973 and again for the total solar eclipse on 11 August 1999.

===Records===
The fastest transatlantic airliner flight was from New York JFK to London Heathrow on 7 February 1996 by the British Airways G-BOAD in 2 hours, 52 minutes, 59 seconds from take-off to touchdown aided by a 175 mph (282 km/h) tailwind. On 13 February 1985, a Concorde charter flight flew from London Heathrow to Sydney in a time of 17 hours, 3 minutes and 45 seconds, including refuelling stops.

Concorde set the FAI &quot;Westbound Around the World&quot; and &quot;Eastbound Around the World&quot; world air speed records. On 12–13 October 1992, in commemoration of the 500th anniversary of Columbus&#x27; first voyage to the New World, Concorde Spirit Tours (US) chartered Air France Concorde F-BTSD and circumnavigated the world in 32 hours 49 minutes and 3 seconds, from Lisbon, Portugal, including six refuelling stops at Santo Domingo, Acapulco, Honolulu, Guam, Bangkok, and Bahrain.

The eastbound record was set by the same Air France Concorde (F-BTSD) under charter to Concorde Spirit Tours in the US on 15–16 August 1995. This promotional flight circumnavigated the world from New York/JFK International Airport in 31 hours 27 minutes 49 seconds, including six refuelling stops at Toulouse, Dubai, Bangkok, Andersen AFB in Guam, Honolulu, and Acapulco.

On its way to the Museum of Flight in November 2003, G-BOAG set a New York City-to-Seattle speed record of 3 hours, 55 minutes, and 12 seconds. Due to the restrictions on supersonic overflights within the US the flight was granted permission by the Canadian authorities for the majority of the journey to be flown supersonically over sparsely-populated Canadian territory.

==Specifications==

==Notable appearances in media==

==See also==

* Barbara Harmer, the first qualified female Concorde pilot
* Museo del Concorde, a former museum in Mexico dedicated to the airliner

==Notes==

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
===Legacy===
* British Airways Concorde page
* BAC Concorde at BAE Systems site
* Design Museum (UK) Concorde page
* Heritage Concorde preservation group site

=== Articles===
* 
* 

===Videos===

* &quot;Video: Roll-out.&quot; British Movietone/Associated Press. 14 December 1967, posted online on 21 July 2015.
* &quot;This plane could cross the Atlantic in 3.5 hours. Why did it fail?.&quot; Vox Media. 19 July 2016.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="0" end="8" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239346" start="38" end="57" title="supersonic airliner" label="supersonic airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428793" start="96" end="108" title="Sud Aviation" label="Sud Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q650639" start="116" end="128" title="Aérospatiale" label="Aérospatiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q655224" start="138" end="166" title="British Aircraft Corporation" label="British Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="243" end="249" title="treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="392" end="401" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="435" end="447" title="first flight" label="first flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="462" end="470" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="493" end="499" title="Market (economics)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="603" end="610" title="airline" label="airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946885" start="655" end="683" title="Certificate of Airworthiness" label="Certificate of Airworthiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q795009" start="698" end="704" title="Civil Aviation Authority (United Kingdom)" label="UK CAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326722" start="734" end="751" title="tailless aircraft" label="tailless aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="773" end="781" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q645102" start="840" end="846" title="ogival" label="ogival"/>
<link wikidata="Q850097" start="847" end="857" title="delta wing" label="delta wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308361" start="864" end="874" title="Droop nose (aeronautics)" label="droop nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q288955" start="921" end="951" title="Rolls-Royce/Snecma Olympus 593" label="Rolls-Royce/Snecma Olympus 593"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="952" end="960" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592527" start="983" end="994" title="intake ramp" label="intake ramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="1001" end="1007" title="reheat" label="reheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="1078" end="1087" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q626658" start="1132" end="1143" title="fly-by-wire" label="fly-by-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068387" start="1206" end="1219" title="supercruise" label="supercruising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682100" start="1284" end="1296" title="cost overrun" label="cost overrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="1415" end="1425" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q46280" start="1431" end="1443" title="Paris-Roissy" label="Paris-Roissy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="1448" end="1463" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="1469" end="1484" title="Heathrow Airport" label="London Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q732410" start="1486" end="1506" title="Transatlantic flight" label="Transatlantic flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="1533" end="1550" title="Washington Dulles" label="Washington Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="1571" end="1583" title="New York JFK" label="New York JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q131277901" start="1670" end="1690" title="Concorde aircraft histories" label="seven airframes each"/>
<link wikidata="Q170007" start="1726" end="1743" title="Supersonic flight" label="Supersonic flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q333268" start="1779" end="1789" title="sonic boom" label="sonic boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q188513" start="1876" end="1890" title="Tupolev Tu-144" label="Tupolev Tu-144"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662591" start="1939" end="1953" title="1978 Yegoryevsk Tu-144 crash" label="May 1978 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q639498" start="1989" end="2000" title="Boeing 2707" label="Boeing 2707"/>
<link wikidata="Q406535" start="2075" end="2097" title="Air France Flight 4590" label="Air France Flight 4590"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794935" start="2548" end="2559" title="Arnold Hall" label="Arnold Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419175" start="2577" end="2605" title="Royal Aircraft Establishment" label="Royal Aircraft Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912189" start="2619" end="2632" title="Morien Morgan" label="Morien Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239346" start="2662" end="2682" title="supersonic transport" label="supersonic transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901639" start="2769" end="2784" title="Robert Thomas Jones (engineer)" label="Robert T. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="2799" end="2803" title="NACA" label="NACA"/>
<link wikidata="Q159881" start="3045" end="3071" title="Lockheed F-104 Starfighter" label="Lockheed F-104 Starfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631212" start="3099" end="3107" title="Avro 730" label="Avro 730"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578508" start="3710" end="3723" title="Johanna Weber" label="Johanna Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q77048" start="3728" end="3746" title="Dietrich Küchemann" label="Dietrich Küchemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992500" start="3802" end="3810" title="Planform (aeronautics)" label="planform"/>
<link wikidata="Q850097" start="4033" end="4043" title="delta wing" label="delta wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q732722" start="4064" end="4072" title="vortex" label="vortices"/>
<link wikidata="Q370906" start="4105" end="4121" title="angle of attack" label="angles of attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q271939" start="4203" end="4215" title="Chuck Yeager" label="Chuck Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129328" start="4223" end="4236" title="Convair XF-92" label="Convair XF-92"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="4572" end="4582" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017635" start="5054" end="5065" title="vortex lift" label="vortex lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q348719" start="5232" end="5242" title="Eric Brown (pilot)" label="Eric Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q965321" start="5512" end="5530" title="Ministry of Supply" label="Ministry of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647508" start="5978" end="5997" title="Handley Page HP.115" label="Handley Page HP.115"/>
<link wikidata="Q845727" start="6280" end="6298" title="lift-to-drag ratio" label="lift-to-drag ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q952062" start="7504" end="7519" title="Hawker Siddeley" label="Hawker Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q654907" start="7524" end="7531" title="Bristol Aeroplane Company" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7607" end="7615" title="Hawker Siddeley HSA.1000" label="HSA.1000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7620" end="7631" title="Bristol Type 223#STAC" label="Bristol 198"/>
<link wikidata="Q689159" start="7633" end="7652" title="Armstrong Whitworth" label="Armstrong Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233" start="7875" end="7883" title="Lockheed Corporation" label="Lockheed"/>
<link wikidata="Q655224" start="7911" end="7939" title="British Aircraft Corporation" label="British Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="8004" end="8010" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q502940" start="8012" end="8028" title="General Dynamics" label="General Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q651778" start="8030" end="8046" title="Douglas Aircraft" label="Douglas Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428793" start="8052" end="8064" title="Sud Aviation" label="Sud Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8330" end="8341" title="Gothic architecture#Equilateral arch" label="gothic arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q645102" start="8357" end="8363" title="ogive" label="ogival"/>
<link wikidata="Q339340" start="8422" end="8426" title="ogee" label="ogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q604830" start="8644" end="8662" title="Center of pressure (fluid mechanics)" label="centre of pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="8734" end="8751" title="centre of gravity" label="centre of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q639090" start="8837" end="8842" title="Pitch axis (kinematics)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252275" start="9450" end="9471" title="Douglas F5D Skylancer" label="Douglas F5D Skylancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513679" start="10136" end="10149" title="Nord Aviation" label="Nord Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434948" start="10162" end="10170" title="Dassault" label="Dassault"/>
<link wikidata="Q60602" start="10267" end="10273" title="ramjet" label="ramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402681" start="10408" end="10436" title="Sud Aviation Super-Caravelle" label="Sud Aviation Super-Caravelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24284536" start="10657" end="10669" title="Pierre Satre" label="Pierre Satre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503" start="11305" end="11314" title="Sud Aviation Caravelle" label="Caravelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784919" start="12362" end="12386" title="Rolls-Royce Olympus" label="Bristol Siddeley Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q795376" start="12420" end="12425" title="TSR-2" label="TSR-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434688" start="12600" end="12612" title="Robert Buron" label="Robert Buron"/>
<link wikidata="Q334282" start="12658" end="12676" title="Peter Thorneycroft" label="Peter Thorneycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="14424" end="14451" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="14822" end="14839" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="15522" end="15538" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="15613" end="15621" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564336" start="15648" end="15670" title="Minister of Technology" label="Minister of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="15672" end="15681" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q464399" start="15906" end="15924" title="Entente Cordiale" label="Entente (Cordiale)"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="16463" end="16470" title="article (grammar)" label="article"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119313" start="17256" end="17282" title="1973–74 stock market crash" label="1973–74 stock market crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="17291" end="17306" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q309078" start="17385" end="17403" title="wide-body aircraft" label="wide-body aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="17417" end="17427" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377047" start="17591" end="17617" title="passenger miles per gallon" label="passenger miles per gallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="17637" end="17647" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q208075" start="17701" end="17724" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-10" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="17810" end="17816" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428742" start="17895" end="17915" title="Flight International" label="Flight International"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="18169" end="18175" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="18177" end="18181" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="BOAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758698" start="18291" end="18307" title="Panair do Brasil" label="Panair do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="18309" end="18329" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="18331" end="18345" title="Japan Airlines" label="Japan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="18347" end="18356" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="18358" end="18375" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="18377" end="18392" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q69906" start="18394" end="18403" title="Air India" label="Air India"/>
<link wikidata="Q185339" start="18405" end="18415" title="Air Canada" label="Air Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q898522" start="18417" end="18424" title="Braniff International Airways" label="Braniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="18426" end="18444" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q461631" start="18446" end="18454" title="Iran Air" label="Iran Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021591" start="18456" end="18471" title="Olympic Airways" label="Olympic Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="18473" end="18479" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060596" start="18481" end="18494" title="CAAC Airlines" label="CAAC Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q859510" start="18496" end="18516" title="Middle East Airlines" label="Middle East Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="18522" end="18525" title="Trans World Airlines" label="TWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q850097" start="18734" end="18744" title="delta wing" label="delta wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393143" start="18760" end="18774" title="Fairey Delta 2" label="Fairey Delta 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647508" start="18899" end="18918" title="Handley Page HP.115" label="Handley Page HP.115"/>
<link wikidata="Q537692" start="19095" end="19101" title="Filton" label="Filton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848727" start="19185" end="19197" title="André Turcat" label="André Turcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427413" start="19287" end="19299" title="RAF Fairford" label="RAF Fairford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965500" start="19328" end="19342" title="Brian Trubshaw" label="Brian Trubshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q174352" start="19413" end="19427" title="Paris Air Show" label="Paris Air Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q459096" start="19746" end="19780" title="Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport" label="Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822723" start="19932" end="19963" title="1973 Paris Air Show crash" label="Paris Le Bourget air show crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q188513" start="19988" end="20002" title="Tupolev Tu-144" label="Tupolev Tu-144"/>
<link wikidata="Q333268" start="20108" end="20118" title="sonic boom" label="sonic boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q639498" start="20473" end="20484" title="Boeing 2707" label="Boeing 2707"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="20825" end="20837" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="20885" end="20898" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682100" start="21034" end="21046" title="cost overrun" label="cost overrun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21270" end="21282" title="Delta wing#ogival delta" label="ogival delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q288955" start="21309" end="21316" title="Rolls-Royce/Snecma Olympus 593" label="Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q218931" start="21367" end="21378" title="Avro Vulcan" label="Avro Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="21379" end="21395" title="strategic bomber" label="strategic bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326722" start="21415" end="21437" title="tailless aircraft" label="tailless configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q188513" start="21477" end="21491" title="Tupolev Tu-144" label="Tupolev Tu-144"/>
<link wikidata="Q626658" start="21535" end="21546" title="fly-by-wire" label="fly-by-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q221329" start="21599" end="21607" title="avionics" label="avionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210109" start="21695" end="21710" title="Hybrid integrated circuit" label="hybrid circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786501" start="21774" end="21795" title="Archibald Russell" label="Sir Archibald Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q850097" start="21905" end="21917" title="Double delta" label="Double delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q339340" start="21919" end="21923" title="ogee" label="ogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592527" start="21967" end="21978" title="intake ramp" label="intake ramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="22000" end="22016" title="digital computer" label="digital computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068387" start="22020" end="22031" title="Supercruise" label="Supercruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="22090" end="22094" title="Mach number" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="22518" end="22527" title="autopilot" label="autopilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872503" start="22532" end="22544" title="autothrottle" label="autothrottle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22667" end="22678" title="Aircraft flight control system#Fly-by-wire control systems" label="fly-by-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063730" start="22779" end="22796" title="Air data computer" label="Air data computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406217" start="22894" end="22909" title="static pressure" label="static pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q370906" start="22911" end="22926" title="angle of attack" label="angle of attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q358947" start="22981" end="22994" title="brake-by-wire" label="brake-by-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q908333" start="23007" end="23027" title="auxiliary power unit" label="auxiliary power unit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23079" end="23101" title="Ground support equipment#Air start unit" label="ground air start carts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170942" start="23221" end="23247" title="Royal Aeronautical Society" label="Royal Aeronautical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="23550" end="23558" title="Turbofan" label="Turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23985" end="23999" title="Rolls-Royce Olympus variants#Bristol Olympus (BOl) 22R (Mk. 320)" label="Olympus Mk 320"/>
<link wikidata="Q795376" start="24049" end="24058" title="BAC TSR-2" label="BAC TSR-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q27070220" start="26033" end="26040" title="nacelle" label="nacelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880445" start="27605" end="27622" title="Ultra Electronics" label="Ultra Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306357" start="27832" end="27849" title="subsonic aircraft" label="subsonic aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="28681" end="28687" title="reheat" label="reheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579556" start="28744" end="28753" title="transonic" label="transonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713784" start="29108" end="29112" title="nose cone" label="nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q841676" start="29121" end="29140" title="aerodynamic heating" label="aerodynamic heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752921" start="29142" end="29152" title="Hiduminium" label="Hiduminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="29731" end="29738" title="fatigue (material)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="29998" end="30006" title="Thermal expansion" label="expanded"/>
<link wikidata="Q432425" start="30118" end="30133" title="flight engineer" label="flight engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142963" start="30390" end="30399" title="Thermal energy storage" label="heat sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698555" start="30605" end="30611" title="aircraft livery" label="livery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774358" start="30679" end="30702" title="Anti-flash white" label="highly reflective white"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="30964" end="30969" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q139188" start="31549" end="31555" title="elevon" label="elevon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777346" start="31854" end="31867" title="critical mach" label="critical mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q604830" start="31889" end="31907" title="Center of pressure (fluid mechanics)" label="centre of pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q581516" start="32145" end="32158" title="Trim tab" label="trim controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q905424" start="32532" end="32537" title="Range (aeronautics)" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450142" start="32684" end="32698" title="fineness ratio" label="fineness ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q845727" start="32736" end="32754" title="lift-to-drag ratio" label="lift-to-drag ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534008" start="33061" end="33079" title="leading edge slats" label="leading edge slats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="33307" end="33318" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485344" start="33789" end="33793" title="flux" label="flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="33814" end="33832" title="ionising radiation" label="ionising radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q256106" start="34092" end="34107" title="equivalent dose" label="equivalent dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q49385" start="34190" end="34204" title="Solar variation" label="solar activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513293" start="34516" end="34531" title="Aircraft cabin" label="Airliner cabins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389519" start="34611" end="34625" title="Cabin pressurization" label="pressurisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260741" start="34785" end="34812" title="Uncontrolled decompression" label="reduction in cabin pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805411" start="34914" end="34942" title="time of useful consciousness" label="time of useful consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370728" start="35148" end="35170" title="emergency oxygen system" label="emergency oxygen masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="35266" end="35273" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165502" start="35723" end="35758" title="Continuous positive airway pressure" label="Continuous positive airway pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q948612" start="36374" end="36395" title="North Atlantic Tracks" label="North Atlantic Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q202325" start="36752" end="36761" title="jetstream" label="jetstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q370906" start="37076" end="37091" title="angle of attack" label="angle of attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488092" start="37369" end="37379" title="Parasitic drag" label="drag force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370303" start="37769" end="37777" title="Rotation (aviation)" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468712" start="37975" end="37993" title="indicated airspeed" label="indicated airspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423039" start="38232" end="38242" title="tailstrike" label="tailstrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q217421" start="38475" end="38480" title="bogie" label="bogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="38887" end="38904" title="anti-lock braking system" label="anti-skid braking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315458" start="39001" end="39007" title="Dunlop Rubber" label="Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8994" start="39487" end="39502" title="Cardiff Airport" label="Cardiff Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317425" start="39552" end="39569" title="Duxford Aerodrome" label="Duxford Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773469" start="39793" end="39821" title="Marshall Aerospace" label="Marshall&amp;#x27;s of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q659994" start="40968" end="40974" title="radome" label="radome"/>
<link wikidata="Q56218" start="41013" end="41018" title="Pitot tube" label="pitot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063730" start="41019" end="41022" title="Air data computer" label="ADC"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="41046" end="41077" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q28961280" start="41595" end="41602" title="Triplex Safety Glass" label="Triplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="41704" end="41719" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="41724" end="41734" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q406535" start="42330" end="42348" title="Air France Flight 4590" label="25 July 2000 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="42392" end="42412" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="42561" end="42571" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="42574" end="42589" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42592" end="42621" title="Braniff International Airways#Concorde SST" label="Braniff International Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="42667" end="42695" title="Dulles International Airport" label="Dulles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q459096" start="42700" end="42739" title="Dallas Fort Worth International Airport" label="Dallas Fort Worth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="43117" end="43135" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q271659" start="44010" end="44017" title="Gonesse" label="Gonesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q46280" start="44048" end="44073" title="Charles de Gaulle Airport" label="Charles de Gaulle Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="44086" end="44123" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010515" start="44480" end="44536" title="Bureau of Enquiry and Analysis for Civil Aviation Safety" label="Bureau of Enquiry and Analysis for Civil Aviation Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="44608" end="44628" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q208075" start="44629" end="44634" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-10" label="DC-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q207344" start="45544" end="45550" title="Kevlar" label="Kevlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494858" start="45745" end="45759" title="Mike Bannister" label="Mike Bannister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420053" start="45884" end="45900" title="RAF Brize Norton" label="RAF Brize Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="46150" end="46176" title="September 11 attacks" label="World Trade Center attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="46412" end="46425" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="46549" end="46561" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="46579" end="46585" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938452" start="46839" end="46851" title="Compressor stall" label="engine surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q406725" start="47175" end="47209" title="Air Accidents Investigation Branch" label="Air Accidents Investigation Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q212500" start="47368" end="47373" title="rivet" label="rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="48953" end="48973" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="49144" end="49172" title="Dulles International Airport" label="Dulles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q406535" start="49728" end="49750" title="Air France Flight 4590" label="Air France Flight 4590"/>
<link wikidata="Q188513" start="49918" end="49932" title="Tupolev Tu-144" label="Tupolev Tu-144"/>
<link wikidata="Q97170268" start="50088" end="50112" title="Soviet industrial espionage of Concorde" label="Soviet espionage efforts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50566" end="50593" title="Turbofan#Low-bypass turbofan" label="low-bypass turbofan engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q591399" start="50759" end="50777" title="drogue parachute" label="braking parachutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822723" start="50826" end="50845" title="1973 Paris Air Show Tu-144 crash" label="1973 Paris Air Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q838974" start="51433" end="51443" title="swing-wing" label="swing-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q639498" start="51444" end="51455" title="Boeing 2707" label="Boeing 2707"/>
<link wikidata="Q850097" start="51473" end="51483" title="delta wing" label="delta wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758666" start="51484" end="51499" title="Lockheed L-2000" label="Lockheed L-2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q729056" start="51859" end="51888" title="North American XB-70 Valkyrie" label="North American XB-70 Valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q599891" start="51904" end="51924" title="Convair B-58 Hustler" label="Convair B-58 Hustler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082162" start="52042" end="52072" title="Oklahoma City sonic boom tests" label="Oklahoma City sonic boom tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="53550" end="53565" title="Ozone depletion" label="ozone-depleting"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="53624" end="53635" title="ozone layer" label="ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="53643" end="53656" title="stratosphere" label="stratospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="53976" end="54023" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q601510" start="54791" end="54807" title="noise barrier" label="acoustic fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q129337" start="54818" end="54821" title="TGV" label="TGV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027853" start="54924" end="54928" title="Campaign to Protect Rural England" label="CPRE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54940" end="54957" title="Tranquillity#Mapping tranquillity" label="tranquillity maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837149" start="55300" end="55307" title="flypast" label="flypast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427806" start="55412" end="55422" title="Red Arrows" label="Red Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="55811" end="55827" title="definite article" label="definite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q11923" start="55837" end="55851" title="French grammar" label="French grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q147276" start="55941" end="55952" title="proper name" label="proper name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="55960" end="55971" title="common noun" label="common noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728389" start="56405" end="56421" title="The Culture Show" label="The Culture Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q571249" start="56437" end="56450" title="Design Museum" label="Design Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="56548" end="56552" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q230823" start="56554" end="56564" title="mini skirt" label="mini skirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q249303" start="56566" end="56579" title="Jaguar E-Type" label="Jaguar E-Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014543" start="56589" end="56597" title="Tube map" label="Tube map"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="56603" end="56617" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q712868" start="56623" end="56643" title="Red telephone box" label="K2 red telephone box"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="56652" end="56672" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="56781" end="56797" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124" start="56799" end="56828" title="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="56833" end="56852" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="56924" end="56936" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="56957" end="56969" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="56971" end="56984" title="Jim Callaghan" label="Jim Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="56986" end="57003" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="57005" end="57015" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="57020" end="57030" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="57225" end="57242" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396967" start="57357" end="57368" title="Farnborough Airshow" label="Farnborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q174352" start="57370" end="57386" title="Paris Air Show" label="Paris-Le Bourget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273800" start="57388" end="57406" title="EAA AirVenture Oshkosh" label="Oshkosh AirVenture"/>
<link wikidata="Q845688" start="57411" end="57415" title="MAKS (air show)" label="MAKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="57604" end="57609" title="Zaire" label="Zaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q164535" start="57610" end="57626" title="Mobutu Sese Seko" label="Mobutu Sese Seko"/>
<link wikidata="Q786947" start="57701" end="57704" title="Oki Electric Industry" label="OKI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9660" start="57733" end="57753" title="1992 Winter Olympics" label="1992 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887" start="57788" end="57801" title="solar eclipse" label="solar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107678" start="57818" end="57847" title="solar eclipse of June 30, 1973" label="solar eclipse of 30 June 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281799" start="57866" end="57903" title="solar eclipse of August 11, 1999" label="total solar eclipse on 11 August 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581" start="58230" end="58236" title="Sydney Airport" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q214130" start="58332" end="58335" title="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale" label="FAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="58511" end="58519" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="58546" end="58555" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135885" start="58625" end="58640" title="circumnavigation" label="circumnavigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="58694" end="58700" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="58746" end="58759" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="58761" end="58769" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="58771" end="58779" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="58787" end="58794" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="58800" end="58807" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="59120" end="59125" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="59152" end="59156" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="59172" end="59180" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402597" start="59201" end="59217" title="Museum of Flight" label="Museum of Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883965" start="59627" end="59641" title="Barbara Harmer" label="Barbara Harmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940564" start="59687" end="59705" title="Museo del Concorde" label="Museo del Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q116293563" start="60108" end="60125" title="British Movietone" label="British Movietone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="60126" end="60142" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942354" start="60275" end="60284" title="Vox Media" label="Vox Media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7053" wikidata="Q81103" url="?curid=7053" title="Cannon">
<text>A cannon is a large-caliber gun classified as a type of artillery, which usually launches a projectile using explosive chemical propellant. Gunpowder (&quot;black powder&quot;) was the primary propellant before the invention of smokeless powder during the late 19th century. Cannons vary in gauge, effective range, mobility, rate of fire, angle of fire and firepower; different forms of cannon combine and balance these attributes in varying degrees, depending on their intended use on the battlefield. A cannon is a type of heavy artillery weapon.

The word &quot;cannon&quot; is derived from several languages, in which the original definition can usually be translated as &quot;tube&quot;, &quot;cane&quot;, or &quot;reed&quot;. In the modern era, the term &quot;cannon&quot; has fallen into decline, replaced by &quot;guns&quot; or &quot;artillery&quot;, if not a more specific term such as howitzer or mortar, except for high-caliber automatic weapons firing bigger rounds than machine guns, called autocannons.

The earliest known depiction of cannons appeared in Song dynasty China as early as the 12th century; however, solid archaeological and documentary evidence of cannons do not appear until the 13th century. In 1288, Yuan dynasty troops are recorded to have used hand cannons in combat, and the earliest extant cannon bearing a date of production comes from the same period. By the early 14th century, possible mentions of cannon had appeared in the Middle East and the depiction of one in Europe by 1326. Recorded usage of cannon began appearing almost immediately after. They subsequently spread to India, their usage on the subcontinent being first attested to in 1366. By the end of the 14th century, cannons were widespread throughout Eurasia.

Cannons were used primarily as anti-infantry weapons until around 1374, when large cannons were recorded to have breached walls for the first time in Europe. Cannons featured prominently as siege weapons, and ever larger pieces appeared. In 1464 a cannon known as the Great Turkish Bombard was created in the Ottoman Empire. Cannons as field artillery became more important after 1453 when cannons broke down the walls of the Roman Empire&#x27;s capital, with the introduction of limber, which greatly improved cannon maneuverability and mobility. European cannons reached their longer, lighter, more accurate, and more efficient &quot;classic form&quot; around 1480. This classic European cannon design stayed relatively consistent in form with minor changes until the 1750s.

==Etymology and terminology==

The word &quot;cannon&quot; is derived from the Old Italian word , meaning &quot;large tube&quot;, which came from the Latin , in turn originating from the Greek (), &quot;reed&quot;, and then generalised to mean any hollow tube-like object. The word has been used to refer to a gun since 1326 in Italy and 1418 in England. Both of the plural forms &quot;cannons&quot; and &quot;cannon&quot; are correct.

==History==

===East Asia===

The cannon may have appeared as early as the 12th century in China, and was probably a parallel development or evolution of the fire-lance, a short ranged anti-personnel weapon combining a gunpowder-filled tube and a polearm. Projectiles such as iron scraps or porcelain shards, mixed together with the gunpowder (&quot;co-viative&quot;), were placed in fire lance barrels at some point, and eventually, the paper and bamboo materials of fire lance barrels were replaced by metal.

The earliest known depiction of a cannon is a sculpture from the Dazu Rock Carvings in Sichuan dated to 1128, however, the earliest archaeological samples and textual accounts do not appear until the 13th century. The primary extant specimens of cannon from the 13th century are the Wuwei Bronze Cannon dated to 1227, the Heilongjiang hand cannon dated to 1288, and the Xanadu Gun dated to 1298. However, only the Xanadu gun contains an inscription bearing a date of production, so it is considered the earliest confirmed extant cannon. The Xanadu Gun is in length and weighs . The other cannons are dated using contextual evidence. The Heilongjiang hand cannon is also often considered by some to be the oldest firearm since it was unearthed near the area where the &quot;History of Yuan&quot; reports a battle took place involving hand cannons. According to the &quot;History of Yuan&quot;, in 1288, a Jurchen commander by the name of Li Ting led troops armed with hand cannons into battle against the rebel prince Nayan.
Chen Bingying argues there were no guns before 1259, while Dang Shoushan believes the Wuwei gun and other Western Xia era samples point to the appearance of guns by 1220, and Stephen Haw goes even further by stating that guns were developed as early as 1200. Sinologist Joseph Needham and renaissance siege expert Thomas Arnold provide a more conservative estimate of around 1280 for the appearance of the &quot;true&quot; cannon. Whether or not any of these are correct, it seems likely that the gun was born sometime during the 13th century.

References to cannons proliferated throughout China in the following centuries. Cannon featured in literary pieces. In 1341 Xian Zhang wrote a poem called &quot;The Iron Cannon Affair&quot; describing a cannonball fired from an eruptor which could &quot;pierce the heart or belly when striking a man or horse, and even transfix several persons at once.&quot; By the 1350s the cannon was used extensively in Chinese warfare. In 1358 the Ming army failed to take a city due to its garrisons&#x27; usage of cannon, however, they themselves would use cannon, in the thousands, later on during the siege of Suzhou in 1366.

The Mongol invasion of Java in 1293 brought gunpowder technology to the Nusantara archipelago in the form of cannon (Chinese: &quot;Pao&quot;). During the Ming dynasty cannons were used in riverine warfare at the Battle of Lake Poyang. One shipwreck in Shandong had a cannon dated to 1377 and an anchor dated to 1372. From the 13th to 15th centuries cannon-armed Chinese ships also travelled throughout Southeast Asia. Cannon appeared in Đại Việt by 1390 at the latest.

The first of the western cannon to be introduced were breech-loaders in the early 16th century, which the Chinese began producing themselves by 1523 and improved on by including composite metal construction in their making.

Japan did not acquire cannon until 1510 when a monk brought one back from China, and did not produce any in appreciable numbers. During the 1593 siege of Pyongyang, 40,000 Ming troops deployed a variety of cannons against Japanese troops. Despite their defensive advantage and the use of arquebus by Japanese soldiers, the Japanese were at a severe disadvantage due to their lack of cannon. Throughout the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598), the Ming–Joseon coalition used artillery widely in land and naval battles, including on the turtle ships of Yi Sun-sin.

According to Ivan Petlin, the first Russian envoy to Beijing, in September 1619, the city was armed with large cannon with cannonballs weighing more than . His general observation was:

===Western Europe===


Outside of China, the earliest texts to mention gunpowder are Roger Bacon&#x27;s (1267) and in what has been interpreted as references to firecrackers. In the early 20th century, a British artillery officer proposed that another work tentatively attributed to Bacon, , dated to 1247, contained an encrypted formula for gunpowder hidden in the text. These claims have been disputed by science historians. In any case, the formula itself is not useful for firearms or even firecrackers, burning slowly and producing mostly smoke.

There is a record of a gun in Europe dating to 1322 that was discovered in the nineteenth century, but the artifact has since been lost. The earliest known European depiction of a gun appeared in 1326 in a manuscript by Walter de Milemete, although not necessarily drawn by him, known as (&quot;Concerning the Majesty, Wisdom, and Prudence of Kings&quot;), which displays a gun with a large arrow emerging from it and its user lowering a long stick to ignite the gun through the touch hole. In the same year, another similar illustration showed a darker gun being set off by a group of knights, in another work of de Milemete&#x27;s, . On 11 February of that same year, the Signoria of Florence appointed two officers to obtain and ammunition for the town&#x27;s defense. In the following year a document from the Turin area recorded a certain amount was paid &quot;for the making of a certain instrument or device made by Friar Marcello for the projection of pellets of lead&quot;. A reference from 1331 describes an attack mounted by two Germanic knights on Cividale del Friuli, using man-portable gunpowder weapons of some sort. The 1320s seem to have been the takeoff point for guns in Europe according to most modern military historians. Scholars suggest that the lack of gunpowder weapons in a well-traveled Venetian&#x27;s catalogue for a new crusade in 1321 implies that guns were unknown in Europe up until this point, further solidifying the 1320 mark, however more evidence in this area may be forthcoming in the future.

The oldest extant cannon in Europe is a small bronze example unearthed in Loshult, Scania in southern Sweden. It dates from the early-mid 14th century, and is currently in the Swedish History Museum in Stockholm.

Early cannons in Europe often shot arrows and were known by an assortment of names such as , , &quot;ribaldis&quot;, and . The &quot;ribaldis&quot;, which shot large arrows and simplistic grapeshot, were first mentioned in the English Privy Wardrobe accounts during preparations for the Battle of Crécy, between 1345 and 1346. The Florentine Giovanni Villani recounts their destructiveness, indicating that by the end of the battle, &quot;the whole plain was covered by men struck down by arrows and cannon balls&quot;. Similar cannon were also used at the siege of Calais (1346–47), although it was not until the 1380s that the &quot;ribaudekin&quot; clearly became mounted on wheels.

====Early use====
The Battle of Crecy which pitted the English against the French in 1346 featured the early use of cannon which helped the longbowmen repulse a large force of Genoese crossbowmen deployed by the French. The English originally intended to use the cannon against cavalry sent to attack their archers, thinking that the loud noises produced by their cannon would panic the advancing horses along with killing the knights atop them.

Early cannons could also be used for more than simply killing men and scaring horses. English cannon were used defensively in 1346 during the siege of Breteuil to launch fire onto an advancing siege tower. In this way, cannons could be used to burn down siege equipment before it reached the fortifications. The use of cannons to shoot fire could also be used offensively as another battle involved the setting of a castle ablaze with similar methods. The particular incendiary used in these projectiles was most likely a gunpowder mixture. This is one area where early Chinese and European cannons share a similarity as both were possibly used to shoot fire.

Another aspect of early European cannons is that they were rather small, dwarfed by the bombards, which would come later. In fact, it is possible that the cannons used at Crécy were capable of being moved rather quickly as there is an anonymous chronicle that notes the guns being used to attack the French camp, indicating that they would have been mobile enough to press the attack. These smaller cannons would eventually give way to larger, wall-breaching guns by the end of the 1300s.

===Islamic world===

There is no clear consensus on when the cannon first appeared in the Islamic world, with dates ranging from 1260 to the mid-14th century. The cannon may have appeared in the Islamic world in the late 13th century, with Ibn Khaldun in the 14th century stating that cannons were used in the Maghreb region of North Africa in 1274, and other Arabic military treatises in the 14th century referring to the use of cannon by Mamluk forces in 1260 and 1303, and by Muslim forces at the 1324 siege of Huesca in Spain. However, some scholars do not accept these early dates. While the date of its first appearance is not entirely clear, the general consensus among most historians is that there is no doubt the Mamluk forces were using cannon by 1342. Other accounts may have also mentioned the use of cannon in the early 14th century. An Arabic text dating to 1320–1350 describes a type of gunpowder weapon called a which uses gunpowder to shoot projectiles out of a tube at the end of a stock. Some scholars consider this a hand cannon while others dispute this claim. The Nasrid army besieging Elche in 1331 made use of &quot;iron pellets shot with fire&quot;.

According to historian Ahmad Y. al-Hassan, during the Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260, the Mamluks used cannon against the Mongols. He claims that this was &quot;the first cannon in history&quot; and used a gunpowder formula almost identical to the ideal composition for explosive gunpowder. He also argues that this was not known in China or Europe until much later. Al-Hassan further claims that the earliest textual evidence of cannon is from the Middle East, based on earlier originals which report hand-held cannons being used by the Mamluks at the Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260. Such an early date is not accepted by some historians, including David Ayalon, Iqtidar Alam Khan, Joseph Needham and Tonio Andrade. Khan argues that it was the Mongols who introduced gunpowder to the Islamic world, and believes cannon only reached Mamluk Egypt in the 1370s. Needham argued that the term , dated to textual sources from 1342 to 1352, did not refer to true hand-guns or bombards, and that contemporary accounts of a metal-barrel cannon in the Islamic world did not occur until 1365. Similarly, Andrade dates the textual appearance of cannons in middle eastern sources to the 1360s. Gabor Ágoston and David Ayalon note that the Mamluks had certainly used siege cannons by 1342 or the 1360s, respectively, but earlier uses of cannons in the Islamic World are vague with a possible appearance in the Emirate of Granada by the 1320s and 1330s, though evidence is inconclusive.

Ibn Khaldun reported the use of cannon as siege machines by the Marinid sultan Abu Yaqub Yusuf at the siege of Sijilmasa in 1274. The passage by Ibn Khaldun on the Marinid siege of Sijilmassa in 1274 occurs as follows: &quot;[The Sultan] installed siege engines ... and gunpowder engines ..., which project small balls of iron. These balls are ejected from a chamber ... placed in front of a kindling fire of gunpowder; this happens by a strange property which attributes all actions to the power of the Creator.&quot; The source is not contemporary and was written a century later, around 1382. Its interpretation has been rejected as anachronistic by some historians, who urge caution regarding claims of Islamic firearms use in the 1204–1324 period as late medieval Arabic texts used the same word for gunpowder, naft, as they did for an earlier incendiary, naphtha. Ágoston and Peter Purton note that in the 1204–1324 period, late medieval Arabic texts used the same word for gunpowder, , that they used for an earlier incendiary, naphtha. Needham believes Ibn Khaldun was speaking of fire lances rather than hand cannon.

The Ottoman Empire made good use of cannon as siege artillery. Sixty-eight super-sized bombards were used by Mehmed the Conqueror to capture Constantinople in 1453. Jim Bradbury argues that Urban, a Hungarian cannon engineer, introduced this cannon from Central Europe to the Ottoman realm; according to Paul Hammer, however, it could have been introduced from other Islamic countries which had earlier used cannons. These cannon could fire heavy stone balls a mile, and the sound of their blast could reportedly be heard from a distance of . Shkodëran historian Marin Barleti discusses Turkish bombards at length in his book &quot;De obsidione Scodrensi&quot; (1504), describing the 1478–79 siege of Shkodra in which eleven bombards and two mortars were employed. The Ottomans also used cannon to control passage of ships through the Bosphorus strait. Ottoman cannons also proved effective at stopping crusaders at Varna in 1444 and Kosovo in 1448 despite the presence of European cannon in the former case.

The similar Dardanelles Guns (for the location) were created by Munir Ali in 1464 and were still in use during the Anglo-Turkish War (1807–1809). These were cast in bronze into two parts: the chase (the barrel) and the breech, which combined weighed 18.4 tonnes. The two parts were screwed together using levers to facilitate moving it.

Fathullah Shirazi, a Persian inhabitant of India who worked for Akbar in the Mughal Empire, developed a volley gun in the 16th century.

While there is evidence of cannons in Iran as early as 1405 they were not widespread. This changed following the increased use of firearms by Shah Ismail I, and the Iranian army used 500 cannons by the 1620s, probably captured from the Ottomans or acquired by allies in Europe. By 1443, Iranians were also making some of their own cannon, as Mir Khawand wrote of a 1200 kg metal piece being made by an Iranian which was most likely a cannon. Due to the difficulties of transporting cannon in mountainous terrain, their use was less common compared to their use in Europe.

===Eastern Europe===
Documentary evidence of cannons in Russia does not appear until 1382 and they were used only in sieges, often by the defenders. It was not until 1475 when Ivan III established the first Russian cannon foundry in Moscow that they began to produce cannons natively. The earliest surviving cannon from Russia dates to 1485.

Later on, large cannons were known as bombards, ranging from three to five feet in length and were used by Dubrovnik and Kotor in defence during the later 14th century. The first bombards were made of iron, but bronze became more prevalent as it was recognized as more stable and capable of propelling stones weighing as much as . Around the same period, the Byzantine Empire began to accumulate its own cannon to face the Ottoman Empire, starting with medium-sized cannon long and of 10 in calibre. The earliest reliable recorded use of artillery in the region was against the Ottoman siege of Constantinople in 1396, forcing the Ottomans to withdraw. The Ottomans acquired their own cannon and laid siege to the Byzantine capital again in 1422. By 1453, the Ottomans used 68 Hungarian-made cannon for the 55-day bombardment of the walls of Constantinople, &quot;hurling the pieces everywhere and killing those who happened to be nearby&quot;. The largest of their cannons was the Great Turkish Bombard, which required an operating crew of 200 men and 70 oxen, and 10,000 men to transport it. Gunpowder made the formerly devastating Greek fire obsolete, and with the final fall of Constantinople—which was protected by what were once the strongest walls in Europe—on 29 May 1453, &quot;it was the end of an era in more ways than one&quot;.

===Southeast Asia===
Cannons were introduced to the Javanese Majapahit Empire when Kublai Khan&#x27;s Mongol-Chinese army under the leadership of Ike Mese sought to invade Java in 1293. &quot;History of Yuan&quot; mentioned that the Mongol used a weapon called &quot;p&#x27;ao&quot; against Daha forces. This weapon is interpreted differently by researchers, it may be a trebuchet that throws thunderclap bombs, firearms, cannons, or rockets. It is possible that the gunpowder weapons carried by the Mongol–Chinese troops amounted to more than one type.

Thomas Stamford Raffles wrote in &quot;The History of Java&quot; that in 1247 saka (1325 AD), cannons were widely used in Java especially by the Majapahit. It is recorded that the small kingdoms in Java that sought the protection of Majapahit had to hand over their cannons to the Majapahit. Majapahit under &quot;Mahapatih&quot; (prime minister) Gajah Mada (in office 1331–1364) utilized gunpowder technology obtained from Yuan dynasty for use in naval fleet.
Mongol-Chinese gunpowder technology of Yuan dynasty resulted in eastern-style cetbang which is similar to Chinese cannon. Swivel guns however, only developed in the archipelago because of the close maritime relations of the Nusantara archipelago with the territory of West India after 1460 AD, which brought new types of gunpowder weapons to the archipelago, likely through Arab intermediaries. This weapon seems to be cannon and gun of Ottoman tradition, for example the prangi, which is a breech-loading swivel gun. A new type of cetbang, called the western-style cetbang, was derived from the Turkish prangi. Just like prangi, this cetbang is a breech-loading swivel gun made of bronze or iron, firing single rounds or scattershots (a large number of small bullets).

Cannons derived from western-style cetbang can be found in Nusantara, among others were lantaka and lela. Most lantakas were made of bronze and the earliest ones were breech-loaded. There is a trend toward muzzle-loading weapons during colonial times. When the Portuguese came to the archipelago, they referred to the breech-loading swivel gun as &quot;berço&quot;, while the Spaniards call it . A pole gun () was recorded as being used by Java in 1413.

Duarte Barbosa c. 1514 said that the inhabitants of Java were great masters in casting artillery and very good artillerymen. They made many one-pounder cannon ( or ), long muskets, (arquebus), (hand cannon), Greek fire, guns (cannon), and other fireworks. Every place was considered excellent in casting artillery, and in the knowledge of using it. In 1513, the Javanese fleet led by Pati Unus sailed to attack Portuguese Malacca &quot;with much artillery made in Java, for the Javanese are skilled in founding and casting, and in all works in iron, over and above what they have in India&quot;. By early 16th century, the Javanese already locally-producing large guns, some of them still survived until the present day and dubbed as &quot;sacred cannon&quot; or &quot;holy cannon&quot;. These cannons varied between 180- and 260-pounders, weighing anywhere between 3 and 8 tons, length of them between .

Cannons were used by the Ayutthaya Kingdom in 1352 during its invasion of the Khmer Empire. Within a decade large quantities of gunpowder could be found in the Khmer Empire. By the end of the 14th century firearms were also used by the Trần dynasty.

Saltpeter harvesting was recorded by Dutch and German travelers as being common in even the smallest villages and was collected from the decomposition process of large dung hills specifically piled for the purpose. The Dutch punishment for possession of non-permitted gunpowder appears to have been amputation. Ownership and manufacture of gunpowder was later prohibited by the colonial Dutch occupiers. According to colonel McKenzie quoted in Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles&#x27; &quot;The History of Java&quot; (1817), the purest sulfur was supplied from a crater from a mountain near the straits of Bali.

===Africa===
In Africa, the Adal Sultanate and the Abyssinian Empire both deployed cannons during the Adal-Abyssinian War. Imported from Arabia, and the wider Islamic world, the Adalites led by Ahmed ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi were the first African power to introduce cannon warfare to the African continent. Later on as the Portuguese Empire entered the war it would supply and train the Abyssinians with cannons, while the Ottoman Empire sent soldiers and cannon to back Adal. The conflict proved, through their use on both sides, the value of firearms such as the matchlock musket, cannon, and the arquebus over traditional weapons.

=== Offensive and defensive use ===
While previous smaller guns could burn down structures with fire, larger and more powerful cannons forced engineers to develop stronger castle walls from enemy attacks. Cannons were used for other purposes, as fortifications began using cannons as defensive instruments. In India, the fort of Raicher had gun ports built into its walls to accommodate the use of defensive cannons. In &quot;The Art of War&quot;, Niccolò Machiavelli opined that field artillery forced an army to take up a defensive posture and opposed a more ideal offensive stance. Machiavelli&#x27;s concerns can be seen in the criticisms of Portuguese mortars being used in India during the sixteenth century as lack of mobility was one of the key problems with the design. In Russia the early cannons were again placed in forts as a defensive tool. Cannons were also difficult to move around in mountainous regions; offensives conducted with such weapons would often be unsuccessful in areas such as Iran.

===Early modern period===
By the 16th century, cannons were made in a great variety of lengths and bore diameters, but the general rule was that the longer the barrel, the longer the range. Some cannons made during this time had barrels exceeding in length, and could weigh up to . Consequently, large amounts of gunpowder were needed to allow them to fire stone balls several hundred yards. By mid-century, European monarchs began to classify cannons to reduce the confusion. Henry II of France opted for six sizes of cannon, but others settled for more; the Spanish used twelve sizes, and the English sixteen. They are, from largest to smallest: the cannon royal, cannon, cannon serpentine, bastard cannon, demicannon, pedrero, culverin, basilisk, demiculverin, bastard culverin, saker, minion, falcon, falconet, serpentine, and rabinet. Better powder had been developed by this time as well. Instead of the finely ground powder used by the first bombards, powder was replaced by a &quot;corned&quot; variety of coarse grains. This coarse powder had pockets of air between grains, allowing fire to travel through and ignite the entire charge quickly and uniformly.

The end of the Middle Ages saw the construction of larger, more powerful cannon, as well as their spread throughout the world. As they were not effective at breaching the newer fortifications resulting from the development of cannon, siege engines—such as siege towers and trebuchets—became less widely used. However, wooden &quot;battery-towers&quot; took on a similar role as siege towers in the gunpowder age—such as that used at Siege of Kazan in 1552, which could hold ten large-calibre cannon, in addition to 50 lighter pieces. Another notable effect of cannon on warfare during this period was the change in conventional fortifications. Niccolò Machiavelli wrote, &quot;There is no wall, whatever its thickness that artillery will not destroy in only a few days.&quot; Although castles were not immediately made obsolete by cannon, their use and importance on the battlefield rapidly declined. Instead of majestic towers and merlons, the walls of new fortresses were thick, angled, and sloped, while towers became low and stout; increasing use was also made of earth and brick in breastworks and redoubts. These new defences became known as bastion forts, after their characteristic shape which attempted to force any advance towards it directly into the firing line of the guns. A few of these featured cannon batteries, such as the House of Tudor&#x27;s Device Forts in England. Bastion forts soon replaced castles in Europe and, eventually, those in the Americas as well.

By the end of the 15th century, several technological advancements made cannons more mobile. Wheeled gun carriages and trunnions became common, and the invention of the limber further facilitated transportation. As a result, field artillery became more viable and began to see more widespread use, often alongside the larger cannons intended for sieges. Better gunpowder, cast-iron projectiles (replacing stone), and the standardisation of calibres meant that even relatively light cannons could be deadly. In &quot;The Art of War&quot;, Niccolò Machiavelli observed that &quot;It is true that the arquebuses and the small artillery do much more harm than the heavy artillery.&quot; This was the case at the Battle of Flodden, in 1513: the English field guns outfired the Scottish siege artillery, firing two or three times as many rounds. Despite the increased maneuverability, however, cannon were still the slowest component of the army: a heavy English cannon required 23 horses to transport, while a culverin needed nine. Even with this many animals pulling, they still moved at a walking pace. Due to their relatively slow speed, lack of organisation, and undeveloped tactics, the combination of pike and shot still dominated the battlefields of Europe.

Innovations continued, notably the German invention of the mortar, a thick-walled, short-barrelled gun that blasted shot upward at a steep angle. Mortars were useful for sieges, as they could hit targets behind walls or other defences. This cannon found more use with the Dutch, who learnt to shoot bombs filled with powder from them. Setting the bomb fuse was a problem. &quot;Single firing&quot; was first used to ignite the fuse, where the bomb was placed with the fuse down against the cannon&#x27;s propellant. This often resulted in the fuse being blown into the bomb, causing it to blow up as it left the mortar. Because of this, &quot;double firing&quot; was tried where the gunner lit the fuse and then the touch hole. This required considerable skill and timing, and was especially dangerous if the gun misfired, leaving a lighted bomb in the barrel. Not until 1650 was it accidentally discovered that double-lighting was superfluous as the heat of firing would light the fuse.

Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden emphasised the use of light cannon and mobility in his army, and created new formations and tactics that revolutionised artillery. He discontinued using all 12 pounder—or heavier—cannon as field artillery, preferring, instead, to use cannons that could be handled by only a few men. One obsolete type of gun, the &quot;leatheren&quot;, was replaced by 4 pounder and 9 pounder demi-culverins. These could be operated by three men, and pulled by only two horses. Gustavus Adolphus&#x27;s army was also the first to use a cartridge that contained both powder and shot which sped up reloading, increasing the rate of fire. Finally, against infantry he pioneered the use of canister shot—essentially a tin can filled with musket balls. Until then there was no more than one cannon for every thousand infantrymen on the battlefield but Gustavus Adolphus increased the number of cannons sixfold. Each regiment was assigned two pieces, though he often arranged them into batteries instead of distributing them piecemeal. He used these batteries to break his opponent&#x27;s infantry line, while his cavalry would outflank their heavy guns.

At the Battle of Breitenfeld, in 1631, Adolphus proved the effectiveness of the changes made to his army, by defeating Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly. Although severely outnumbered, the Swedes were able to fire between three and five times as many volleys of artillery, and their infantry&#x27;s linear formations helped ensure they did not lose any ground. Battered by cannon fire, and low on morale, Tilly&#x27;s men broke ranks and fled.

In England, cannons were being used to besiege various fortified buildings during the English Civil War. Nathaniel Nye is recorded as testing a Birmingham cannon in 1643 and experimenting with a saker in 1645. From 1645 he was the master gunner to the Parliamentarian garrison at Evesham and in 1646 he successfully directed the artillery at the Siege of Worcester, detailing his experiences and in his 1647 book &quot;The Art of Gunnery&quot;. Believing that war was as much a science as an art, his explanations focused on triangulation, arithmetic, theoretical mathematics, and cartography as well as practical considerations such as the ideal specification for gunpowder or slow matches. His book acknowledged mathematicians such as Robert Recorde and Marcus Jordanus as well as earlier military writers on artillery such as Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia and Thomas (or Francis) Malthus (author of &quot;A Treatise on Artificial Fire-Works&quot;).

Around this time also came the idea of aiming the cannon to hit a target. Gunners controlled the range of their cannons by measuring the angle of elevation, using a &quot;gunner&#x27;s quadrant&quot;. Cannons did not have sights; therefore, even with measuring tools, aiming was still largely guesswork.

In the latter half of the 17th century, the French engineer Sébastien Le Prestre de Vauban introduced a more systematic and scientific approach to attacking gunpowder fortresses, in a time when many field commanders &quot;were notorious dunces in siegecraft&quot;. Careful sapping forward, supported by enfilading ricochets, was a key feature of this system, and it even allowed Vauban to calculate the length of time a siege would take. He was also a prolific builder of bastion forts, and did much to popularize the idea of &quot;depth in defence&quot; in the face of cannon. These principles were followed into the mid-19th century, when changes in armaments necessitated greater depth defence than Vauban had provided for. It was only in the years prior to World War I that new works began to break radically away from his designs.

===18th and 19th centuries===

The lower tier of 17th-century English ships of the line were usually equipped with demi-cannons, guns that fired a solid shot, and could weigh up to . Demi-cannons were capable of firing these heavy metal balls with such force that they could penetrate more than a metre of solid oak, from a distance of , and could dismast even the largest ships at close range. Full cannon fired a shot, but were discontinued by the 18th century, as they were too unwieldy. By the end of the 18th century, principles long adopted in Europe specified the characteristics of the Royal Navy&#x27;s cannon, as well as the acceptable defects, and their severity. The United States Navy tested guns by measuring them, firing them two or three times—termed &quot;proof by powder&quot;—and using pressurized water to detect leaks.

The carronade was adopted by the Royal Navy in 1779; the lower muzzle velocity of the round shot when fired from this cannon was intended to create more wooden splinters when hitting the structure of an enemy vessel, as they were believed to be more deadly than the ball by itself. The carronade was much shorter, and weighed between a third to a quarter of the equivalent long gun; for example, a 32-pounder carronade weighed less than a ton, compared with a 32-pounder long gun, which weighed over . The guns were, therefore, easier to handle, and also required less than half as much gunpowder, allowing fewer men to crew them. Carronades were manufactured in the usual naval gun calibres, but were not counted in a ship of the line&#x27;s rated number of guns. As a result, the classification of Royal Navy vessels in this period can be misleading, as they often carried more cannons than were listed.

Cannons were crucial in Napoleon&#x27;s rise to power, and continued to play an important role in his army in later years. During the French Revolution, the unpopularity of the Directory led to riots and rebellions. When over 25,000 royalists led by General Danican assaulted Paris, Paul Barras was appointed to defend the capital; outnumbered five to one and disorganised, the Republicans were desperate. When Napoleon arrived, he reorganised the defences but realised that without cannons the city could not be held. He ordered Joachim Murat to bring the guns from the Sablons artillery park; the Major and his cavalry fought their way to the recently captured cannons, and brought them back to Napoleon. When Danican&#x27;s poorly trained men attacked, on 13 Vendémiaire 1795 (5 October in the calendar used in France at the time), Napoleon ordered his cannon to fire grapeshot into the mob, an act that became known as the &quot;whiff of grapeshot&quot;. The slaughter effectively ended the threat to the new government, while, at the same time, making Bonaparte a famous—and popular—public figure. Among the first generals to recognise that artillery was not being used to its full potential, Napoleon often massed his cannon into batteries and introduced several changes into the French artillery, improving it significantly and making it among the finest in Europe. Such tactics were successfully used by the French, for example, at the Battle of Friedland, when 66 guns fired a total of 3,000 roundshot and 500 rounds of grapeshot, inflicting severe casualties to the Russian forces, whose losses numbered over 20,000 killed and wounded, in total. At the Battle of Waterloo—Napoleon&#x27;s final battle—the French army had many more artillery pieces than either the British or Prussians. As the battlefield was muddy, recoil caused cannons to bury themselves into the ground after firing, resulting in slow rates of fire, as more effort was required to move them back into an adequate firing position; also, roundshot did not ricochet with as much force from the wet earth. Despite the drawbacks, sustained artillery fire proved deadly during the engagement, especially during the French cavalry attack. The British infantry, having formed infantry squares, took heavy losses from the French guns, while their own cannons fired at the cuirassiers and lancers, when they fell back to regroup. Eventually, the French ceased their assault, after taking heavy losses from the British cannon and musket fire.

In the 1810s and 1820s, greater emphasis was placed on the accuracy of long-range gunfire, and less on the weight of a broadside. Around 1822, George Marshall wrote &quot;Marshall&#x27;s Practical Marine Gunnery&quot;. The book was used by cannon operators in the United States Navy throughout the 19th century. It listed all the types of cannons and instructions.

The carronade, although initially very successful and widely adopted, disappeared from the Royal Navy in the 1850s after the development of wrought-iron-jacketed steel cannon by William Armstrong and Joseph Whitworth. Nevertheless, carronades were used in the American Civil War.

Western cannons during the 19th century became larger, more destructive, more accurate, and could fire at longer range. One example is the American wrought-iron, muzzle-loading rifle, or Griffen gun (usually called the 3-inch Ordnance Rifle), used during the American Civil War, which had an effective range of over . Another is the smoothbore 12-pounder Napoleon, which originated in France in 1853 and was widely used by both sides in the American Civil War. This cannon was renowned for its sturdiness, reliability, firepower, flexibility, relatively lightweight, and range of .


The practice of rifling—casting spiralling lines inside the cannon&#x27;s barrel—was applied to artillery more frequently by 1855, as it gave cannon projectiles gyroscopic stability, which improved their accuracy. One of the earliest rifled cannons was the breech-loading Armstrong Gun—also invented by William Armstrong—which boasted significantly improved range, accuracy, and power than earlier weapons. The projectile fired from the Armstrong gun could reportedly pierce through a ship&#x27;s side and explode inside the enemy vessel, causing increased damage and casualties. The British military adopted the Armstrong gun, and was impressed; the Duke of Cambridge even declared that it &quot;could do everything but speak&quot;. Despite being significantly more advanced than its predecessors, the Armstrong gun was rejected soon after its integration, in favour of the muzzle-loading pieces that had been in use before. While both types of gun were effective against wooden ships, neither had the capability to pierce the armour of ironclads; due to reports of slight problems with the breeches of the Armstrong gun, and their higher cost, the older muzzle-loaders were selected to remain in service instead. Realising that iron was more difficult to pierce with breech-loaded cannons, Armstrong designed rifled muzzle-loading guns, which proved successful; &quot;The Times&quot; reported: &quot;even the fondest believers in the invulnerability of our present ironclads were obliged to confess that against such artillery, at such ranges, their plates and sides were almost as penetrable as wooden ships.&quot;

The superior cannon of the Western world brought them tremendous advantages in warfare. For example, in the First Opium War in China, during the 19th century, British battleships bombarded the coastal areas and fortifications from afar, safe from the reach of the Chinese cannons. Similarly, the shortest war in recorded history, the Anglo-Zanzibar War of 1896, was brought to a swift conclusion by shelling from British cruisers. The cynical attitude towards recruited infantry in the face of ever more powerful field artillery is the source of the term &quot;cannon fodder&quot;, first used by François-René de Chateaubriand, in 1814; however, the concept of regarding soldiers as nothing more than &quot;food for powder&quot; was mentioned by William Shakespeare as early as 1598, in &quot;Henry IV, Part 1&quot;.

===20th and 21st centuries===

Cannons in the 20th and 21st centuries are usually divided into sub-categories and given separate names. Some of the most widely used types of modern cannon are howitzers, mortars, guns, and autocannon, although a few very large-calibre cannon, custom-designed, have also been constructed. Nuclear artillery was experimented with, but was abandoned as impractical. Modern artillery is used in a variety of roles, depending on its type. According to NATO, the general role of artillery is to provide fire support, which is defined as &quot;the application of fire, coordinated with the manoeuvre of forces to destroy, neutralize, or suppress the enemy&quot;.

When referring to cannons, the term &quot;gun&quot; is often used incorrectly. In military usage, a gun is a cannon with a high muzzle velocity and a flat trajectory, useful for hitting the sides of targets such as walls, as opposed to howitzers or mortars, which have lower muzzle velocities, and fire indirectly, lobbing shells up and over obstacles to hit the target from above.


By the early 20th century, infantry weapons had become more powerful, forcing most artillery away from the front lines. Despite the change to indirect fire, cannons proved highly effective during World War I, directly or indirectly causing over 75% of casualties. The onset of trench warfare after the first few months of World War I greatly increased the demand for howitzers, as they were more suited to hitting targets in trenches. Furthermore, their shells carried more explosives than those of guns, and caused considerably less barrel wear. The German army had the advantage here as they began the war with many more howitzers than the French. World War I also saw the use of the Paris Gun, the longest-ranged gun ever fired. This calibre gun was used by the Germans against Paris and could hit targets more than away.

The Second World War sparked new developments in cannon technology. Among them were sabot rounds, hollow-charge projectiles, and proximity fuses, all of which increased the effectiveness of cannon against specific targets. The proximity fuse emerged on the battlefields of Europe in late December 1944. Used to great effect in anti-aircraft projectiles, proximity fuses were fielded in both the European and Pacific Theatres of Operations; they were particularly useful against V-1 flying bombs and kamikaze planes. Although widely used in naval warfare, and in anti-air guns, both the British and Americans feared unexploded proximity fuses would be reverse engineered, leading to them limiting their use in continental battles. During the Battle of the Bulge, however, the fuses became known as the American artillery&#x27;s &quot;Christmas present&quot; for the German army because of their effectiveness against German personnel in the open, when they frequently dispersed attacks. Anti-tank guns were also tremendously improved during the war: in 1939, the British used primarily 2 pounder and 6 pounder guns. By the end of the war, 17 pounders had proven much more effective against German tanks, and 32 pounders had entered development. Meanwhile, German tanks were continuously upgraded with better main guns, in addition to other improvements. For example, the Panzer III was originally designed with a 37 mm gun, but was mass-produced with a 50 mm cannon. To counter the threat of the Russian T-34s, another, more powerful 50 mm gun was introduced, only to give way to a larger 75 mm cannon, which was in a fixed mount as the StuG III, the most-produced German World War II armoured fighting vehicle of any type. Despite the improved guns, production of the Panzer III was ended in 1943, as the tank still could not match the T-34, and was replaced by the Panzer IV and Panther tanks. In 1944, the 8.8 cm KwK 43 and many variations, entered service with the Wehrmacht, and was used as both a tank main gun, and as the PaK 43 anti-tank gun. One of the most powerful guns to see service in World War II, it was capable of destroying any Allied tank at very long ranges.
Despite being designed to fire at trajectories with a steep angle of descent, howitzers can be fired directly, as was done by the 11th Marine Regiment at the Battle of Chosin Reservoir, during the Korean War. Two field batteries fired directly upon a battalion of Chinese infantry; the Marines were forced to brace themselves against their howitzers, as they had no time to dig them in. The Chinese infantry took heavy casualties, and were forced to retreat.

The tendency to create larger calibre cannons during the World Wars has reversed since. The United States Army, for example, sought a lighter, more versatile howitzer, to replace their aging pieces. As it could be towed, the M198 was selected to be the successor to the World War II–era cannons used at the time, and entered service in 1979. Still in use today, the M198 is, in turn, being slowly replaced by the M777 Ultralightweight howitzer, which weighs nearly half as much and can be more easily moved. Although land-based artillery such as the M198 are powerful, long-ranged, and accurate, naval guns have not been neglected, despite being much smaller than in the past, and, in some cases, having been replaced by cruise missiles. However, the &#x27;s planned armament included the Advanced Gun System (AGS), a pair of 155 mm guns, which fire the Long Range Land-Attack Projectile. The warhead, which weighed , had a circular error of probability of , and was mounted on a rocket, to increase the effective range to , further than that of the Paris Gun. The AGS&#x27;s barrels would be water-cooled, and fire 10 rounds per minute, per gun. The combined firepower from both turrets would give a &quot;Zumwalt&quot;-class destroyer the firepower equivalent to 12 conventional M198 howitzers. The reason for the re-integration of cannons as a main armament in United States Navy ships was because satellite-guided munitions fired from a gun would be less expensive than a cruise missile but have a similar guidance capability.

====Autocannon====

Autocannons have an automatic firing mode, similar to that of a machine gun. They have mechanisms to automatically load their ammunition, and therefore have a higher rate of fire than artillery, often approaching, or, in the case of rotary autocannons, even surpassing the firing rate of a machine gun. While there is no minimum bore for autocannons, they are generally larger than machine guns, typically or greater since World War II and are usually capable of using explosive ammunition even if it is not always used. Machine guns in contrast are usually too small to use explosive ammunition; such ammunition is additionally banned in international conflict for the parties to the Saint Petersburg Declaration of 1868.

Most nations use rapid-fire cannon on light vehicles, replacing a more powerful, but heavier, tank gun. A typical autocannon is the 25 mm &quot;Bushmaster&quot; chain gun, mounted on the LAV-25 and M2 Bradley armoured vehicles. Autocannons may be capable of a very high rate of fire, but ammunition is heavy and bulky, limiting the amount carried. For this reason, both the 25 mm Bushmaster and the 30 mm RARDEN are deliberately designed with relatively low rates of fire. The typical rate of fire for a modern autocannon ranges from 90 to 1,800 rounds per minute. Systems with multiple barrels, such as a rotary autocannon, can have rates of fire of several thousand rounds per minute. The fastest of these is the GSh-6-23, which has a rate of fire of over 10,000 rounds per minute.

Autocannons are often found in aircraft, where they replaced machine guns and as shipboard anti-aircraft weapons, as they provide greater destructive power than machine guns.

====Aircraft use====
The first documented installation of a cannon firing explosive shells on an aircraft was on the Voisin Canon in 1911, displayed at the Paris Exposition that year. By World War I, all of the major powers were experimenting with aircraft-mounted cannons; however, their low rate of fire and great size and weight precluded any of them from being anything other than experimental. The most successful (or least unsuccessful) was the SPAD 12 Ca.1 with a single 37 mm Puteaux mounted to fire between the cylinder banks and through the propeller boss of the aircraft&#x27;s Hispano-Suiza 8C. The pilot (by necessity an ace) had to manually reload each round.

The first autocannon were developed during World War I as anti-aircraft guns, and one of these, the Coventry Ordnance Works &quot;COW 37 mm gun&quot;, was installed in an aircraft. However, the war ended before it could be given a field trial, and it never became standard equipment in a production aircraft. Later trials had it fixed at a steep angle upwards in both the Vickers Type 161 and the Westland C.O.W. Gun Fighter, an idea that would return later.

During this period autocannons became available and several fighters of the German and the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service were fitted with 20 mm cannons. They continued to be installed as an adjunct to machine guns rather than as a replacement, as the rate of fire was still too low and the complete installation too heavy. There was a some debate in the RAF as to whether the greater number of possible rounds being fired from a machine gun, or a smaller number of explosive rounds from a cannon was preferable. Improvements during the war in regards to rate of fire allowed the cannon to displace the machine gun almost entirely. The cannon was more effective against armour so they were increasingly used during the course of World War II, and newer fighters such as the Hawker Tempest usually carried two or four instead of the six .50 Browning machine guns for US aircraft or eight to twelve M1919 Browning machine guns on earlier British aircraft. The Hispano-Suiza HS.404, Oerlikon 20 mm cannon, MG FF, and their numerous variants became among the most widely used autocannon in the war. Cannons, as with machine guns, were either fixed to fire forwards (mounted in the wings, in the nose or fuselage, or in a pannier under either), or mounted in gun turrets on heavier aircraft. Both the Germans and Japanese mounted cannons to fire upwards and forwards for use against heavy bombers, with the Germans calling guns so-installed , derived from a German colloquialism for jazz music— means &quot;off-key&quot;.

Preceding the Vietnam War the high speeds aircraft were attaining and availability of missiles led to a move to omit cannon due to the belief that they would be useless in a dogfight, but combat experience during the Vietnam War showed conclusively that, despite advances in missiles, there was still a need for cannon. Nearly all modern fighter aircraft are armed with an autocannon, and they are also commonly found on ground-attack aircraft. One of the most powerful examples is the 30mm GAU-8/A Avenger Gatling-type rotary cannon mounted on the Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II. The Lockheed AC-130 gunship (a converted transport) can carry a 105 mm howitzer as well as a variety of autocannons ranging up to 40 mm. Both are used in the close air support role.

==Materials, parts, and terms==

Cannons in general have the form of a truncated cone with an internal cylindrical bore for holding an explosive charge and a projectile. The thickest, strongest, and closed part of the cone is located near the explosive charge. As any explosive charge will dissipate in all directions equally, the thickest portion of the cannon is useful for containing and directing this force. The backward motion of the cannon as its projectile leaves the bore is termed its recoil, and the effectiveness of the cannon can be measured in terms of how much this response can be diminished, though obviously diminishing recoil through increasing the overall mass of the cannon means decreased mobility.

Field artillery cannon in Europe and the Americas were initially made most often of bronze, though later forms were constructed of cast iron and eventually steel. Bronze has several characteristics that made it preferable as a construction material: although it is relatively expensive, does not always alloy well, and can result in a final product that is &quot;spongy about the bore&quot;, bronze is more flexible than iron and therefore less prone to bursting when exposed to high pressure; cast-iron cannon are less expensive and more durable generally than bronze and withstand being fired more times without deteriorating. However, cast-iron cannon have a tendency to burst without having shown any previous weakness or wear, and this makes them more dangerous to operate.

The older and more-stable forms of cannon were muzzle-loading as opposed to breech-loading—to be used they had to have their ordnance packed down the bore through the muzzle rather than inserted through the breech.

The following terms refer to the components or aspects of a classical western cannon (c. 1850) as illustrated here. In what follows, the words &quot;near&quot;, &quot;close&quot;, and &quot;behind&quot; will refer to those parts towards the thick, closed end of the piece, and &quot;far&quot;, &quot;front&quot;, &quot;in front of&quot;, and &quot;before&quot; to the thinner, open end.

===Negative spaces===
* Bore: The hollow cylinder bored lengthwise down the centre of the cannon, including the &quot;base of the bore&quot; or &quot;bottom of the bore&quot;, the nearest end of the bore in which the ordnance (wadding, shot, etc.) rests just before firing. A cannon&#x27;s calibre is determined by the diameter of its bore.
* Chamber: The cylindrical, conical, or spherical recess at the nearest end of the bottom of the bore into which the gunpowder is packed.
* Vent: A thin tube on the near end of the cannon connecting the explosive charge inside with an ignition source outside and often filled with a length of fuse; always located near the &quot;breech&quot;. Sometimes called the &quot;fuse hole&quot; or the &quot;touch hole&quot;. On the top of the vent on the outside of the cannon is a flat circular space called the &quot;vent field&quot; where the charge is lit. If the cannon is bronze, it will often have a &quot;vent piece&quot; made of copper screwed into the length of the vent.

===Solid spaces===
The main body of a cannon consists of three basic extensions: the foremost and the longest is called the &quot;chase&quot;, the middle portion is the &quot;reinforce&quot;, and the closest and briefest portion is the &quot;cascabel&quot; or &quot;cascable&quot;.
* The chase: Simply the entire conical part of the cannon in front of the &quot;reinforce&quot;. It is the longest portion of the cannon, and includes the following elements:
** The &quot;neck&quot;: the narrowest part of the chase, always located near the foremost end of the piece.
** The &quot;muzzle&quot;: the portion of the chase forward of the &quot;neck&quot;. It includes the following:
*** The &quot;swell of the muzzle&quot; refers to the slight swell in the diameter of the piece at the very end of the chase. It is often chamfered on the inside to make loading the cannon easier. In some guns, this element is replaced with a wide ring and is called a &quot;muzzle band&quot;.
*** The &quot;face&quot; is the flat vertical plane at the foremost edge of the muzzle (and of the entire piece).
*** The &quot;muzzle mouldings&quot; are the tiered rings which connect the face with the rest of the muzzle, the first of which is called the &quot;lip&quot; and the second the &quot;fillet&quot;
*** The &quot;muzzle astragal and fillets&quot; are a series of three narrow rings running around the outside of the chase just behind the neck. Sometimes also collectively called the &quot;chase ring&quot;.
** The &quot;chase astragal and fillets&quot;: these are a second series of such rings located at the near end of the chase.
** The &quot;chase girdle&quot;: this is the brief length of the chase between the chase astragal and fillets and the &quot;reinforce&quot;.
* The reinforce: This portion of the piece is frequently divided into a &quot;first reinforce&quot; and a &quot;second reinforce&quot;, but in any case is marked as separate from the chase by the presence of a narrow circular &quot;reinforce ring&quot; or &quot;band&quot; at its foremost end. The span of the reinforce also includes the following:
** The &quot;trunnions&quot; are located at the foremost end of the reinforce just behind the reinforce ring. They consist of two cylinders perpendicular to the bore and below it which are used to mount the cannon on its carriage.
** The &quot;rimbases&quot; are short broad rings located at the union of the trunnions and the cannon which provide support to the carriage attachment.
** The &quot;reinforce band&quot; is only present if the cannon has two reinforces, and it divides the first reinforce from the second.
** The &quot;breech&quot; refers to the mass of solid metal behind the bottom of the bore extending to the &quot;base of the breech&quot; and including the &quot;base ring&quot;; it also generally refers to the end of the cannon opposite the &quot;muzzle&quot;, i.e., the location where the explosion of the gunpowder begins as opposed to the opening through which the pressurized gas escapes.
** The &quot;base ring&quot; forms a ring at the widest part of the entire cannon at the nearest end of the reinforce just before the &quot;cascabel&quot;.
* The cascabel: This is that portion of the cannon behind the reinforce(s) and behind the &quot;base ring&quot;. It includes the following:
** The &quot;knob&quot; which is the small spherical terminus of the piece;
** The &quot;neck&quot;, a short, narrow piece of metal holding out the knob; and
** The &quot;fillet&quot;, the tiered disk connecting the neck of the cascabel to the &quot;base of the breech&quot;.
** The &quot;base of the breech&quot; is the metal disk that forms the most forward part of the cascabel and rests against the breech itself, right next to the &quot;base ring&quot;.

To pack a muzzle-loading cannon, first gunpowder is poured down the bore. This is followed by a layer of wadding (often nothing more than paper), and then the cannonball itself. A certain amount of windage (in this case meaning that the bore is designed slightly wider than the cannonball) allows the ball to fit down the bore, though the greater the windage the less efficient the propulsion of the ball when the gunpowder is ignited. To fire the cannon, the fuse located in the vent is lit, quickly burning down to the gunpowder, which then explodes violently, propelling wadding and ball down the bore and out of the muzzle. A small portion of exploding gas also escapes through the vent, but this does not dramatically affect the total force exerted on the ball.

Any large, smoothbore, muzzle-loading gun—used before the advent of breech-loading, rifled guns—may be referred to as a cannon, though once standardised names were assigned to different-sized cannon, the term specifically referred to a gun designed to fire a shot, as distinct from a demi-cannon – , culverin – , or demi-culverin – . &quot;Gun&quot; in this context specifically refers to a type of cannon that fires projectiles at high speeds, and usually at relatively low angles; they have been used in warships, and as field artillery. The term &quot;cannon&quot; is also used for autocannon, a modern repeating weapon firing explosive projectiles. Cannon have been used extensively in fighter aircraft since World War II.

==Operation==

In the 1770s, cannon operation worked as follows: each cannon would be manned by two gunners, six soldiers, and four officers of artillery. The right gunner was to prime the piece and load it with powder, and the left gunner would fetch the powder from the magazine and be ready to fire the cannon at the officer&#x27;s command. On each side of the cannon, three soldiers stood, to ram and sponge the cannon, and hold the ladle. The second soldier on the left was tasked with providing 50 bullets.

Before loading, the cannon would be cleaned with a wet sponge to extinguish any smouldering material from the last shot. Fresh powder could be set off prematurely by lingering ignition sources. The powder was added, followed by wadding of paper or hay, and the ball was placed in and rammed down. After ramming, the cannon would be aimed with the elevation set using a quadrant and a plummet. At 45 degrees, the ball had the utmost range: about ten times the gun&#x27;s level range. Any angle above a horizontal line was called random-shot. Wet sponges were used to cool the pieces every ten or twelve rounds.

During the Napoleonic Wars, a British gun team consisted of five gunners to aim it, clean the bore with a damp sponge to quench any remaining embers before a fresh charge was introduced, and another to load the gun with a bag of powder and then the projectile. The fourth gunner pressed his thumb on the vent hole, to prevent a draught that might fan a flame. The charge loaded, the fourth would prick the bagged charge through the vent hole, and fill the vent with powder. On command, the fifth gunner would fire the piece with a slow match. Friction primers replaced slow match ignition by the mid-19th century.

When a cannon had to be abandoned such as in a retreat or surrender, the touch hole of the cannon would be plugged flush with an iron spike, disabling the cannon (at least until metal boring tools could be used to remove the plug). This was called &quot;spiking&quot;.

A gun was said to be &quot;honeycombed&quot; when the surface of the bore had cavities, or holes in it, caused by corrosion or casting defects.

===Legal considerations===
In the United States, muzzleloading cannons made before 1899 (and replicas) that are unable to fire fixed ammunition are considered antiques. They are not subject to the Gun Control Act of 1968 or National Firearms Act of 1934. They may be subject to local rules in some jurisdictions, however.

==Deceptive imitations==

Historically, logs or poles have been used as decoys to mislead the enemy as to the strength of an emplacement. The &quot;Quaker Gun trick&quot; was used by Colonel William Washington&#x27;s Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War; in 1780, approximately 100 Loyalists surrendered to them, rather than face bombardment. During the American Civil War, Quaker guns were also used by the Confederates, to compensate for their shortage of artillery. The decoy cannon were painted black at the &quot;muzzle&quot;, and positioned behind fortifications to delay Union attacks on those positions. On occasion, real gun carriages were used to complete the deception.

==In popular culture==

Cannon sounds have sometimes been used in classical pieces with a military theme. One of the best known examples is Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky&#x27;s &quot;1812 Overture&quot;. The overture is to be performed using an artillery section together with the orchestra, resulting in noise levels high enough that musicians are required to wear ear protection. The cannon fire simulates Russian artillery bombardments of the Battle of Borodino, a critical battle in Napoleon&#x27;s invasion of Russia, whose defeat the piece celebrates. When the overture was first performed, the cannon were fired by an electric current triggered by the conductor. However, the overture was not recorded with real cannon fire until Mercury Records and conductor Antal Doráti&#x27;s 1958 recording of the Minnesota Orchestra. Cannon fire is also frequently used in presentations of the &quot;1812&quot; on American Independence Day, a tradition started by Arthur Fiedler of the Boston Pops in 1974.

The hard rock band AC/DC used cannon in their song &quot;For Those About to Rock (We Salute You)&quot;, and in live shows replica Napoleonic cannon and pyrotechnics were used to perform the piece. A recording of that song has accompanied the firing of an authentic reproduction of a M1857 12-pounder Napoleon during Columbus Blue Jackets goal celebrations at Nationwide Arena since opening night of the 2007–08 season. The cannon is the focal point of the team&#x27;s alternate logo on its third jerseys.

Cannons have been fired in touchdown celebrations by several American football teams including the San Diego Chargers. The Pittsburgh Steelers used one only during the 1962 campaign but discontinued it after Buddy Dial was startled by inadvertently running face-first into the cannon&#x27;s smoky discharge in a 42–27 loss to the Dallas Cowboys.

==Restoration==
Cannon recovered from the sea are often extensively damaged from exposure to salt water; electrolytic reduction treatment is required to forestall corrosion. The cannon is then washed in deionized water to remove the electrolyte, and is treated in tannic acid, which prevents further rust and gives the metal a bluish-black colour. Cannon on display may be protected from oxygen and moisture by a wax sealant. A coat of polyurethane may also be painted over the wax sealant, to prevent the cannon from attracting dust.

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* .
* 
* .
* 
* .
* 
* Hadden, R. Lee. 2005. &quot;Confederate Boys and Peter Monkeys.&quot; Armchair General. January 2005. Adapted from a talk given to the Geological Society of America on 25 March 2004.
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Schmidtchen, Volker (1977a), &quot;Riesengeschütze des 15. Jahrhunderts. Technische Höchstleistungen ihrer Zeit&quot;, &quot;Technikgeschichte&quot; 44 (2): 153–173 (153–157)
* Schmidtchen, Volker (1977b), &quot;Riesengeschütze des 15. Jahrhunderts. Technische Höchstleistungen ihrer Zeit&quot;, &quot;Technikgeschichte&quot; 44 (3): 213–237 (226–228)
* .
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* Artillery Tactics and Combat during the Napoleonic Wars
* Handgonnes and Matchlocks – History of firearms to 1500
* – &quot;Patent for a Casting ordnance&quot;
* – &quot;Cannon patent&quot;
* – &quot;Muzzle loading ordnance patent&quot;
* Historic Cannons of San Francisco</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="2" end="8" title="Cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170417" start="20" end="27" title="caliber" label="caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q110155210" start="28" end="31" title="gun" label="gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="56" end="65" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="92" end="102" title="projectile" label="projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="128" end="138" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="140" end="149" title="Gunpowder" label="Gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q901722" start="228" end="244" title="smokeless powder" label="smokeless powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330873" start="291" end="296" title="gauge (firearms)" label="gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377031" start="298" end="313" title="effective range" label="effective range"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887290" start="315" end="323" title="mobility (military)" label="mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q753454" start="325" end="337" title="rate of fire" label="rate of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q641888" start="339" end="352" title="elevation (ballistics)" label="angle of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409574" start="357" end="366" title="firepower" label="firepower"/>
<link wikidata="Q180126" start="895" end="903" title="howitzer" label="howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="907" end="913" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180311" start="939" end="955" title="automatic weapon" label="automatic weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="1004" end="1014" title="autocannon" label="autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1070" end="1088" title="Science and technology of the Song dynasty#Gunpowder warfare" label="Song dynasty China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="1232" end="1244" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="1278" end="1290" title="hand cannon" label="hand cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="1755" end="1762" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="1955" end="1960" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q800205" start="2033" end="2054" title="Great Turkish Bombard" label="Great Turkish Bombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2074" end="2088" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q366656" start="2245" end="2251" title="Limbers and caissons" label="limber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2622" end="2633" title="Italian language#Origins" label="Old Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2693" end="2698" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2853" end="2856" title="Gun#Terminology" label="gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826688" start="3138" end="3148" title="fire-lance" label="fire-lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q651278" start="3557" end="3575" title="Dazu Rock Carvings" label="Dazu Rock Carvings"/>
<link wikidata="Q42310000" start="3775" end="3794" title="Wuwei Bronze Cannon" label="Wuwei Bronze Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24970374" start="3814" end="3838" title="Heilongjiang hand cannon" label="Heilongjiang hand cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42310001" start="3862" end="3872" title="Xanadu Gun" label="Xanadu Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="4142" end="4153" title="hand cannon" label="hand cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345223" start="4265" end="4280" title="History of Yuan" label="History of Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427" start="4622" end="4633" title="Western Xia" label="Western Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q318054" start="4786" end="4800" title="Joseph Needham" label="Joseph Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="5663" end="5669" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672432" start="5684" end="5707" title="Mongol invasion of Java" label="Mongol invasion of Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q49332" start="5752" end="5761" title="Nusantara (archipelago)" label="Nusantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514302" start="5806" end="5821" title="hu dun pao" label="&amp;quot;Pao&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="5835" end="5847" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291963" start="5893" end="5914" title="Battle of Lake Poyang" label="Battle of Lake Poyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q430309" start="6118" end="6126" title="Đại Việt" label="Đại Việt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="6205" end="6219" title="Breech-loading weapon" label="breech-loaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475856" start="6521" end="6539" title="Siege of Pyongyang (1593)" label="siege of Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="6782" end="6821" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)" label="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)"/>
<link wikidata="Q695959" start="6915" end="6926" title="turtle ship" label="turtle ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q50184" start="6931" end="6941" title="Yi Sun-sin" label="Yi Sun-sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961008" start="6957" end="6968" title="Ivan Petlin" label="Ivan Petlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171677" start="7215" end="7226" title="Roger Bacon" label="Roger Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q588748" start="7291" end="7302" title="firecracker" label="firecracker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7374" end="7418" title="Roger Bacon#Other attributed works" label="another work tentatively attributed to Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546904" start="7902" end="7920" title="Walter de Milemete" label="Walter de Milemete"/>
<link wikidata="Q914425" start="8356" end="8364" title="Signoria" label="Signoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="8368" end="8376" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q53245" start="8742" end="8761" title="Cividale del Friuli" label="Cividale del Friuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="9298" end="9304" title="Scania" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726607" start="9391" end="9413" title="Swedish History Museum" label="Swedish History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075009" start="9617" end="9626" title="grapeshot" label="grapeshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969197" start="9656" end="9678" title="Wardrobe (government)" label="English Privy Wardrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="9716" end="9731" title="Battle of Crécy" label="Battle of Crécy"/>
<link wikidata="Q704179" start="9771" end="9787" title="Giovanni Villani" label="Giovanni Villani"/>
<link wikidata="Q676340" start="9986" end="10011" title="siege of Calais (1346–47)" label="siege of Calais (1346–47)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="10138" end="10153" title="Battle of Crecy" label="Battle of Crecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10729167" start="10256" end="10263" title="longbow" label="longbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q107536804" start="10705" end="10722" title="siege of Breteuil" label="siege of Breteuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q622666" start="10756" end="10767" title="siege tower" label="siege tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="10979" end="10985" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="11804" end="11817" title="Islamic world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="11954" end="11965" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="12024" end="12031" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="12154" end="12160" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11967" start="12228" end="12234" title="Huesca" label="Huesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q847837" start="12801" end="12807" title="Nasrid dynasty" label="Nasrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10509" start="12823" end="12828" title="Elche" label="Elche"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695499" start="12914" end="12932" title="Ahmad Y. al-Hassan" label="Ahmad Y. al-Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q244356" start="12945" end="12964" title="Battle of Ain Jalut" label="Battle of Ain Jalut"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="12978" end="12984" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="13010" end="13017" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q318054" start="13568" end="13582" title="Joseph Needham" label="Joseph Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q82119066" start="13587" end="13600" title="Tonio Andrade" label="Tonio Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="13630" end="13637" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="13718" end="13730" title="Mamluk Egypt" label="Mamluk Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="14224" end="14237" title="Islamic World" label="Islamic World"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="14282" end="14300" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="14359" end="14370" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="14401" end="14414" title="siege machine" label="siege machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="14423" end="14430" title="Marinid" label="Marinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="14470" end="14479" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q898983" start="15394" end="15401" title="naphtha" label="naphtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="15595" end="15615" title="Mehmed the Conqueror" label="Mehmed the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="15619" end="15641" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="capture Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q131638" start="16029" end="16036" title="Shkodër" label="Shkodër"/>
<link wikidata="Q464230" start="16049" end="16062" title="Marin Barleti" label="Marin Barleti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764128" start="16118" end="16140" title="The Siege of Shkodra (book)" label="De obsidione Scodrensi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510403" start="16178" end="16194" title="siege of Shkodra" label="siege of Shkodra"/>
<link wikidata="Q31301" start="16611" end="16640" title="Anglo-Turkish War (1807–1809)" label="Anglo-Turkish War (1807–1809)"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="16751" end="16756" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="16855" end="16862" title="Persian people" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8597" start="16898" end="16903" title="Akbar" label="Akbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="16911" end="16924" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q730016" start="16938" end="16948" title="volley gun" label="volley gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="17994" end="18003" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q171080" start="18008" end="18013" title="Kotor" label="Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="18246" end="18262" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="18310" end="18324" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="18720" end="18743" title="walls of Constantinople" label="walls of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q179537" start="19021" end="19031" title="Greek fire" label="Greek fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="19185" end="19198" title="Late Middle Ages" label="end of an era"/>
<link wikidata="Q49209" start="19281" end="19289" title="Javanese people" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="19290" end="19299" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="19312" end="19323" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672432" start="19384" end="19405" title="Mongol invasion of Java" label="sought to invade Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345223" start="19421" end="19436" title="History of Yuan" label="History of Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514302" start="19490" end="19511" title="Hu dun pao" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;#x27;ao&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="19600" end="19609" title="trebuchet" label="trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19622" end="19639" title="Gunpowder weapons in the Song dynasty#Explosives" label="thunderclap bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q130327" start="19784" end="19807" title="Thomas Stamford Raffles" label="Thomas Stamford Raffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18182584" start="19823" end="19842" title="The History of Java" label="The History of Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358959" start="19862" end="19866" title="Saka era" label="saka"/>
<link wikidata="Q49329" start="20131" end="20141" title="Gajah Mada" label="Gajah Mada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="20208" end="20220" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859628" start="20717" end="20723" title="prangi" label="prangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246676" start="20736" end="20761" title="breech-loading swivel gun" label="breech-loading swivel gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487519" start="21104" end="21111" title="lantaka" label="lantaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="21183" end="21196" title="Breechloader" label="breech-loaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="21277" end="21287" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="21392" end="21401" title="Spaniards" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="21414" end="21422" title="Hand cannon" label="pole gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q179537" start="21679" end="21689" title="Greek fire" label="Greek fire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21833" end="21847" title="Djong (ship)#European age of discovery" label="Javanese fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988343" start="21882" end="21900" title="Portuguese Malacca" label="Portuguese Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="22402" end="22419" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="22455" end="22467" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="22537" end="22549" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111454" start="22613" end="22625" title="Trần dynasty" label="Trần dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q130327" start="23076" end="23099" title="Thomas Stamford Raffles" label="Thomas Stamford Raffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18182584" start="23112" end="23131" title="The History of Java (1817 book)" label="The History of Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q548489" start="23182" end="23206" title="Ijen" label="a crater from a mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="23227" end="23231" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365048" start="23262" end="23276" title="Adal Sultanate" label="Adal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="23285" end="23302" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Abyssinian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915203" start="23336" end="23355" title="Ethiopian-Adal War" label="Adal-Abyssinian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="23371" end="23377" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335728" start="23428" end="23454" title="Ahmed ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi" label="Ahmed ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="23554" end="23571" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="23654" end="23668" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="23775" end="23783" title="firearms" label="firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="23796" end="23805" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="23806" end="23812" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="23830" end="23838" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q610942" start="24292" end="24306" title="The Art of War (Machiavelli)" label="The Art of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="25356" end="25374" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="26281" end="26293" title="siege engine" label="siege engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q622666" start="26303" end="26314" title="siege tower" label="siege tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="26320" end="26329" title="trebuchet" label="trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670327" start="26480" end="26494" title="Siege of Kazan" label="Siege of Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="26691" end="26710" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12518" start="26968" end="26973" title="tower" label="tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q23419" start="26979" end="26985" title="merlon" label="merlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q91745" start="27134" end="27145" title="Breastwork (fortification)" label="breastworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q90754" start="27150" end="27157" title="redoubt" label="redoubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12797" start="27195" end="27207" title="bastion fort" label="bastion fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="27358" end="27374" title="Artillery battery" label="cannon batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="27388" end="27402" title="House of Tudor" label="House of Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267014" start="27410" end="27422" title="Device Forts" label="Device Forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q354271" start="27649" end="27657" title="trunnion" label="trunnion"/>
<link wikidata="Q366656" start="27699" end="27705" title="Limbers and caissons" label="limber"/>
<link wikidata="Q610942" start="28046" end="28060" title="The Art of War (Machiavelli)" label="The Art of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="28128" end="28136" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300742" start="28238" end="28255" title="Battle of Flodden" label="Battle of Flodden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330892" start="28278" end="28287" title="field gun" label="field gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378432" start="28479" end="28493" title="English cannon" label="English cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193626" start="28732" end="28745" title="pike and shot" label="pike and shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="28850" end="28856" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="29780" end="29807" title="Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden" label="Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226272" start="30127" end="30136" title="Leather cannon" label="leatheren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427237" start="30477" end="30490" title="canister shot" label="canister shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427134" start="30913" end="30921" title="flanking maneuver" label="outflank"/>
<link wikidata="Q205379" start="30948" end="30969" title="Battle of Breitenfeld (1631)" label="Battle of Breitenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q155534" start="31060" end="31092" title="Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly" label="Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q179583" start="31239" end="31245" title="line (formation)" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="31471" end="31488" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441631" start="31490" end="31503" title="Nathaniel Nye" label="Nathaniel Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="31529" end="31539" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402901" start="31580" end="31585" title="Saker (cannon)" label="saker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="31637" end="31652" title="Roundhead" label="Parliamentarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q585963" start="31665" end="31672" title="Evesham" label="Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277698" start="31731" end="31749" title="Siege of Worcester (1646)" label="Siege of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q188056" start="31910" end="31923" title="triangulation" label="triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="31925" end="31935" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="31966" end="31977" title="cartography" label="cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q988463" start="32063" end="32073" title="slow match" label="slow match"/>
<link wikidata="Q318192" start="32122" end="32136" title="Robert Recorde" label="Robert Recorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894207" start="32141" end="32156" title="Marcus Jordanus" label="Marcus Jordanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201543" start="32214" end="32239" title="Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia" label="Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134322" start="32556" end="32562" title="Sight (device)" label="sights"/>
<link wikidata="Q192839" start="32699" end="32729" title="Sébastien Le Prestre de Vauban" label="Sébastien Le Prestre de Vauban"/>
<link wikidata="Q621719" start="32912" end="32919" title="sapping" label="sapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q112481674" start="32942" end="32952" title="Enfilade and defilade" label="enfilading"/>
<link wikidata="Q323227" start="32953" end="32961" title="ricochet" label="ricochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="33400" end="33411" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="33546" end="33563" title="ship of the line" label="ships of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="34070" end="34080" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="34155" end="34173" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260986" start="34281" end="34314" title="hydrostatic test" label="pressurized water to detect leaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135922" start="34321" end="34330" title="carronade" label="carronade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046481" start="34690" end="34698" title="long gun" label="long gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="34756" end="34759" title="ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q511450" start="34990" end="34999" title="naval artillery" label="naval gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q170417" start="35000" end="35007" title="Caliber" label="calibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="35248" end="35256" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="35358" end="35375" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="35401" end="35410" title="French Directory" label="Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q333843" start="35507" end="35518" title="Paul Barras" label="Paul Barras"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="35754" end="35767" title="Joachim Murat" label="Joachim Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q720498" start="35983" end="35997" title="13 Vendémiaire" label="13 Vendémiaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q837299" start="36021" end="36044" title="Vendémiaire" label="calendar used in France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36157" end="36175" title="13 Vendémiaire#A whiff of grapeshot" label="whiff of grapeshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q241108" start="36668" end="36687" title="Battle of Friedland" label="Battle of Friedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723884" start="36725" end="36734" title="roundshot" label="roundshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="36887" end="36905" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="36998" end="37005" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="37009" end="37016" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q749601" start="37050" end="37056" title="recoil" label="recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q323227" start="37258" end="37266" title="ricochet" label="ricochet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37413" end="37434" title="Battle of Waterloo#The French cavalry attack" label="French cavalry attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q639509" start="37472" end="37487" title="infantry square" label="infantry square"/>
<link wikidata="Q44865" start="37567" end="37577" title="cuirassier" label="cuirassier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045848" start="37583" end="37589" title="lancer" label="lancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107108590" start="37880" end="37895" title="George Marshall (gunner)" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q335115" start="38281" end="38298" title="William Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong" label="William Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q712307" start="38303" end="38319" title="Joseph Whitworth" label="Joseph Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186910" start="38571" end="38582" title="Griffen gun" label="Griffen gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="38643" end="38661" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604756" start="38728" end="38747" title="Canon obusier de 12" label="12-pounder Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q228268" start="38984" end="38991" title="rifling" label="rifling"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="39129" end="39139" title="Gyroscope" label="gyroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="39225" end="39239" title="breech-loading weapon" label="breech-loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q689133" start="39240" end="39253" title="Armstrong Gun" label="Armstrong Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q435182" start="39615" end="39636" title="Prince George, Duke of Cambridge" label="the Duke of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="40006" end="40015" title="ironclad warship" label="ironclads"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="40338" end="40347" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="40695" end="40710" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170850" start="40921" end="40939" title="Anglo-Zanzibar War" label="Anglo-Zanzibar War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570324" start="41148" end="41161" title="cannon fodder" label="cannon fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q49767" start="41183" end="41213" title="François-René de Chateaubriand" label="François-René de Chateaubriand"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="41333" end="41352" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q631855" start="41380" end="41396" title="Henry IV, Part 1" label="Henry IV, Part 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897627" start="41659" end="41679" title="large-calibre artillery" label="large-calibre cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q602517" start="41726" end="41743" title="Nuclear artillery" label="Nuclear artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="41885" end="41889" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097656" start="42245" end="42260" title="indirect fire" label="flat trajectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475694" start="42506" end="42521" title="infantry weapon" label="infantry weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097656" start="42621" end="42634" title="indirect fire" label="indirect fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="42675" end="42686" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="42756" end="42770" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q753063" start="43165" end="43174" title="Paris Gun" label="Paris Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580802" start="43389" end="43401" title="sabot (firearms)" label="sabot rounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q333133" start="43434" end="43448" title="proximity fuse" label="proximity fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="43632" end="43645" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060817" start="43700" end="43708" title="European Theater of Operations" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296445" start="43713" end="43720" title="Asiatic-Pacific Theater" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="43783" end="43798" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="43804" end="43812" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="44046" end="44065" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370129" start="44291" end="44304" title="Anti-tank gun" label="Anti-tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110438" start="44390" end="44399" title="Ordnance QF 2 pounder" label="2 pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q977910" start="44404" end="44413" title="Ordnance QF 6 pounder" label="6 pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479597" start="44443" end="44454" title="Ordnance QF 17 pounder" label="17 pounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241267" start="44612" end="44621" title="tank gun" label="main guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q151475" start="44675" end="44685" title="Panzer III" label="Panzer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="44736" end="44749" title="mass production" label="mass-produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q172233" start="44808" end="44812" title="T-34" label="T-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q117936" start="44941" end="44949" title="Sturmgeschütz III" label="StuG III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186" start="45171" end="45180" title="Panzer IV" label="Panzer IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q151960" start="45185" end="45197" title="Panther tank" label="Panther tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406923" start="45213" end="45226" title="8.8 cm KwK 43" label="8.8 cm KwK 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="45273" end="45282" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q270140" start="45333" end="45339" title="PaK 43" label="PaK 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="45450" end="45456" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="45584" end="45592" title="direct fire" label="directly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45613" end="45633" title="11th Marine Regiment#Korean War" label="11th Marine Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q277337" start="45641" end="45667" title="Battle of Chosin Reservoir" label="Battle of Chosin Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="45680" end="45690" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45696" end="45711" title="Artillery battery#Modern battery organization" label="field batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="45734" end="45743" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="46035" end="46053" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068971" start="46356" end="46360" title="M777 howitzer" label="M777"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="46664" end="46678" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q379582" start="46732" end="46751" title="Advanced Gun System" label="Advanced Gun System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673139" start="46797" end="46830" title="Long Range Land-Attack Projectile" label="Long Range Land-Attack Projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q843368" start="46867" end="46896" title="Circular error probable" label="circular error of probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966482" start="47728" end="47746" title="rotary cannon" label="rotary autocannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888983" start="48180" end="48216" title="Saint Petersburg Declaration of 1868" label="Saint Petersburg Declaration of 1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815389" start="48351" end="48356" title="25 mm caliber" label="25 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q138729" start="48363" end="48373" title="M242 Bushmaster" label="Bushmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059048" start="48380" end="48389" title="chain gun" label="chain gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q906668" start="48406" end="48412" title="LAV-25" label="LAV-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q473430" start="48417" end="48427" title="M2 Bradley" label="M2 Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="48428" end="48445" title="Infantry fighting vehicle" label="armoured vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131718" start="48624" end="48630" title="RARDEN" label="RARDEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q195415" start="48934" end="48942" title="Gryazev-Shipunov GSh-6-23" label="GSh-6-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="49254" end="49269" title="explosive shell" label="explosive shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179106" start="49955" end="49978" title="Coventry Ordnance Works" label="Coventry Ordnance Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936447" start="49985" end="49998" title="COW 37 mm gun" label="COW 37 mm gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011199" start="50227" end="50243" title="Vickers Type 161" label="Vickers Type 161"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098829" start="50252" end="50279" title="Westland C.O.W. Gun Fighter" label="Westland C.O.W. Gun Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568476" start="50406" end="50440" title="Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service" label="Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q723612" start="51093" end="51107" title="Hawker Tempest" label="Hawker Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q218932" start="51155" end="51180" title="M2 Browning" label=".50 Browning machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q484019" start="51216" end="51242" title="M1919 Browning machine gun" label="M1919 Browning machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620698" start="51277" end="51297" title="Hispano-Suiza HS.404" label="Hispano-Suiza HS.404"/>
<link wikidata="Q210670" start="51299" end="51320" title="Oerlikon 20 mm cannon" label="Oerlikon 20 mm cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q680704" start="51322" end="51327" title="MG FF cannon" label="MG FF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524253" start="51536" end="51543" title="pannier" label="pannier"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="51573" end="51583" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="51851" end="51862" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q830494" start="52011" end="52019" title="dogfight" label="dogfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="52175" end="52191" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="52258" end="52280" title="ground-attack aircraft" label="ground-attack aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q192443" start="52386" end="52424" title="Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II" label="Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II"/>
<link wikidata="Q431231" start="52430" end="52445" title="Lockheed AC-130" label="Lockheed AC-130"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="52584" end="52601" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="52744" end="52760" title="explosive charge" label="explosive charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q749601" start="53104" end="53110" title="recoil" label="recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="53415" end="53421" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="53462" end="53471" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461850" start="54158" end="54172" title="Muzzleloader" label="muzzle-loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="54187" end="54201" title="Breech-loading weapon" label="breech-loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="54932" end="54940" title="Artillery" label="ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q281560" start="54942" end="54949" title="wadding" label="wadding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723884" start="54951" end="54955" title="Round shot" label="shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019825" start="55005" end="55012" title="Caliber (artillery)" label="calibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="55173" end="55182" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q664571" start="55349" end="55353" title="fuse (explosives)" label="fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048074" start="55973" end="55981" title="cascabel (artillery)" label="cascabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q487192" start="56310" end="56316" title="Muzzle (firearms)" label="muzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263742" start="57035" end="57043" title="astragal" label="astragal"/>
<link wikidata="Q354271" start="57850" end="57859" title="trunnions" label="trunnions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346098" start="59705" end="59712" title="windage" label="windage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064392" start="60286" end="60296" title="smoothbore" label="smoothbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="60343" end="60357" title="breech-loading" label="breech-loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q228268" start="60359" end="60365" title="rifled" label="rifled"/>
<link wikidata="Q195463" start="60559" end="60570" title="demi-cannon" label="demi-cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054101" start="60575" end="60583" title="culverin" label="culverin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255322" start="60591" end="60604" title="demi-culverin" label="demi-culverin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="60798" end="60813" title="field artillery" label="field artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="60860" end="60870" title="autocannon" label="autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="60988" end="61000" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826066" start="61901" end="61908" title="plumb-bob" label="plummet"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="62139" end="62154" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62534" end="62547" title="bagged charge" label="bagged charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q988463" start="62659" end="62669" title="slow match" label="slow match"/>
<link wikidata="Q65045289" start="62671" end="62686" title="Friction primer" label="Friction primer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046871" start="63629" end="63639" title="Quaker Gun" label="Quaker Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581011" start="63672" end="63690" title="William Washington" label="William Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="63698" end="63714" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="63726" end="63752" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="63907" end="63919" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="64077" end="64082" title="Union Army" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="64321" end="64345" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q212776" start="64359" end="64372" title="1812 Overture" label="1812 Overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q673782" start="64542" end="64556" title="Earplug" label="ear protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q184320" start="64622" end="64640" title="Battle of Borodino" label="Battle of Borodino"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="64663" end="64697" title="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s invasion of Russia" label="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="64913" end="64928" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q355978" start="64943" end="64955" title="Antal Doráti" label="Antal Doráti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328403" start="64985" end="65004" title="Minnesota Orchestra" label="Minnesota Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="65095" end="65111" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q709361" start="65136" end="65150" title="Arthur Fiedler" label="Arthur Fiedler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263983" start="65158" end="65169" title="Boston Pops" label="Boston Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="65184" end="65193" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="65199" end="65204" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393681" start="65237" end="65276" title="For Those About to Rock (We Salute You)" label="For Those About to Rock (We Salute You)"/>
<link wikidata="Q474100" start="65332" end="65344" title="pyrotechnics" label="pyrotechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760708" start="65463" end="65488" title="M1857 12-pounder Napoleon" label="M1857 12-pounder Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="65496" end="65517" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317522" start="65518" end="65522" title="Goal (ice hockey)" label="goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166503" start="65539" end="65555" title="Nationwide Arena" label="Nationwide Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609947" start="65583" end="65597" title="2007–08 Columbus Blue Jackets season" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q650807" start="65713" end="65722" title="touchdown" label="touchdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="65747" end="65764" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="65785" end="65803" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881252" start="65809" end="65828" title="1962 Pittsburgh Steelers season" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984845" start="65894" end="65904" title="Buddy Dial" label="Buddy Dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881176" start="66016" end="66030" title="1962 Dallas Cowboys season" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084299" start="66138" end="66170" title="Extractive metallurgy" label="electrolytic reduction treatment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66236" end="66245" title="Purified water#Deionization" label="deionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="66266" end="66277" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q427956" start="66297" end="66308" title="tannic acid" label="tannic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184197" start="66333" end="66337" title="rust" label="rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="66446" end="66449" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="66469" end="66481" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503216" start="66794" end="66823" title="Geological Society of America" label="Geological Society of America"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7056" wikidata="Q7987" url="?curid=7056" title="Computer mouse">
<text>A computer mouse (plural mice, also mouses) is a hand-held pointing device that detects two-dimensional motion relative to a surface. This motion is typically translated into the motion of the pointer (called a cursor) on a display, which allows a smooth control of the graphical user interface of a computer.

The first public demonstration of a mouse controlling a computer system was done by Doug Engelbart in 1968 as part of the Mother of All Demos. Mice originally used two separate wheels to directly track movement across a surface: one in the x-dimension and one in the Y. Later, the standard design shifted to use a ball rolling on a surface to detect motion, in turn connected to internal rollers. Most modern mice use optical movement detection with no moving parts. Though originally all mice were connected to a computer by a cable, many modern mice are cordless, relying on short-range radio communication with the connected system.

In addition to moving a cursor, computer mice have one or more buttons to allow operations such as the selection of a menu item on a display. Mice often also feature other elements, such as touch surfaces and scroll wheels, which enable additional control and dimensional input.

== Etymology ==
The earliest known written use of the term &quot;mouse&quot; or mice in reference to a computer pointing device is in Bill English&#x27;s July 1965 publication, &quot;Computer-Aided Display Control&quot;. This likely originated from its resemblance to the shape and size of a mouse, with the cord resembling its tail. The popularity of wireless mice without cords makes the resemblance less obvious.

According to Roger Bates, a hardware designer under English, the term also came about because the cursor on the screen was, for an unknown reason, referred to as &quot;CAT&quot; and was seen by the team as if it would be chasing the new desktop device.

The plural for the small rodent is always &quot;mice&quot; in modern usage. The plural for a computer mouse is either &quot;mice&quot; or &quot;mouses&quot; according to most dictionaries, with &quot;mice&quot; being more common. The first recorded plural usage is &quot;mice&quot;; the online &quot;Oxford Dictionaries&quot; cites a 1984 use, and earlier uses include J. C. R. Licklider&#x27;s &quot;The Computer as a Communication Device&quot; of 1968.

== History ==
=== Stationary trackballs ===
The trackball, a related pointing device, was invented in 1946 by Ralph Benjamin as part of a post-World War II-era fire-control radar plotting system called the Comprehensive Display System (CDS). Benjamin was then working for the British Royal Navy Scientific Service. Benjamin&#x27;s project used analog computers to calculate the future position of target aircraft based on several initial input points provided by a user with a joystick. Benjamin felt that a more elegant input device was needed and invented what they called a &quot;roller ball&quot; for this purpose.

The device was patented in 1947, but only a prototype using a metal ball rolling on two rubber-coated wheels was ever built, and the device was kept as a military secret.

Another early trackball was built by Kenyon Taylor, a British electrical engineer working in collaboration with Tom Cranston and Fred Longstaff. Taylor was part of the original Ferranti Canada, working on the Royal Canadian Navy&#x27;s DATAR (Digital Automated Tracking and Resolving) system in 1952.

DATAR was similar in concept to Benjamin&#x27;s display. The trackball used four disks to pick up motion, two each for the X and Y directions. Several rollers provided mechanical support. When the ball was rolled, the pickup discs spun and contacts on their outer rim made periodic contact with wires, producing pulses of output with each movement of the ball. By counting the pulses, the physical movement of the ball could be determined. A digital computer calculated the tracks and sent the resulting data to other ships in a task force using pulse-code modulation radio signals. This trackball used a standard Canadian five-pin bowling ball. It was not patented, since it was a secret military project.

=== Engelbart&#x27;s first &quot;mouse&quot; ===
Douglas Engelbart of the Stanford Research Institute (now SRI International) has been credited in published books by Thierry Bardini, Paul Ceruzzi, Howard Rheingold, and several others as the inventor of the computer mouse. Engelbart was also recognized as such in various obituary titles after his death in July 2013.

By 1963, Engelbart had already established a research lab at SRI, the Augmentation Research Center (ARC), to pursue his objective of developing both hardware and software computer technology to &quot;augment&quot; human intelligence. That November, while attending a conference on computer graphics in Reno, Nevada, Engelbart began to ponder how to adapt the underlying principles of the planimeter to inputting X- and Y-coordinate data. On 14 November 1963, he first recorded his thoughts in his personal notebook about something he initially called a &quot;bug&quot;, which is a &quot;3-point&quot; form could have a &quot;drop point and 2 orthogonal wheels&quot;. He wrote that the &quot;bug&quot; would be &quot;easier&quot; and &quot;more natural&quot; to use, and unlike a stylus, it would stay still when let go, which meant it would be &quot;much better for coordination with the keyboard&quot;.

In 1964, Bill English joined ARC, where he helped Engelbart build the first mouse prototype. They christened the device the &quot;mouse&quot; as early models had a cord attached to the rear part of the device which looked like a tail, and in turn, resembled the common mouse. According to Roger Bates, a hardware designer under English, another reason for choosing this name was because the cursor on the screen was also referred to as &quot;CAT&quot; at this time.

As noted above, this &quot;mouse&quot; was first mentioned in print in a July 1965 report, on which English was the lead author. On 9 December 1968, Engelbart publicly demonstrated the mouse at what would come to be known as The Mother of All Demos. Engelbart never received any royalties for it, as his employer SRI held the patent, which expired before the mouse became widely used in personal computers. In any event, the invention of the mouse was just a small part of Engelbart&#x27;s much larger project of augmenting human intellect.

Several other experimental pointing-devices developed for Engelbart&#x27;s oN-Line System (NLS) exploited different body movements – for example, head-mounted devices attached to the chin or nose – but ultimately the mouse won out because of its speed and convenience. The first mouse, a bulky device (pictured) used two potentiometers perpendicular to each other and connected to wheels: the rotation of each wheel translated into motion along one axis. At the time of the &quot;Mother of All Demos&quot;, Engelbart&#x27;s group had been using their second-generation, 3-button mouse for about a year.

=== First rolling-ball mouse ===
On 2 October 1968, three years after Engelbart&#x27;s prototype but more than two months before his public demo, a mouse device named &quot;&quot; (German for &quot;Trackball control&quot;) was shown in a sales brochure by the German company AEG-Telefunken as an optional input device for the SIG 100 vector graphics terminal, part of the system around their process computer TR 86 and the main frame. Based on an even earlier trackball device, the mouse device had been developed by the company in 1966 in what had been a parallel and independent discovery. As the name suggests and unlike Engelbart&#x27;s mouse, the Telefunken model already had a ball (diameter 40 mm, weight 40 g) and two mechanical 4-bit rotational position transducers with Gray code-like states, allowing easy movement in any direction. The bits remained stable for at least two successive states to relax debouncing requirements. This arrangement was chosen so that the data could also be transmitted to the TR 86 front-end process computer and over longer distance telex lines with 50 baud. Weighing , the device with a total height of about came in a diameter hemispherical injection-molded thermoplastic casing featuring one central push button.

As noted above, the device was based on an earlier trackball-like device (also named &#x27;) that was embedded into radar flight control desks. This trackball had been originally developed by a team led by at Telefunken for the German &#x27; (Federal Air Traffic Control). It was part of the corresponding workstation system SAP 300 and the terminal SIG 3001, which had been designed and developed since 1963. Development for the TR 440 main frame began in 1965. This led to the development of the TR 86 process computer system with its SIG 100-86 terminal. Inspired by a discussion with a university customer, Mallebrein came up with the idea of &quot;reversing&quot; the existing trackball into a moveable mouse-like device in 1966, so that customers did not have to be bothered with mounting holes for the earlier trackball device. The device was finished in early 1968, and together with light pens and trackballs, it was commercially offered as an optional input device for their system starting later that year. Not all customers opted to buy the device, which added costs of per piece to the already up to 20-million DM deal for the main frame, of which only a total of 46 systems were sold or leased. They were installed at more than 20 German universities including RWTH Aachen, Technische Universität Berlin, University of Stuttgart and Konstanz. Several mice installed at the Leibniz Supercomputing Centre in Munich in 1972 are well preserved in a museum, two others survived in a museum at Stuttgart University, two in Hamburg, the one from Aachen at the Computer History Museum in the US, and yet another sample was recently donated to the Heinz Nixdorf MuseumsForum (HNF) in Paderborn. Anecdotal reports claim that Telefunken&#x27;s attempt to patent the device was rejected by the German Patent Office due to lack of inventiveness. For the air traffic control system, the Mallebrein team had already developed a precursor to touch screens in form of an ultrasonic-curtain-based pointing device in front of the display. In 1970, they developed a device named &quot;Touchinput-&quot; (&quot;touch input device&quot;) based on a conductively coated glass screen.

=== First mice on personal computers and workstations ===
The Xerox Alto was one of the first computers designed for individual use in 1973 and is regarded as the first modern computer to use a mouse. Alan Kay designed the 16-by-16 mouse cursor icon with its left edge vertical and right edge 45-degrees so it displays well on the bitmap.Inspired by PARC&#x27;s Alto, the Lilith, a computer which had been developed by a team around Niklaus Wirth at ETH Zürich between 1978 and 1980, provided a mouse as well. The third marketed version of an integrated mouse shipped as a part of a computer and intended for personal computer navigation came with the Xerox 8010 Star in 1981.

By 1982, the Xerox 8010 was probably the best-known computer with a mouse. The Sun-1 also came with a mouse, and the forthcoming Apple Lisa was rumored to use one, but the peripheral remained obscure; Jack Hawley of The Mouse House reported that one buyer for a large organization believed at first that his company sold lab mice. Hawley, who manufactured mice for Xerox, stated that &quot;Practically, I have the market all to myself right now&quot;; a Hawley mouse cost $415. In 1982, Logitech introduced the P4 Mouse at the Comdex trade show in Las Vegas, its first hardware mouse. That same year Microsoft made the decision to make the MS-DOS program Microsoft Word mouse-compatible, and developed the first PC-compatible mouse. The Microsoft Mouse shipped in 1983, thus beginning the Microsoft Hardware division of the company. However, the mouse remained relatively obscure until the appearance of the Macintosh 128K (which included an updated version of the single-button Lisa Mouse) in 1984, and of the Amiga 1000 and the Atari ST in 1985.

== Operation ==

A mouse typically controls the motion of a pointer in two dimensions in a graphical user interface (GUI). The mouse turns movements of the hand backward and forward, left and right into equivalent electronic signals that in turn are used to move the pointer.

The relative movements of the mouse on the surface are applied to the position of the pointer on the screen, which signals the point where actions of the user take place, so hand movements are replicated by the pointer. Clicking or pointing (stopping movement while the cursor is within the bounds of an area) can select files, programs or actions from a list of names, or (in graphical interfaces) through small images called &quot;icons&quot; and other elements. For example, a text file might be represented by a picture of a paper notebook and clicking while the cursor points at this icon might cause a text editing program to open the file in a window.

Different ways of operating the mouse cause specific things to happen in the GUI:
* Point: stop the motion of the pointer while it is inside the boundaries of what the user wants to interact with. This act of pointing is what the &quot;pointer&quot; and &quot;pointing device&quot; are named after. In web design lingo, pointing is referred to as &quot;hovering&quot;. This usage spread to web programming and Android programming, and is now found in many contexts.
* Click: pressing and releasing a button.
** (left) Single-click: clicking the main button.
** (left) Double-click: clicking the button two times in quick succession counts as a different gesture than two separate single clicks.
** (left) Triple-click: clicking the button three times in quick succession counts as a different gesture than three separate single clicks. Triple clicks are far less common in traditional navigation.
** Right-click: clicking the secondary button. In modern applications, this frequently opens a context menu.
** Middle-click: clicking the tertiary button. In most cases, this is also the scroll wheel.
** Clicking the fourth button.
** Clicking the fifth button.
** The USB standard defines up to 65535 distinct buttons for mice and other such devices, although in practice buttons above 3 are rarely implemented.
* Drag: pressing and holding a button, and moving the mouse before releasing the button. This is frequently used to move or copy files or other objects via drag and drop; other uses include selecting text and drawing in graphics applications.
* Mouse button chording or chord clicking:
** Clicking with more than one button simultaneously.
** Clicking while simultaneously typing a letter on the keyboard.
** Clicking and rolling the mouse wheel simultaneously.
* Clicking while holding down a modifier key.
* Moving the pointer a long distance: When a practical limit of mouse movement is reached, one lifts up the mouse, brings it to the opposite edge of the working area while it is held above the surface, and then lowers it back onto the working surface. This is often not necessary, because acceleration software detects fast movement, and moves the pointer significantly faster in proportion than for slow mouse motion.
* Multi-touch: this method is similar to a multi-touch touchpad on a laptop with support for tap input for multiple fingers, the most famous example being the Apple Magic Mouse.

=== Gestures ===
Gestural interfaces have become an integral part of modern computing, allowing users to interact with their devices in a more intuitive and natural way. In addition to traditional pointing-and-clicking actions, users can now employ gestural inputs to issue commands or perform specific actions. These stylized motions of the mouse cursor, known as &quot;gestures&quot;, have the potential to enhance user experience and streamline workflow.

To illustrate the concept of gestural interfaces, let&#x27;s consider a drawing program as an example. In this scenario, a user can employ a gesture to delete a shape on the canvas. By rapidly moving the mouse cursor in an &quot;x&quot; motion over the shape, the user can trigger the command to delete the selected shape. This gesture-based interaction enables users to perform actions quickly and efficiently without relying solely on traditional input methods.

While gestural interfaces offer a more immersive and interactive user experience, they also present challenges. One of the primary difficulties lies in the requirement of finer motor control from users. Gestures demand precise movements, which can be more challenging for individuals with limited dexterity or those who are new to this mode of interaction.

However, despite these challenges, gestural interfaces have gained popularity due to their ability to simplify complex tasks and improve efficiency. Several gestural conventions have become widely adopted, making them more accessible to users. One such convention is the drag and drop gesture, which has become pervasive across various applications and platforms.

The drag and drop gesture is a fundamental gestural convention that enables users to manipulate objects on the screen seamlessly. It involves a series of actions performed by the user:

# Pressing the mouse button while the cursor hovers over an interface object.
# Moving the cursor to a different location while holding the button down.
# Releasing the mouse button to complete the action.

This gesture allows users to transfer or rearrange objects effortlessly. For instance, a user can drag and drop a picture representing a file onto an image of a trash can, indicating the intention to delete the file. This intuitive and visual approach to interaction has become synonymous with organizing digital content and simplifying file management tasks.

In addition to the drag and drop gesture, several other semantic gestures have emerged as standard conventions within the gestural interface paradigm. These gestures serve specific purposes and contribute to a more intuitive user experience. Some of the notable semantic gestures include:

* Crossing-based goal: This gesture involves crossing a specific boundary or threshold on the screen to trigger an action or complete a task. For example, swiping across the screen to unlock a device or confirm a selection.
* Menu traversal: Menu traversal gestures facilitate navigation through hierarchical menus or options. Users can perform gestures such as swiping or scrolling to explore different menu levels or activate specific commands.
* Pointing: Pointing gestures involve positioning the mouse cursor over an object or element to interact with it. This fundamental gesture enables users to select, click, or access contextual menus.
* Mouseover (pointing or hovering): Mouseover gestures occur when the cursor is positioned over an object without clicking. This action often triggers a visual change or displays additional information about the object, providing users with real-time feedback.

These standard semantic gestures, along with the drag and drop convention, form the building blocks of gestural interfaces, allowing users to interact with digital content using intuitive and natural movements.

=== Specific uses ===

At the end of 20th century, digitizer mice (puck) with magnifying glass was used with AutoCAD for the digitizations of blueprints.

Other uses of the mouse&#x27;s input occur commonly in special application domains. In interactive three-dimensional graphics, the mouse&#x27;s motion often translates directly into changes in the virtual objects&#x27; or camera&#x27;s orientation. For example, in the first-person shooter genre of games (see below), players usually employ the mouse to control the direction in which the virtual player&#x27;s &quot;head&quot; faces: moving the mouse up will cause the player to look up, revealing the view above the player&#x27;s head. A related function makes an image of an object rotate so that all sides can be examined. 3D design and animation software often modally chord many different combinations to allow objects and cameras to be rotated and moved through space with the few axes of movement mice can detect.

When mice have more than one button, the software may assign different functions to each button. Often, the primary (leftmost in a right-handed configuration) button on the mouse will select items, and the secondary (rightmost in a right-handed) button will bring up a menu of alternative actions applicable to that item. For example, on platforms with more than one button, the Mozilla web browser will follow a link in response to a primary button click, will bring up a contextual menu of alternative actions for that link in response to a secondary-button click, and will often open the link in a new tab or window in response to a click with the tertiary (middle) mouse button.

== Types ==
=== Mechanical mice ===

The German company Telefunken published on their early ball mouse on 2 October 1968. Telefunken&#x27;s mouse was sold as optional equipment for their computer systems. Bill English, builder of Engelbart&#x27;s original mouse, created a ball mouse in 1972 while working for Xerox PARC.

The ball mouse replaced the external wheels with a single ball that could rotate in any direction. It came as part of the hardware package of the Xerox Alto computer. Perpendicular chopper wheels housed inside the mouse&#x27;s body chopped beams of light on the way to light sensors, thus detecting in their turn the motion of the ball. This variant of the mouse resembled an inverted trackball and became the predominant form used with personal computers throughout the 1980s and 1990s. The Xerox PARC group also settled on the modern technique of using both hands to type on a full-size keyboard and grabbing the mouse when required.

The ball mouse has two freely rotating rollers. These are located 90 degrees apart. One roller detects the forward-backward motion of the mouse and the other the left-right motion. Opposite the two rollers is a third one (white, in the photo, at 45 degrees) that is spring-loaded to push the ball against the other two rollers. Each roller is on the same shaft as an encoder wheel that has slotted edges; the slots interrupt infrared light beams to generate electrical pulses that represent wheel movement. Each wheel&#x27;s disc has a pair of light beams, located so that a given beam becomes interrupted or again starts to pass light freely when the other beam of the pair is about halfway between changes.

Simple logic circuits interpret the relative timing to indicate which direction the wheel is rotating. This incremental rotary encoder scheme is sometimes called quadrature encoding of the wheel rotation, as the two optical sensors produce signals that are in approximately quadrature phase. The mouse sends these signals to the computer system via the mouse cable, directly as logic signals in very old mice such as the Xerox mice, and via a data-formatting IC in modern mice. The driver software in the system converts the signals into motion of the mouse cursor along X and Y axes on the computer screen.

The ball is mostly steel, with a precision spherical rubber surface. The weight of the ball, given an appropriate working surface under the mouse, provides a reliable grip so the mouse&#x27;s movement is transmitted accurately. Ball mice and wheel mice were manufactured for Xerox by Jack Hawley, doing business as The Mouse House in Berkeley, California, starting in 1975. Based on another invention by Jack Hawley, proprietor of the Mouse House, Honeywell produced another type of mechanical mouse. Instead of a ball, it had two wheels rotating at off axes. Key Tronic later produced a similar product.

Modern computer mice took form at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) under the inspiration of Professor Jean-Daniel Nicoud and at the hands of engineer and watchmaker André Guignard. This new design incorporated a single hard rubber mouseball and three buttons, and remained a common design until the mainstream adoption of the scroll-wheel mouse during the 1990s. In 1985, René Sommer added a microprocessor to Nicoud&#x27;s and Guignard&#x27;s design. Through this innovation, Sommer is credited with inventing a significant component of the mouse, which made it more &quot;intelligent&quot;; though optical mice from Mouse Systems had incorporated microprocessors by 1984.

Another type of mechanical mouse, the &quot;analog mouse&quot; (now generally regarded as obsolete), uses potentiometers rather than encoder wheels, and is typically designed to be plug compatible with an analog joystick. The &quot;Color Mouse&quot;, originally marketed by RadioShack for their Color Computer (but also usable on MS-DOS machines equipped with analog joystick ports, provided the software accepted joystick input) was the best-known example.

=== Optical and laser mice ===

Early optical mice relied entirely on one or more light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and an imaging array of photodiodes to detect movement relative to the underlying surface, eschewing the internal moving parts a mechanical mouse uses in addition to its optics. A laser mouse is an optical mouse that uses coherent (laser) light.

The earliest optical mice detected movement on pre-printed mousepad surfaces, whereas the modern LED optical mouse works on most opaque diffuse surfaces; it is usually unable to detect movement on specular surfaces like polished stone. Laser diodes provide good resolution and precision, improving performance on opaque specular surfaces. Later, more surface-independent optical mice use an optoelectronic sensor (essentially, a tiny low-resolution video camera) to take successive images of the surface on which the mouse operates. Battery powered, wireless optical mice flash the LED intermittently to save power, and only glow steadily when movement is detected.

=== Inertial and gyroscopic mice ===
Often called &quot;air mice&quot; since they do not require a surface to operate, inertial mice use a tuning fork or other accelerometer (US Patent 4787051) to detect rotary movement for every axis supported. The most common models (manufactured by Logitech and Gyration) work using 2 degrees of rotational freedom and are insensitive to spatial translation. The user requires only small wrist rotations to move the cursor, reducing user fatigue or &quot;gorilla arm&quot;.

Usually cordless, they often have a switch to deactivate the movement circuitry between use, allowing the user freedom of movement without affecting the cursor position. A patent for an inertial mouse claims that such mice consume less power than optically based mice, and offer increased sensitivity, reduced weight and increased ease-of-use. In combination with a wireless keyboard an inertial mouse can offer alternative ergonomic arrangements which do not require a flat work surface, potentially alleviating some types of repetitive motion injuries related to workstation posture.

=== 3D mice ===
A 3D mouse is a computer input device for viewport interaction with at least three degrees of freedom (DoF), e.g. in 3D computer graphics software for manipulating virtual objects, navigating in the viewport, defining camera paths, posing, and desktop motion capture. 3D mice can also be used as spatial controllers for video game interaction, e.g. SpaceOrb 360. To perform such different tasks the used transfer function and the device stiffness are essential for efficient interaction.

==== Transfer function ====
The virtual motion is connected to the 3D mouse control handle via a transfer function. Position control means that the virtual position and orientation is proportional to the mouse handle&#x27;s deflection whereas velocity control means that translation and rotation velocity of the controlled object is proportional to the handle deflection. A further essential property of a transfer function is its interaction metaphor:

* Object-in-hand metaphor: An exterocentrical metaphor whereby the scene moves in correspondence with the input device. If the handle of the input device is twisted clockwise the scene rotates clockwise. If the handle is moved left the scene shifts left, and so on.
* Camera-in-hand metaphor: An egocentrical metaphor whereby the user&#x27;s view is controlled by direct movement of a virtual camera. If the handle is twisted clockwise the scene rotates counter-clockwise. If the handle is moved left the scene shifts right, and so on.

Ware and Osborne performed an experiment investigating these metaphors whereby it was shown that there is no single best metaphor. For manipulation tasks, the object-in-hand metaphor was superior, whereas for navigation tasks the camera-in-hand metaphor was superior.

==== Device stiffness ====
Zhai used and the following three categories for device stiffness:

* Isotonic Input: An input device with zero stiffness, that is, there is no self-centering effect.
* Elastic Input: A device with some stiffness, that is, the forces on the handle are proportional to the deflections.
* Isometric Input: An elastic input device with infinite stiffness, that is, the device handle does not allow any deflection but records force and torque.

==== Isotonic 3D mice ====
Logitech 3D Mouse (1990) was the first ultrasonic mouse and is an example of an isotonic 3D mouse having six degrees of freedom (6DoF). Isotonic devices have also been developed with less than 6DoF, e.g. the Inspector at Technical University of Denmark (5DoF input).

Other examples of isotonic 3D mice are motion controllers, i.e. is a type of game controller that typically uses accelerometers to track motion. Motion tracking systems are also used for motion capture e.g. in the film industry, although that these tracking systems are not 3D mice in a strict sense, because motion capture only means recording 3D motion and not 3D interaction.

==== Isometric 3D mice ====
Early 3D mice for velocity control were almost ideally isometric, e.g. SpaceBall 1003, 2003, 3003, and a device developed at Deutsches Zentrum für Luft und Raumfahrt (DLR), cf. US patent US4589810A.

==== Elastic 3D mice ====
At DLR an elastic 6DoF sensor was developed that was used in Logitech&#x27;s SpaceMouse and in the products of 3DConnexion. SpaceBall 4000 FLX has a maximum deflection of approximately at a maximum force of approximately 10N, that is, a stiffness of approximately . SpaceMouse has a maximum deflection of at a maximum force of , that is, a stiffness of approximately . Taking this development further, the softly elastic Sundinlabs SpaceCat was developed. SpaceCat has a maximum translational deflection of approximately and maximum rotational deflection of approximately 30° at a maximum force less than 2N, that is, a stiffness of approximately . With SpaceCat Sundin and Fjeld reviewed five comparative experiments performed with different device stiffness and transfer functions and performed a further study comparing 6DoF softly elastic position control with 6DoF stiffly elastic velocity control in a positioning task. They concluded that for positioning tasks position control is to be preferred over velocity control. They could further conjecture the following two types of preferred 3D mouse usage:

* Positioning, manipulation, and docking using isotonic or softly elastic position control and an object-in-hand metaphor.
* Navigation using softly or stiffly elastic rate control and a camera-in-hand metaphor.

3DConnexion&#x27;s 3D mice have been commercially successful over decades. They are used in combination with the conventional mouse for CAD. The Space Mouse is used to orient the target object or change the viewpoint with the non-dominant hand, whereas the dominant hand operates the computer mouse for conventional CAD GUI operation. This is a kind of space-multiplexed input where the 6 DoF input device acts as a graspable user interface that is always connected to the view port.

==== Force feedback ====
With force feedback the device stiffness can dynamically be adapted to the task just performed by the user, e.g. performing positioning tasks with less stiffness than navigation tasks.

=== Tactile mice ===
In 2000, Logitech introduced a &quot;tactile mouse&quot; known as the &quot;iFeel Mouse&quot; developed by Immersion Corporation that contained a small actuator to enable the mouse to generate simulated physical sensations. Such a mouse can augment user-interfaces with haptic feedback, such as giving feedback when crossing a window boundary. To surf the internet by touch-enabled mouse was first developed in 1996 and first implemented commercially by the Wingman Force Feedback Mouse. It requires the user to be able to feel depth or hardness; this ability was realized with the first electrorheological tactile mice but never marketed.

=== Pucks ===
Tablet digitizers are sometimes used with accessories called pucks, devices which rely on absolute positioning, but can be configured for sufficiently mouse-like relative tracking that they are sometimes marketed as mice.

=== Ergonomic mice ===

As the name suggests, this type of mouse is intended to provide optimum comfort and avoid injuries such as carpal tunnel syndrome, arthritis, and other repetitive strain injuries. It is designed to fit natural hand position and movements, to reduce discomfort.

When holding a typical mouse, the ulna and radius bones on the arm are crossed. Some designs attempt to place the palm more vertically, so the bones take more natural parallel position.

Increasing mouse height and angling the mouse topcase can improve wrist posture without negatively affecting performance. Some limit wrist movement, encouraging arm movement instead, that may be less precise but more optimal from the health point of view. A mouse may be angled from the thumb downward to the opposite side – this is known to reduce wrist pronation. However such optimizations make the mouse right or left hand specific, making more problematic to change the tired hand. &quot;Time&quot; has criticized manufacturers for offering few or no left-handed ergonomic mice: &quot;Oftentimes I felt like I was dealing with someone who&#x27;d never actually met a left-handed person before.&quot;

Another solution is a pointing bar device. The so-called &quot;roller bar mouse&quot; is positioned snugly in front of the keyboard, thus allowing bi-manual accessibility.

=== Gaming mice ===
These mice are specifically designed for use in computer games. They typically employ a wider array of controls and buttons and have designs that differ radically from traditional mice. They may also have decorative monochrome or programmable RGB LED lighting. The additional buttons can often be used for changing the sensitivity of the mouse or they can be assigned (programmed) to macros (i.e., for opening a program or for use instead of a key combination). It is also common for game mice, especially those designed for use in real-time strategy games such as &quot;StarCraft&quot;, or in multiplayer online battle arena games such as League of Legends to have a relatively high sensitivity, measured in dots per inch (DPI), which can be as high as 25,600. DPI and CPI are the same values that refer to the mouse&#x27;s sensitivity. DPI is a misnomer used in the gaming world, and many manufacturers use it to refer to CPI, counts per inch. Some advanced mice from gaming manufacturers also allow users to adjust the weight of the mouse by adding or subtracting weights to allow for easier control. Ergonomic quality is also an important factor in gaming mouse, as extended gameplay times may render further use of the mouse to be uncomfortable. Some mice have been designed to have adjustable features such as removable and/or elongated palm rests, horizontally adjustable thumb rests and pinky rests. Some mice may include several different rests with their products to ensure comfort for a wider range of target consumers. Gaming mice are held by gamers in three styles of :
# Palm Grip: the hand rests on the mouse, with extended fingers.
# Claw Grip: palm rests on the mouse, bent fingers.
# Finger-Tip Grip: bent fingers, palm does not touch the mouse.

== Connectivity and communication protocols ==
To transmit their input, typical cabled mice use a thin electrical cord terminating in a standard connector, such as RS-232C, PS/2, ADB, or USB. Cordless mice instead transmit data via infrared radiation (see IrDA) or radio (including Bluetooth), although many such cordless interfaces are themselves connected through the aforementioned wired serial buses.

While the electrical interface and the format of the data transmitted by commonly available mice is currently standardized on USB, in the past it varied between different manufacturers. A bus mouse used a dedicated interface card for connection to an IBM PC or compatible computer.

Mouse use in DOS applications became more common after the introduction of the Microsoft Mouse, largely because Microsoft provided an open standard for communication between applications and mouse driver software. Thus, any application written to use the Microsoft standard could use a mouse with a driver that implements the same API, even if the mouse hardware itself was incompatible with Microsoft&#x27;s. This driver provides the state of the buttons and the distance the mouse has moved in units that its documentation calls &quot;mickeys&quot;.

=== Early mice ===

In the 1970s, the Xerox Alto mouse, and in the 1980s the Xerox optical mouse, used a quadrature-encoded X and Y interface. This two-bit encoding per dimension had the property that only one bit of the two would change at a time, like a Gray code or Johnson counter, so that the transitions would not be misinterpreted when asynchronously sampled.

The earliest mass-market mice, such as the original Macintosh, Amiga, and Atari ST mice used a D-subminiature 9-pin connector to send the quadrature-encoded X and Y axis signals directly, plus one pin per mouse button. The mouse was a simple optomechanical device, and the decoding circuitry was all in the main computer.

The DE-9 connectors were designed to be electrically compatible with the joysticks popular on numerous 8-bit systems, such as the Commodore 64 and the Atari 2600. Although the ports could be used for both purposes, the signals must be interpreted differently. As a result, plugging a mouse into a joystick port causes the &quot;joystick&quot; to continuously move in some direction, even if the mouse stays still, whereas plugging a joystick into a mouse port causes the &quot;mouse&quot; to only be able to move a single pixel in each direction.

=== Serial interface and protocol ===
Because the IBM PC did not have a quadrature decoder built in, early PC mice used the RS-232C serial port to communicate encoded mouse movements, as well as provide power to the mouse&#x27;s circuits. The Mouse Systems Corporation (MSC) version used a five-byte protocol and supported three buttons. The Microsoft version used a three-byte protocol and supported two buttons. Due to the incompatibility between the two protocols, some manufacturers sold serial mice with a mode switch: &quot;PC&quot; for MSC mode, &quot;MS&quot; for Microsoft mode.

=== Apple Desktop Bus ===
In 1986 Apple first implemented the Apple Desktop Bus allowing the daisy chaining of up to 16 devices, including mice and other devices on the same bus with no configuration whatsoever. Featuring only a single data pin, the bus used a purely polled approach to device communications and survived as the standard on mainstream models (including a number of non-Apple workstations) until 1998 when Apple&#x27;s iMac line of computers joined the industry-wide switch to using USB. Beginning with the Bronze Keyboard PowerBook G3 in May 1999, Apple dropped the external ADB port in favor of USB, but retained an internal ADB connection in the PowerBook G4 for communication with its built-in keyboard and trackpad until early 2005.

=== PS/2 interface and protocol ===

With the arrival of the IBM PS/2 personal-computer series in 1987, IBM introduced the eponymous PS/2 port for mice and keyboards, which other manufacturers rapidly adopted. The most visible change was the use of a round 6-pin mini-DIN, in lieu of the former 5-pin MIDI style full sized DIN 41524 connector. In default mode (called &quot;stream mode&quot;) a PS/2 mouse communicates motion, and the state of each button, by means of 3-byte packets. For any motion, button press or button release event, a PS/2 mouse sends, over a bi-directional serial port, a sequence of three bytes, with the following format:

Here, XS and YS represent the sign bits of the movement vectors, XV and YV indicate an overflow in the respective vector component, and LB, MB and RB indicate the status of the left, middle and right mouse buttons (1 = pressed). PS/2 mice also understand several commands for reset and self-test, switching between different operating modes, and changing the resolution of the reported motion vectors.

A Microsoft IntelliMouse relies on an extension of the PS/2 protocol: the ImPS/2 or IMPS/2 protocol (the abbreviation combines the concepts of &quot;IntelliMouse&quot; and &quot;PS/2&quot;). It initially operates in standard PS/2 format, for backward compatibility. After the host sends a special command sequence, it switches to an extended format in which a fourth byte carries information about wheel movements. The IntelliMouse Explorer works analogously, with the difference that its 4-byte packets also allow for two additional buttons (for a total of five).

Mouse vendors also use other extended formats, often without providing public documentation. The Typhoon mouse uses 6-byte packets which can appear as a sequence of two standard 3-byte packets, such that an ordinary PS/2 driver can handle them. For 3D (or 6-degree-of-freedom) input, vendors have made many extensions both to the hardware and to software. In the late 1990s, Logitech created ultrasound based tracking which gave 3D input to a few millimeters accuracy, which worked well as an input device but failed as a profitable product. In 2008, Motion4U introduced its &quot;OptiBurst&quot; system using IR tracking for use as a Maya (graphics software) plugin.

=== USB ===
Almost all wired mice today use USB and the USB human interface device class for communication.

=== Cordless or wireless ===
Cordless or wireless mice transmit data via radio. Some mice connect to the computer through Bluetooth or Wi-Fi, while others use a receiver that plugs into the computer, for example through a USB port.

Many mice that use a USB receiver have a storage compartment for it inside the mouse. Some &quot;nano receivers&quot; are designed to be small enough to remain plugged into a laptop during transport, while still being large enough to easily remove.

== Operating system support ==
MS-DOS and Windows 1.0 support connecting a mouse such as a Microsoft Mouse via multiple interfaces: BallPoint, Bus (InPort), Serial port or PS/2.

Windows 98 added built-in support for USB Human Interface Device class (USB HID), with native vertical scrolling support. Windows 2000 and Windows Me expanded this built-in support to 5-button mice.

Windows XP Service Pack 2 introduced a Bluetooth stack, allowing Bluetooth mice to be used without any USB receivers. Windows Vista added native support for horizontal scrolling and standardized wheel movement granularity for finer scrolling.

Windows 8 introduced BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) mouse/HID support.

== Multiple-mouse systems ==
Some systems allow two or more mice to be used at once as input devices. Late-1980s era home computers such as the Amiga used this to allow computer games with two players interacting on the same computer (Lemmings and The Settlers for example). The same idea is sometimes used in collaborative software, e.g. to simulate a whiteboard that multiple users can draw on without passing a single mouse around.

Microsoft Windows, since Windows 98, has supported multiple simultaneous pointing devices. Because Windows only provides a single screen cursor, using more than one device at the same time requires cooperation of users or applications designed for multiple input devices.

Multiple mice are often used in multi-user gaming in addition to specially designed devices that provide several input interfaces.

Windows also has full support for multiple input/mouse configurations for multi-user environments.

Starting with Windows XP, Microsoft introduced an SDK for developing applications that allow multiple input devices to be used at the same time with independent cursors and independent input points. However, it no longer appears to be available.

The introduction of Windows Vista and Microsoft Surface (now known as Microsoft PixelSense) introduced a new set of input APIs that were adopted into Windows 7, allowing for 50 points/cursors, all controlled by independent users. The new input points provide traditional mouse input; however, they were designed with other input technologies like touch and image in mind. They inherently offer 3D coordinates along with pressure, size, tilt, angle, mask, and even an image bitmap to see and recognize the input point/object on the screen.

, Linux distributions and other operating systems that use X.Org, such as OpenSolaris and FreeBSD, support 255 cursors/input points through Multi-Pointer X. However, currently no window managers support Multi-Pointer X leaving it relegated to custom software usage.

There have also been propositions of having a single operator use two mice simultaneously as a more sophisticated means of controlling various graphics and multimedia applications.

== Buttons ==

Mouse buttons are microswitches which can be pressed to select or interact with an element of a graphical user interface, producing a distinctive clicking sound.

Since around the late 1990s, the three-button scrollmouse has become the de facto standard. Users most commonly employ the second button to invoke a contextual menu in the computer&#x27;s software user interface, which contains options specifically tailored to the interface element over which the mouse cursor currently sits. By default, the primary mouse button sits located on the left-hand side of the mouse, for the benefit of right-handed users; left-handed users can usually reverse this configuration via software.

== Scrolling ==
Nearly all mice now have an integrated input primarily intended for scrolling on top, usually a single-axis digital wheel or rocker switch which can also be depressed to act as a third button. Though less common, many mice instead have two-axis inputs such as a tiltable wheel, trackball, or touchpad. Those with a trackball may be designed to stay stationary, using the trackball instead of moving the mouse.

== Speed ==
Mickeys per second is a unit of measurement for the speed and movement direction of a computer mouse, where direction is often expressed as &quot;horizontal&quot; versus &quot;vertical&quot; mickey count. However, speed can also refer to the ratio between how many pixels the cursor moves on the screen and how far the mouse moves on the mouse pad, which may be expressed as pixels per mickey, pixels per inch, or pixels per centimeter.

The computer industry often measures mouse sensitivity in terms of counts per inch (CPI), commonly expressed as dots per inch (DPI)the number of steps the mouse will report when it moves one inch. In early mice, this specification was called pulses per inch (ppi). The mickey originally referred to one of these counts, or one resolvable step of motion. If the default mouse-tracking condition involves moving the cursor by one screen-pixel or dot on-screen per reported step, then the CPI does equate to DPI: dots of cursor motion per inch of mouse motion. The CPI or DPI as reported by manufacturers depends on how they make the mouse; the higher the CPI, the faster the cursor moves with mouse movement. However, software can adjust the mouse sensitivity, making the cursor move faster or slower than its CPI. software can change the speed of the cursor dynamically, taking into account the mouse&#x27;s absolute speed and the movement from the last stop-point.

For simple software, when the mouse starts to move, the software will count the number of &quot;counts&quot; or &quot;mickeys&quot; received from the mouse and will move the cursor across the screen by that number of pixels (or multiplied by a rate factor, typically less than 1). The cursor will move slowly on the screen, with good precision. When the movement of the mouse passes the value set for some threshold, the software will start to move the cursor faster, with a greater rate factor. Usually, the user can set the value of the second rate factor by changing the &quot;acceleration&quot; setting.

Operating systems sometimes apply acceleration, referred to as &quot;ballistics&quot;, to the motion reported by the mouse. For example, versions of Windows prior to Windows XP doubled reported values above a configurable threshold, and then optionally doubled them again above a second configurable threshold. These doublings applied separately in the X and Y directions, resulting in very nonlinear response.

== Mousepads ==
Engelbart&#x27;s original mouse did not require a mousepad; the mouse had two large wheels which could roll on virtually any surface. However, most subsequent mechanical mice starting with the steel roller ball mouse have required a mousepad for optimal performance.

The mousepad, the most common mouse accessory, appears most commonly in conjunction with mechanical mice, because to roll smoothly the ball requires more friction than common desk surfaces usually provide. So-called &quot;hard mousepads&quot; for gamers or optical/laser mice also exist.

Most optical and laser mice do not require a pad, the notable exception being early optical mice which relied on a grid on the pad to detect movement (e.g. Mouse Systems). Whether to use a hard or soft mousepad with an optical mouse is largely a matter of personal preference. One exception occurs when the desk surface creates problems for the optical or laser tracking, for example, a transparent or reflective surface, such as glass.

Some mice also come with small &quot;pads&quot; attached to the bottom surface, also called mouse feet or mouse skates, that help the user slide the mouse smoothly across surfaces.

== In the marketplace ==
Around 1981, Xerox included mice with its Xerox Star, based on the mouse used in the 1970s on the Alto computer at Xerox PARC. Sun Microsystems, Symbolics, Lisp Machines Inc., and Tektronix also shipped workstations with mice, starting in about 1981. Later, inspired by the Star, Apple Computer released the Apple Lisa, which also used a mouse. However, none of these products achieved large-scale success. Only with the release of the Apple Macintosh in 1984 did the mouse see widespread use.

The Macintosh design, commercially successful and technically influential, led many other vendors to begin producing mice or including them with their other computer products (by 1986, Atari ST, Amiga, Windows 1.0, GEOS for the Commodore 64, and the Apple IIGS).

The widespread adoption of graphical user interfaces in the software of the 1980s and 1990s made mice all but indispensable for controlling computers. In November 2008, Logitech built their billionth mouse.

== Use in games ==
The device often functions as an interface for PC-based computer games and sometimes for video game consoles. The Classic Mac OS Desk Accessory &quot;Puzzle&quot; in 1984 was the first game designed specifically for a mouse.

=== First-person shooters ===
FPSs naturally lend themselves to separate and simultaneous control of the player&#x27;s movement and aim, and on computers this has traditionally been achieved with a combination of keyboard and mouse. Players use the X-axis of the mouse for looking (or turning) left and right, and the Y-axis for looking up and down; the keyboard is used for movement and supplemental inputs.

Many shooting genre players prefer a mouse over a gamepad analog stick because the wide range of motion offered by a mouse allows for faster and more varied control. Although an analog stick allows the player more granular control, it is poor for certain movements, as the player&#x27;s input is relayed based on a vector of both the stick&#x27;s direction and magnitude. Thus, a small but fast movement (known as &quot;flick-shotting&quot;) using a gamepad requires the player to quickly move the stick from its rest position to the edge and back again in quick succession, a difficult maneuver. In addition the stick also has a finite magnitude; if the player is currently using the stick to move at a non-zero velocity their ability to increase the rate of movement of the camera is further limited based on the position their displaced stick was already at before executing the maneuver. The effect of this is that a mouse is well suited not only to small, precise movements but also to large, quick movements and immediate, responsive movements; all of which are important in shooter gaming. This advantage also extends in varying degrees to similar game styles such as third-person shooters.

Some incorrectly ported games or game engines have acceleration and interpolation curves which unintentionally produce excessive, irregular, or even negative acceleration when used with a mouse instead of their native platform&#x27;s non-mouse default input device. Depending on how deeply hardcoded this misbehavior is, internal user patches or external 3rd-party software may be able to fix it. Individual game engines will also have their own sensitivities. This often restricts one from taking a game&#x27;s existing sensitivity, transferring it to another, and acquiring the same 360 rotational measurements. A sensitivity converter is the preferred tool that FPS gamers use to translate correctly the rotational movements between different mice and between different games. Calculating the conversion values manually is also possible but it is more time-consuming and requires performing complex mathematical calculations, while using a sensitivity converter is a lot faster and easier for gamers.

Due to their similarity to the WIMP desktop metaphor interface for which mice were originally designed, and to their own tabletop game origins, computer strategy games are most commonly played with mice. In particular, real-time strategy and MOBA games usually require the use of a mouse.

The left button usually controls primary fire. If the game supports multiple fire modes, the right button often provides secondary fire from the selected weapon. Games with only a single fire mode will generally map secondary fire to &quot;aim down the weapon sights&quot;. In some games, the right button may also invoke accessories for a particular weapon, such as allowing access to the scope of a sniper rifle or allowing the mounting of a bayonet or silencer.

Players can use a scroll wheel for changing weapons (or for controlling scope-zoom magnification, in older games). On most first person shooter games, programming may also assign more functions to additional buttons on mice with more than three controls. A keyboard usually controls movement (for example, WASD for moving forward, left, backward, and right, respectively) and other functions such as changing posture. Since the mouse serves for aiming, a mouse that tracks movement accurately and with less lag (latency) will give a player an advantage over players with less accurate or slower mice. In some cases the right mouse button may be used to move the player forward, either in lieu of, or in conjunction with the typical WASD configuration.

Many games provide players with the option of mapping their own choice of a key or button to a certain control. An early technique of players, circle strafing, saw a player continuously strafing while aiming and shooting at an opponent by walking in circle around the opponent with the opponent at the center of the circle. Players could achieve this by holding down a key for strafing while continuously aiming the mouse toward the opponent.

Games using mice for input are so popular that many manufacturers make mice specifically for gaming. Such mice may feature adjustable weights, high-resolution optical or laser components, additional buttons, ergonomic shape, and other features such as adjustable CPI. Mouse Bungees are typically used with gaming mice because it eliminates the annoyance of the cable.

Many games, such as first- or third-person shooters, have a setting named &quot;invert mouse&quot; or similar (not to be confused with &quot;button inversion&quot;, sometimes performed by left-handed users) which allows the user to look downward by moving the mouse forward and upward by moving the mouse backward (the opposite of non-inverted movement). This control system resembles that of aircraft control sticks, where pulling back causes pitch up and pushing forward causes pitch down; computer joysticks also typically emulate this control-configuration.

After id Software&#x27;s commercial hit of &quot;Doom&quot;, which did not support vertical aiming, competitor Bungie&#x27;s &quot;Marathon&quot; became the first first-person shooter to support using the mouse to aim up and down. Games using the Build engine had an option to invert the Y-axis. The &quot;invert&quot; feature actually made the mouse behave in a manner that users regard as non-inverted (by default, moving mouse forward resulted in looking down). Soon after, id Software released &quot;Quake&quot;, which introduced the invert feature as users know it.

=== Home consoles ===
In 1988, the VTech Socrates educational video game console featured a wireless mouse with an attached mouse pad as an optional controller used for some games. In the early 1990s, the Super Nintendo Entertainment System video game system featured a mouse in addition to its controllers. A mouse was also released for the Nintendo 64, although it was only released in Japan. The 1992 game &quot;Mario Paint&quot; in particular used the mouse&#x27;s capabilities, as did its Japanese-only successor &quot;Mario Artist&quot; on the N64 for its 64DD disk drive peripheral in 1999. Sega released official mice for their Genesis/Mega Drive, Saturn and Dreamcast consoles. NEC sold official mice for its PC Engine and PC-FX consoles. Sony released an official mouse product for the PlayStation console, included one along with the Linux for PlayStation 2 kit, as well as allowing owners to use virtually any USB mouse with the PS2, PS3, and PS4. Nintendo&#x27;s Wii also had this feature implemented in a later software update, and this support was retained on its successor, the Wii U. Microsoft&#x27;s Xbox line of game consoles (which used operaring systems based on modified versions of Windows NT) also had universal-wide mouse support using USB.

== See also ==
* Computer accessibility
* Footmouse
* Graphics tablet
* Gesture recognition
* Human–computer interaction (HCI)
* Mouse keys
* Mouse tracking
* Optical trackpad
* Pointing stick
* Rotational mouse
* Trackball
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* (11 pages) (NB. This is based on an earlier German article published in 1996 in &quot;Lab. Jahrbuch 1995/1996 für Künste und Apparate&quot; (350 pages) by Kunsthochschule für Medien Köln mit dem Verein der Freunde der Kunsthochschule für Medien Köln; in Cologne, Germany. .)

== External links ==
* Doug Engelbart Institute mouse resources page includes stories and links
* The video segment of The Mother of All Demos with Doug Engelbart showing the device from 1968</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="2" end="16" title="Computer mouse" label="computer mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="25" end="29" title="Computer mouse" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="36" end="42" title="Computer mouse" label="mouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q184824" start="59" end="74" title="pointing device" label="pointing device"/>
<link wikidata="Q222032" start="88" end="103" title="Plane (mathematics)" label="two-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="193" end="200" title="Cursor (user interface)#Pointer" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="224" end="231" title="computer monitor" label="display"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="270" end="294" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="300" end="308" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q92614" start="395" end="409" title="Doug Engelbart" label="Doug Engelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521932" start="433" end="452" title="Mother of All Demos" label="Mother of All Demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q364747" start="729" end="755" title="optical mouse" label="optical movement detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q107602" start="972" end="978" title="cursor (user interface)" label="cursor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926048" start="1011" end="1018" title="mouse button" label="buttons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091813" start="1157" end="1169" title="scroll wheel" label="scroll wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894943" start="1362" end="1374" title="Bill English (computer engineer)" label="Bill English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="1520" end="1525" title="mouse" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q60960" start="1556" end="1560" title="tail" label="tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q107602" start="1743" end="1749" title="cursor (user interface)" label="cursor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807054" start="2199" end="2218" title="Oxford Dictionaries (website)" label="Oxford Dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q92778" start="2268" end="2286" title="J. C. R. Licklider" label="J. C. R. Licklider"/>
<link wikidata="Q20140" start="2403" end="2412" title="trackball" label="trackball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287239" start="2465" end="2479" title="Ralph Benjamin" label="Ralph Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2498" end="2510" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="2515" end="2527" title="fire-control system" label="fire-control"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="2528" end="2533" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950753" start="2561" end="2589" title="Comprehensive Display System" label="Comprehensive Display System"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2639" end="2649" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="2699" end="2714" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="2832" end="2840" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q864114" start="2876" end="2888" title="input device" label="input device"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392957" start="3184" end="3197" title="Kenyon Taylor" label="Kenyon Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="3209" end="3228" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445239" start="3324" end="3339" title="Ferranti Canada" label="Ferranti Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="3356" end="3375" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204334" start="3383" end="3388" title="DATAR" label="DATAR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3891" end="3907" title="computer#Vacuum tubes and digital electronic circuits" label="digital computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13043846" start="3995" end="4016" title="pulse-code modulation" label="pulse-code modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455798" start="4072" end="4088" title="five-pin bowling" label="five-pin bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q92614" start="4206" end="4223" title="Douglas Engelbart" label="Douglas Engelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="4264" end="4281" title="SRI International" label="SRI International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524125" start="4323" end="4338" title="Thierry Bardini" label="Thierry Bardini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150414" start="4340" end="4352" title="Paul Ceruzzi" label="Paul Ceruzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q962698" start="4354" end="4370" title="Howard Rheingold" label="Howard Rheingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820422" start="4596" end="4624" title="Augmentation Research Center" label="Augmentation Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="4828" end="4840" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q626974" start="4914" end="4924" title="planimeter" label="planimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q107602" start="5085" end="5088" title="bug (computer mouse)" label="bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894943" start="5440" end="5452" title="Bill English (computer engineer)" label="Bill English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="5700" end="5705" title="mouse" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521932" start="6123" end="6146" title="The Mother of All Demos" label="The Mother of All Demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050365" start="6531" end="6534" title="NLS (computer system)" label="NLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="6761" end="6774" title="potentiometer" label="potentiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="6889" end="6893" title="coordinate system" label="axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521932" start="7184" end="7188" title="The Mother of All Demos" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q158276" start="7319" end="7322" title="AEG (German company)" label="AEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q325635" start="7323" end="7333" title="Telefunken" label="Telefunken"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7453" end="7458" title="Telefunken TR 86" label="TR 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645643" start="7613" end="7634" title="independent discovery" label="independent discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937669" start="7798" end="7817" title="position transducer" label="position transducer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332772" start="7824" end="7833" title="Gray code" label="Gray code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="7957" end="7967" title="debouncing" label="debouncing"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="8118" end="8128" title="telex line" label="telex line"/>
<link wikidata="Q192027" start="8138" end="8142" title="baud" label="baud"/>
<link wikidata="Q20139" start="9194" end="9203" title="light pen" label="light pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20140" start="9209" end="9218" title="trackball" label="trackball"/>
<link wikidata="Q273263" start="9577" end="9588" title="RWTH Aachen" label="RWTH Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51985" start="9590" end="9619" title="Technische Universität Berlin" label="Technische Universität Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q122453" start="9621" end="9644" title="University of Stuttgart" label="University of Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q835440" start="9649" end="9657" title="University of Konstanz" label="Konstanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q872555" start="9689" end="9718" title="Leibniz Supercomputing Centre" label="Leibniz Supercomputing Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="9869" end="9892" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600696" start="9955" end="9981" title="Heinz Nixdorf MuseumsForum" label="Heinz Nixdorf MuseumsForum"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="10242" end="10254" title="touch screen" label="touch screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="10381" end="10391" title="Touchinput" label="Touchinput"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140061" start="10540" end="10550" title="Xerox Alto" label="Xerox Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q92742" start="10679" end="10687" title="Alan Kay" label="Alan Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="10828" end="10832" title="Palo Alto Research Center" label="PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q278299" start="10850" end="10856" title="Lilith (computer)" label="Lilith"/>
<link wikidata="Q92604" start="10911" end="10924" title="Niklaus Wirth" label="Niklaus Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="10928" end="10938" title="ETH Zürich" label="ETH Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q978826" start="11130" end="11145" title="Xerox Star" label="Xerox 8010 Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q649677" start="11235" end="11240" title="Sun-1" label="Sun-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q371482" start="11285" end="11295" title="Apple Lisa" label="Apple Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842787" start="11477" end="11485" title="laboratory mouse" label="lab mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q223127" start="11643" end="11651" title="Logitech" label="Logitech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="11756" end="11765" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="11796" end="11802" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="11811" end="11825" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q29948401" start="11893" end="11908" title="Microsoft Mouse" label="Microsoft Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840137" start="11945" end="11963" title="Microsoft hardware" label="Microsoft Hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137478" start="12064" end="12078" title="Macintosh 128K" label="Macintosh 128K"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12135" end="12145" title="Apple Mouse#Lisa Mouse (A9M0050)" label="Lisa Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q471089" start="12167" end="12177" title="Amiga 1000" label="Amiga 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="12186" end="12194" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q107602" start="12265" end="12272" title="pointer (user interface)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107602" start="13378" end="13385" title="pointer (user interface)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048387" start="13660" end="13672" title="Point and click" label="Single-click"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369585" start="13710" end="13722" title="Double-click" label="Double-click"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843327" start="13847" end="13859" title="Triple-click" label="Triple-click"/>
<link wikidata="Q734215" start="14042" end="14053" title="Right-click" label="Right-click"/>
<link wikidata="Q734215" start="14134" end="14146" title="context menu" label="context menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q558376" start="14609" end="14622" title="drag and drop" label="drag and drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816260" start="14698" end="14719" title="Mouse chording" label="Mouse button chording"/>
<link wikidata="Q845804" start="14947" end="14959" title="modifier key" label="modifier key"/>
<link wikidata="Q621296" start="15545" end="15556" title="Magic Mouse" label="Magic Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q189414" start="19421" end="19435" title="digitizer mouse" label="digitizer mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q166849" start="19448" end="19464" title="magnifying glass" label="magnifying glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q83570" start="19479" end="19486" title="AutoCAD" label="AutoCAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q843958" start="19495" end="19507" title="digitization" label="digitization"/>
<link wikidata="Q422321" start="19512" end="19521" title="blueprint" label="blueprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="19624" end="19650" title="3D computer graphics" label="three-dimensional graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="20479" end="20491" title="handedness" label="right-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661" start="20727" end="20734" title="Mozilla" label="Mozilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q849450" start="20953" end="20956" title="tab (GUI)" label="tab"/>
<link wikidata="Q835016" start="20960" end="20966" title="window (computing)" label="window"/>
<link wikidata="Q325635" start="21088" end="21098" title="Telefunken" label="Telefunken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894943" start="21237" end="21249" title="William English (computer engineer)" label="Bill English"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="21342" end="21352" title="PARC (company)" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140061" start="21501" end="21511" title="Xerox Alto" label="Xerox Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098848" start="21536" end="21550" title="optical chopper" label="chopper wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q20140" start="21740" end="21749" title="trackball" label="trackball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="21792" end="21809" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640007" start="22359" end="22366" title="incremental encoder" label="encoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640007" start="22810" end="22836" title="incremental encoder" label="incremental rotary encoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="22976" end="22992" title="quadrature phase" label="quadrature phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q898208" start="23759" end="23768" title="Honeywell" label="Honeywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740323" start="23871" end="23881" title="Key Tronic" label="Key Tronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q262760" start="23955" end="23995" title="École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne" label="École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165305" start="24038" end="24056" title="Jean-Daniel Nicoud" label="Jean-Daniel Nicoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="24077" end="24085" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q157798" start="24090" end="24100" title="watchmaker" label="watchmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759923" start="24101" end="24115" title="André Guignard" label="André Guignard"/>
<link wikidata="Q122397" start="24308" end="24319" title="René Sommer" label="René Sommer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="24328" end="24342" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q764560" start="24554" end="24567" title="Mouse Systems" label="Mouse Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="24717" end="24730" title="potentiometer" label="potentiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205259" start="24792" end="24807" title="plug compatible" label="plug compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195490" start="24885" end="24895" title="RadioShack" label="RadioShack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411846" start="24906" end="24920" title="TRS-80 Color Computer" label="Color Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="24941" end="24947" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="25152" end="25172" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q175943" start="25205" end="25215" title="photodiode" label="photodiode"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="26255" end="26268" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="26587" end="26598" title="gorilla arm" label="gorilla arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q216378" start="26938" end="26949" title="usability" label="ease-of-use"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523931" start="27252" end="27260" title="viewport" label="viewport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480745" start="27313" end="27316" title="Degrees of freedom (mechanics)" label="DoF"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="27327" end="27347" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="27462" end="27476" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q865422" start="27506" end="27525" title="Game controller" label="spatial controllers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="27530" end="27540" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572200" start="27559" end="27571" title="SpaceOrb 360" label="SpaceOrb 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q334269" start="27614" end="27631" title="transfer function" label="transfer function"/>
<link wikidata="Q334269" start="27796" end="27813" title="transfer function" label="transfer function"/>
<link wikidata="Q192388" start="27855" end="27863" title="Position (geometry)" label="position"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235286" start="27868" end="27879" title="Orientation (geometry)" label="orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211459" start="27970" end="27981" title="Translation (geometry)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q848368" start="27986" end="27994" title="Rotation (mathematics)" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="27995" end="28003" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q543183" start="29056" end="29064" title="Isotonic (exercise physiology)" label="Isotonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="29155" end="29162" title="Elasticity (physics)" label="Elastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216236" start="29273" end="29282" title="Isometric exercise" label="Isometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q223127" start="29454" end="29462" title="Logitech" label="Logitech"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917780" start="29761" end="29778" title="motion controller" label="motion controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q865422" start="29799" end="29814" title="game controller" label="game controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="29909" end="29923" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q229377" start="30201" end="30210" title="Spaceball (computing)" label="SpaceBall"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="30255" end="30295" title="German Aerospace Center" label="Deutsches Zentrum für Luft und Raumfahrt"/>
<link wikidata="Q229377" start="30467" end="30478" title="3Dconnexion" label="3DConnexion"/>
<link wikidata="Q229377" start="31680" end="31691" title="3Dconnexion" label="3DConnexion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="31816" end="31819" title="CAD" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="32000" end="32003" title="Graphical user interface" label="GUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030571" start="32195" end="32209" title="Haptic technology" label="force feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q223127" start="32406" end="32414" title="Logitech" label="Logitech"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534742" start="32504" end="32525" title="Immersion Corporation" label="Immersion Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q423488" start="32549" end="32557" title="actuator" label="actuator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030571" start="32667" end="32682" title="haptic technology" label="haptic feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q835016" start="32724" end="32730" title="window (computing)" label="window"/>
<link wikidata="Q189414" start="33052" end="33069" title="Graphics tablet" label="Tablet digitizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q332293" start="33406" end="33428" title="carpal tunnel syndrome" label="carpal tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="33430" end="33439" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="33451" end="33477" title="repetitive strain injury" label="repetitive strain injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q199507" start="33595" end="33599" title="ulna" label="ulna"/>
<link wikidata="Q178492" start="33604" end="33610" title="radius (bone)" label="radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43471" start="33624" end="33627" title="arm" label="arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="34241" end="34245" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="34695" end="34709" title="PC game" label="computer games"/>
<link wikidata="Q629579" start="35031" end="35037" title="Macro (computer science)" label="macros"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="35179" end="35197" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q290106" start="35218" end="35227" title="StarCraft" label="StarCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189206" start="35241" end="35272" title="multiplayer online battle arena" label="multiplayer online battle arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q223341" start="35287" end="35304" title="League of Legends" label="League of Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q305896" start="35356" end="35369" title="dots per inch" label="dots per inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276395" start="36202" end="36207" title="gamer" label="gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191895" start="36576" end="36583" title="RS-232C" label="RS-232C"/>
<link wikidata="Q847473" start="36585" end="36589" title="PS/2 connector" label="PS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q621236" start="36591" end="36594" title="Apple Desktop Bus" label="ADB"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="36599" end="36602" title="Universal Serial Bus" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="36644" end="36652" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q339953" start="36668" end="36672" title="infrared Data Association" label="IrDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="36677" end="36682" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="36694" end="36703" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001222" start="37006" end="37015" title="bus mouse" label="bus mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="37069" end="37075" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q29948401" start="37180" end="37195" title="Microsoft Mouse" label="Microsoft Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37638" end="37645" title="#Mouse speed" label="mickeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140061" start="37692" end="37702" title="Xerox Alto" label="Xerox Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q364747" start="37737" end="37750" title="optical mouse" label="optical mouse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37759" end="37777" title="rotary encoder#Incremental rotary encoder" label="quadrature-encoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q332772" start="37910" end="37919" title="Gray code" label="Gray code"/>
<link wikidata="Q265923" start="37923" end="37938" title="Johnson counter" label="Johnson counter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38065" end="38083" title="Apple mouse#Models" label="original Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="38085" end="38090" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="38096" end="38104" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045191" start="38117" end="38131" title="D-subminiature" label="D-subminiature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045191" start="38349" end="38363" title="DE-9 connector" label="DE-9 connector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38418" end="38427" title="joystick#Electronic games" label="joysticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="38475" end="38487" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="38496" end="38506" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640007" start="38965" end="38983" title="quadrature decoder" label="quadrature decoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q191895" start="39017" end="39024" title="RS-232C" label="RS-232C"/>
<link wikidata="Q764560" start="39136" end="39161" title="Mouse Systems Corporation" label="Mouse Systems Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="39516" end="39521" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q621236" start="39544" end="39561" title="Apple Desktop Bus" label="Apple Desktop Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157702" start="39575" end="39589" title="daisy chain (electrical engineering)" label="daisy chaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q14091" start="39917" end="39921" title="iMac" label="iMac"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="39981" end="39984" title="Universal Serial Bus" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670087" start="40147" end="40159" title="PowerBook G4" label="PowerBook G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q284518" start="40298" end="40306" title="IBM Personal System/2" label="IBM PS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="40360" end="40366" title="eponym" label="eponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q847473" start="40370" end="40379" title="PS/2 port" label="PS/2 port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359217" start="40500" end="40508" title="mini-DIN connector" label="mini-DIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133767" start="40560" end="40569" title="DIN 41524" label="DIN 41524"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926048" start="41086" end="41098" title="mouse button" label="mouse button"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426202" start="41291" end="41313" title="IntelliMouse" label="Microsoft IntelliMouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="41531" end="41553" title="backward compatibility" label="backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="42076" end="42082" title="device driver" label="driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="42568" end="42571" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052163" start="42580" end="42612" title="USB human interface device class" label="USB human interface device class"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="42706" end="42711" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="42755" end="42764" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="42768" end="42773" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29948401" start="43207" end="43222" title="Microsoft Mouse" label="Microsoft Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001222" start="43259" end="43271" title="Bus mouse" label="Bus (InPort)"/>
<link wikidata="Q385390" start="43273" end="43284" title="Serial port" label="Serial port"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052163" start="43333" end="43365" title="USB Human Interface Device class" label="USB Human Interface Device class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="43739" end="43748" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43793" end="43796" title="list of Bluetooth profiles#Human Interface Device Profile (HID)" label="HID"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="43924" end="43937" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="43951" end="43956" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q864177" start="44042" end="44050" title="Lemmings (video game)" label="Lemmings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163239" start="44055" end="44067" title="The Settlers" label="The Settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q474157" start="44117" end="44139" title="collaborative software" label="collaborative software"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354" start="44160" end="44170" title="whiteboard" label="whiteboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="44243" end="44260" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q483132" start="44268" end="44278" title="Windows 98" label="Windows 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024436" start="44795" end="44801" title="Windows Multipoint Mouse" label="an SDK"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="45015" end="45028" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q947428" start="45065" end="45085" title="Microsoft PixelSense" label="Microsoft PixelSense"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="45537" end="45542" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="45567" end="45583" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q518900" start="45594" end="45599" title="X.Org Server" label="X.Org"/>
<link wikidata="Q237580" start="45609" end="45620" title="OpenSolaris" label="OpenSolaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="45625" end="45632" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032356" start="45675" end="45690" title="Multi-Pointer X" label="Multi-Pointer X"/>
<link wikidata="Q688956" start="46017" end="46030" title="miniature snap-action switch" label="microswitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="46095" end="46119" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q734215" start="46311" end="46326" title="context menu" label="contextual menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q181319" start="46770" end="46779" title="scrolling" label="scrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q20140" start="46980" end="46989" title="trackball" label="trackball"/>
<link wikidata="Q20137" start="46994" end="47002" title="touchpad" label="touchpad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623814" start="47125" end="47132" title="Mickey (unit)" label="Mickeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="47500" end="47506" title="pixels" label="pixels"/>
<link wikidata="Q218593" start="47530" end="47534" title="inch" label="inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q174728" start="47550" end="47560" title="centimeter" label="centimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184631" start="49207" end="49217" title="ballistics" label="ballistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="49287" end="49294" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="49304" end="49314" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="49529" end="49538" title="nonlinear system" label="nonlinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q764560" start="50279" end="50292" title="Mouse Systems" label="Mouse Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q978826" start="50810" end="50820" title="Xerox Star" label="Xerox Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="50883" end="50893" title="PARC (company)" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="50895" end="50911" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034213" start="50913" end="50922" title="Symbolics" label="Symbolics"/>
<link wikidata="Q262903" start="50924" end="50937" title="Lisp Machines" label="Lisp Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347679" start="50948" end="50957" title="Tektronix" label="Tektronix"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="51048" end="51062" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q371482" start="51076" end="51086" title="Apple Lisa" label="Apple Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137478" start="51204" end="51219" title="Macintosh 128K" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="51448" end="51456" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="51458" end="51463" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q58378" start="51465" end="51476" title="Windows 1.0" label="Windows 1.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q572117" start="51478" end="51482" title="GEOS (8-bit operating system)" label="GEOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="51491" end="51503" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282269" start="51513" end="51523" title="Apple IIGS" label="Apple IIGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q223127" start="51696" end="51704" title="Logitech" label="Logitech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="51810" end="51824" title="video game" label="computer games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="51843" end="51861" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="51868" end="51882" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604107" start="51883" end="51897" title="Desk Accessory" label="Desk Accessory"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="52010" end="52014" title="First-person shooter" label="FPSs"/>
<link wikidata="Q273140" start="52440" end="52447" title="gamepad" label="gamepad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629760" start="52448" end="52460" title="analog stick" label="analog stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q380266" start="53565" end="53585" title="third-person shooter" label="third-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="53606" end="53612" title="porting" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="53622" end="53633" title="game engine" label="game engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="53997" end="54008" title="game engine" label="game engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116203" start="54625" end="54629" title="WIMP (computing)" label="WIMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048818" start="54630" end="54646" title="desktop metaphor" label="desktop metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244175" start="54715" end="54728" title="tabletop game" label="tabletop game"/>
<link wikidata="Q472055" start="54747" end="54761" title="strategy video game" label="strategy games"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="54813" end="54831" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189206" start="54836" end="54840" title="multiplayer online battle arena" label="MOBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="55124" end="55150" title="ADS (video gaming)" label="aim down the weapon sights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199954" start="55656" end="55660" title="WASD keys" label="WASD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443577" start="56246" end="56261" title="circle strafing" label="circle strafing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56810" end="56813" title="#Mouse speed" label="CPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951032" start="56815" end="56827" title="Mouse Bungee" label="Mouse Bungee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="57104" end="57115" title="handedness" label="left-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="57417" end="57425" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q204474" start="57485" end="57496" title="id Software" label="id Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q189784" start="57528" end="57532" title="Doom (1993 video game)" label="Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="57590" end="57596" title="Bungie" label="Bungie"/>
<link wikidata="Q795399" start="57610" end="57618" title="Marathon (video game)" label="Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003003" start="57726" end="57738" title="Build engine" label="Build engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217423" start="57983" end="57988" title="Quake (video game)" label="Quake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907638" start="58086" end="58100" title="VTech Socrates" label="VTech Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="58256" end="58291" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296161" start="58321" end="58326" title="SNES Mouse" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="58393" end="58404" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809250" start="58466" end="58477" title="Mario Paint" label="Mario Paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058524" start="58575" end="58587" title="Mario Artist" label="Mario Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q253044" start="58613" end="58617" title="64DD" label="64DD"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="58649" end="58653" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="58687" end="58705" title="Sega Genesis" label="Genesis/Mega Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="58707" end="58713" title="Sega Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="58718" end="58727" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="58738" end="58741" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="58769" end="58778" title="TurboGrafx-16" label="PC Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136902" start="58783" end="58788" title="PC-FX" label="PC-FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q18594" start="58799" end="58803" title="Sony Computer Entertainment" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="58847" end="58858" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322715" start="58896" end="58919" title="Linux for PlayStation 2" label="Linux for PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="58973" end="58976" title="Universal Serial Bus" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="58992" end="58995" title="PlayStation 2" label="PS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="58997" end="59000" title="PlayStation 3" label="PS3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="59006" end="59009" title="PlayStation 4" label="PS4"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="59027" end="59030" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q56942" start="59145" end="59150" title="Wii U" label="Wii U"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="59152" end="59168" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281614" start="59169" end="59173" title="Xbox" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="59256" end="59266" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097841" start="59335" end="59357" title="Computer accessibility" label="Computer accessibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288436" start="59360" end="59369" title="Footmouse" label="Footmouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q189414" start="59372" end="59387" title="Graphics tablet" label="Graphics tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519524" start="59390" end="59409" title="Gesture recognition" label="Gesture recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q207434" start="59412" end="59438" title="Human–computer interaction" label="Human–computer interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395310" start="59447" end="59457" title="Mouse keys" label="Mouse keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951040" start="59460" end="59474" title="Mouse tracking" label="Mouse tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098899" start="59477" end="59493" title="Optical trackpad" label="Optical trackpad"/>
<link wikidata="Q20141" start="59496" end="59510" title="Pointing stick" label="Pointing stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370324" start="59513" end="59529" title="Rotational mouse" label="Rotational mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q20140" start="59532" end="59541" title="Trackball" label="Trackball"/>
<link wikidata="Q827038" start="59750" end="59781" title="Kunsthochschule für Medien Köln" label="Kunsthochschule für Medien Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q827038" start="59790" end="59844" title="Verein der Freunde der Kunsthochschule für Medien Köln" label="Verein der Freunde der Kunsthochschule für Medien Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521932" start="59990" end="60013" title="The Mother of All Demos" label="The Mother of All Demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q92614" start="60019" end="60033" title="Doug Engelbart" label="Doug Engelbart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7059" wikidata="Q10427676" url="?curid=7059" title="Civil defense">
<text>Civil defense or civil protection is an effort to protect the citizens of a state (generally non-combatants) from human-made and natural disasters. It uses the principles of emergency management: prevention, mitigation, preparation, response, or emergency evacuation and recovery. Programs of this sort were initially discussed at least as early as the 1920s and were implemented in some countries during the 1930s as the threat of war and aerial bombardment grew. Civil-defense structures became widespread after authorities recognised the threats posed by nuclear weapons.

Since the end of the Cold War, the focus of civil defense has largely shifted from responding to military attack to dealing with emergencies and disasters in general. The new concept is characterised by a number of terms, each of which has its own specific shade of meaning, such as &quot;crisis management&quot;, &quot;emergency management&quot;, &quot;emergency preparedness&quot;, &quot;contingency planning&quot;, &quot;civil contingency&quot;, &quot;civil aid&quot; and &quot;civil protection&quot;.

Some countries treat civil defense as a key part of defense in general. For example, total defence refers to the commitment of a wide range of national resources to defense, including the protection of all aspects of civilian life. 

== History ==
=== Origins ===

==== United Kingdom ====

The advent of civil defense was stimulated by the experience of the bombing of civilian areas during the First World War. The bombing of the United Kingdom began on 19 January 1915 when German zeppelins dropped bombs on the Great Yarmouth area, killing six people. German bombing operations of the First World War were surprisingly effective, especially after the Gotha bombers surpassed the zeppelins. The most devastating raids inflicted 121 casualties for each ton of bombs dropped; this figure was then used as a basis for predictions.

After the war, attention was turned toward civil defense in the event of war, and the Air Raid Precautions Committee (ARP) was established in 1924 to investigate ways for ensuring the protection of civilians from the danger of air-raids.

The Committee produced figures estimating that in London there would be 9,000 casualties in the first two days and then a continuing rate of 17,500 casualties a week. These rates were thought conservative. It was believed that there would be &quot;total chaos and panic&quot; and hysterical neurosis as the people of London would try to flee the city. To control the population harsh measures were proposed: bringing London under almost military control, and physically cordoning off the city with 120,000 troops to force people back to work. A different government department proposed setting up camps for refugees for a few days before sending them back to London.

A special government department, the Civil Defence Service, was established by the Home Office in 1935. Its remit included the pre-existing ARP as well as wardens, firemen (initially the Auxiliary Fire Service (AFS) and latterly the National Fire Service (NFS)), fire watchers, rescue, first aid post, stretcher party and industry. Over 1.9 million people served within the CD; nearly 2,400 died from enemy action.
The organization of civil defense was the responsibility of the local authority. Volunteers were ascribed to different units depending on experience or training. Each local civil defense service was divided into several sections. Wardens were responsible for local reconnaissance and reporting, and leadership, organization, guidance and control of the general public. Wardens would also advise survivors of the locations of rest and food centers, and other welfare facilities.

Rescue Parties were required to assess and then access bombed-out buildings and retrieve injured or dead people. In addition they would turn off gas, electricity and water supplies, and repair or pull down unsteady buildings. Medical services, including First Aid Parties, provided on the spot medical assistance.

The expected stream of information that would be generated during an attack was handled by &#x27;Report and Control&#x27; teams. A local headquarters would have an ARP controller who would direct rescue, first aid and decontamination teams to the scenes of reported bombing. If local services were deemed insufficient to deal with the incident then the controller could request assistance from surrounding boroughs.

Fire Guards were responsible for a designated area/building and required to monitor the fall of incendiary bombs and pass on news of any fires that had broken out to the NFS. They could deal with an individual magnesium alloy (&quot;Elektron&quot;) incendiary bomb by dousing it with buckets of sand or water or by smothering. Additionally, &#x27;Gas Decontamination Teams&#x27; kitted out with gas-tight and waterproof protective clothing were to deal with any gas attacks. They were trained to decontaminate buildings, roads, rail and other material that had been contaminated by liquid or jelly gases.
Little progress was made over the issue of air-raid shelters, because of the apparently irreconcilable conflict between the need to send the public underground for shelter and the need to keep them above ground for protection against gas attacks. In February 1936 the Home Secretary appointed a technical Committee on Structural Precautions against Air Attack. During the Munich crisis, local authorities dug trenches to provide shelter. After the crisis, the British Government decided to make these a permanent feature, with a standard design of precast concrete trench lining. They also decided to issue the Anderson shelter free to poorer households and to provide steel props to create shelters in suitable basements.

During the Second World War, the ARP was responsible for the issuing of gas masks, pre-fabricated air-raid shelters (such as Anderson shelters, as well as Morrison shelters), the upkeep of local public shelters, and the maintenance of the blackout. The ARP also helped rescue people after air raids and other attacks, and some women became ARP Ambulance Attendants whose job was to help administer first aid to casualties, search for survivors, and in many grim instances, help recover bodies, sometimes those of their own colleagues.
As the war progressed, the military effectiveness of Germany&#x27;s aerial bombardment was very limited. Thanks to the Luftwaffe&#x27;s shifting aims, the strength of British air defenses, the use of early warning radar in combination with the Royal Observer Corps, and the life-saving actions of local civil defense units, the aerial &quot;Blitz&quot; during the Battle of Britain failed to break the morale of the British people, destroy the Royal Air Force or significantly hinder British industrial production. Despite a significant investment in civil and military defense, British civilian losses during the Blitz were higher than in most strategic bombing campaigns throughout the war. For example, there were 14,000-20,000 UK civilian fatalities during the Battle of Britain, a relatively high number considering that the Luftwaffe dropped only an estimated 30,000 tons of ordinance during the battle. Granted, this resulting 0.47-0.67 civilian fatalities per ton of bombs dropped was lower than the earlier 121 casualties per ton prediction. However, in comparison, Allied strategic bombing of Germany during the war proved slightly less lethal than what was observed in the UK, with an estimated 400,000-600,000 German civilian fatalities for approximately 1.35 million tons of bombs dropped on Germany, an estimated resulting rate therefore of 0.30-0.44 civilian fatalities per ton of bombs dropped.

==== United States ====

In the United States, the Office of Civilian Defense was established in May 1941 to coordinate civilian defense efforts. It coordinated with the Department of the Army and established similar groups to the British ARP. One of these groups that still exists today is the Civil Air Patrol, which was originally created as a civilian auxiliary to the Army. The CAP was created on December 1, 1941, with the main civil defense mission of search and rescue. The CAP also sank two Axis submarines and provided aerial reconnaissance for Allied and neutral merchant ships. In 1946, the Civil Air Patrol was barred from combat by Public Law 79-476. The CAP then received its current mission: search and rescue for downed aircraft. When the Air Force was created, in 1947, the Civil Air Patrol became the auxiliary of the Air Force.

The Coast Guard Auxiliary performs a similar role in support of the U.S. Coast Guard. Like the Civil Air Patrol, the Coast Guard Auxiliary was established in the run up to World War II. Auxiliarists were sometimes armed during the war, and extensively participated in port security operations. After the war, the Auxiliary shifted its focus to promoting boating safety and assisting the Coast Guard in performing search and rescue and marine safety and environmental protection.

In the United States a federal civil defense program existed under Public Law 920 of the 81st Congress, as amended, from 1951 to 1994. That statutory scheme was made so-called all-hazards by Public Law 103–160 in 1993 and largely repealed by Public Law 103–337 in 1994. Parts now appear in Title VI of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, Public Law 100-107 [1988 as amended]. The term EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS was largely codified by that repeal and amendment. See 42 USC Sections 5101 and following.

=== Post–World War II ===

In most of the states of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, such as the United States, the United Kingdom and West Germany, as well as the Soviet Bloc, and especially in the neutral countries, such as Switzerland and in Sweden during the 1950s and 1960s, many civil defense practices took place to prepare for the aftermath of a nuclear war, which seemed quite likely at that time.

In the United Kingdom, the Civil Defence Service was disbanded in 1945, followed by the ARP in 1946. With the onset of the growing tensions between East and West, the service was revived in 1949 as the Civil Defence Corps. As a civilian volunteer organization, it was tasked to take control in the aftermath of a major national emergency, principally envisaged as being a Cold War nuclear attack. Although under the authority of the Home Office, with a centralized administrative establishment, the corps was administered locally by Corps Authorities. In general every county was a Corps Authority, as were most county boroughs in England and Wales and large burghs in Scotland.

Each division was divided into several sections, including the Headquarters, Intelligence and Operations, Scientific and Reconnaissance, Warden &amp; Rescue, Ambulance and First Aid and Welfare.

In 1954 Coventry City Council caused international controversy when it announced plans to disband its Civil Defence committee because the councillors had decided that hydrogen bombs meant that there could be no recovery from a nuclear attack. The British government opposed such a move and held a provocative Civil Defence exercise on the streets of Coventry which Labour council members protested against. The government also decided to implement its own committee at the city&#x27;s cost until the council reinstituted its committee.

In the United States, the sheer power of nuclear weapons and the perceived likelihood of such an attack precipitated a greater response than had yet been required of civil defense. Civil defense, previously considered an important and commonsense step, became divisive and controversial in the charged atmosphere of the Cold War. In 1950, the National Security Resources Board created a 162-page document outlining a model civil defense structure for the U.S. Called the &quot;Blue Book&quot; by civil defense professionals in reference to its solid blue cover, it was the template for legislation and organization for the next 40 years.
Perhaps the most memorable aspect of the Cold War civil defense effort was the educational effort made or promoted by the government. In &quot;Duck and Cover&quot;, Bert the Turtle advocated that children &quot;duck and cover&quot; when they &quot;see the flash.&quot; Booklets such as &quot;Survival Under Atomic Attack&quot;, &quot;Fallout Protection&quot; and &quot;Nuclear War Survival Skills&quot; were also commonplace. The transcribed radio program Stars for Defense combined hit music with civil defense advice. Government institutes created public service announcements including children&#x27;s songs and distributed them to radio stations to educate the public in case of nuclear attack.

The US President Kennedy (1961–63) launched an ambitious effort to install fallout shelters throughout the United States. These shelters would not protect against the blast and heat effects of nuclear weapons, but would provide some protection against the radiation effects that would last for weeks and even affect areas distant from a nuclear explosion. In order for most of these preparations to be effective, there had to be some degree of warning. In 1951, CONELRAD (Control of Electromagnetic Radiation) was established. Under the system, a few primary stations would be alerted of an emergency and would broadcast an alert. All broadcast stations throughout the country would be constantly listening to an upstream station and repeat the message, thus passing it from station to station.

In a once classified US war game analysis, looking at varying levels of war escalation, warning and pre-emptive attacks in the late 1950s early 1960s, it was estimated that approximately 27 million US citizens would have been saved with civil defense education. At the time, however, the cost of a full-scale civil defense program was regarded as less effective in cost-benefit analysis than a ballistic missile defense (Nike Zeus) system, and as the Soviet adversary was increasing their nuclear stockpile, the efficacy of both would follow a diminishing returns trend.

Contrary to the largely noncommittal approach taken in NATO, with its stops and starts in civil defense depending on the whims of each newly elected government, the military strategy in the comparatively more ideologically consistent USSR held that, amongst other things, a winnable nuclear war was possible. To this effect the Soviets planned to minimize, as far as possible, the effects of nuclear weapon strikes on its territory, and therefore spent considerably more thought on civil defense preparations than in U.S., with defense plans that have been assessed to be far more effective than those in the U.S.

Soviet Civil Defense Troops played the main role in the massive disaster relief operation following the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear accident. Defense Troop reservists were officially mobilized (as in a case of war) from throughout the USSR to join the Chernobyl task force and formed on the basis of the Kyiv Civil Defense Brigade. The task force performed some high-risk tasks including, with the failure of their robotic machinery, the manual removal of highly-radioactive debris. Many of their personnel were later decorated with medals for their work at containing the release of radiation into the environment, with a number of the 56 deaths from the accident being Civil defense troops.

In Western countries, strong civil defense policies were never properly implemented, because it was fundamentally at odds with the doctrine of &quot;mutual assured destruction&quot; (MAD) by making provisions for survivors. It was also considered that a full-fledged total defense would have not been worth the very large expense. For whatever reason, the public saw efforts at civil defense as fundamentally ineffective against the powerful destructive forces of nuclear weapons, and therefore a waste of time and money, although detailed scientific research programs did underlie the much-mocked government civil defense pamphlets of the 1950s and 1960s.

The Civil Defence Corps was stood down in Great Britain in 1968 due to the financial crisis of the mid-1960s. Its neighbors, however, remained committed to Civil Defence, namely the Isle of Man Civil Defence Corps and Civil Defence Ireland (Ireland).

In the United States, the various civil defense agencies were replaced with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in 1979. In 2002 this became part of the Department of Homeland Security. The focus was shifted from nuclear war to an &quot;all-hazards&quot; approach of comprehensive emergency management. Natural disasters and the emergence of new threats such as terrorism have caused attention to be focused away from traditional civil defense and into new forms of civil protection such as emergency management and homeland security.

=== Today ===
Many countries maintain a national Civil Defence Corps, usually having a wide brief for assisting in large scale civil emergencies such as flood, earthquake, invasion, or civil disorder.

After the September 11 attacks in 2001, in the United States the concept of civil defense has been revisited under the umbrella term of homeland security and all-hazards emergency management.

In Europe, the triangle CD logo continues to be widely used. Created in 1939 by Charles Coiner of the N. W. Ayer Advertising Agency, it was used throughout World War II and the Cold War era. In the U.S., 2006 saw the retirement of the old triangle logo, to be replaced with a stylised &quot;EM&quot; (for emergency management). A reference to the old CD logo (without the red CD letters) can be seen above the eagle&#x27;s head in the FEMA seal. The name and logo continue to be used by Hawaii State Civil Defense and Guam Homeland Security/Office of Civil Defense. 

The term &quot;civil protection&quot; is currently widely used within the European Union to refer to government-approved systems and resources tasked with protecting the non-combat population, primarily in the event of natural and technological disasters. For example, the EU&#x27;s humanitarian aid policy director on the Ebola Crisis, Florika Fink-Hooijer, said that civil protection requires &quot;not just more resources, but first and foremost better governance of the resources that are available including better synergies between humanitarian aid and civil protection&quot;. In recent years there has been emphasis on preparedness for technological disasters resulting from terrorist attack. Within EU countries the term &quot;crisis-management&quot; emphasizes the political and security dimension rather than measures to satisfy the immediate needs of the population.

In Australia, civil defense is the responsibility of the volunteer-based State Emergency Service. In most former Soviet countries civil defense is the responsibility of governmental ministries, such as Russia&#x27;s Ministry of Emergency Situations.

== Importance ==
Relatively small investments in preparation can speed up recovery by months or years and thereby prevent millions of deaths by hunger, cold and disease. According to human capital theory in economics, a country&#x27;s population is more valuable than all of the land, factories and other assets that it possesses. People rebuild a country after its destruction, and it is therefore important for the economic security of a country that it protect its people. According to psychology, it is important for people to feel as though they are in control of their own destiny, and preparing for uncertainty via civil defense may help to achieve this.

In the United States, the federal civil defense program was authorized by statute and ran from 1951 to 1994. Originally authorized by Public Law 920 of the 81st Congress, it was repealed by Public Law 93–337 in 1994. Small portions of that statutory scheme were incorporated into the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (Public Law 100–707) which partly superseded in part, partly amended, and partly supplemented the Disaster Relief Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-288). In the portions of the civil defense statute incorporated into the Stafford Act, the primary modification was to use the term &quot;Emergency Preparedness&quot; wherever the term &quot;Civil Defence&quot; had previously appeared in the statutory language.

An important concept initiated by President Jimmy Carter was the so-called &quot;Crisis Relocation Program&quot; administered as part of the federal civil defense program. That effort largely lapsed under President Ronald Reagan, who discontinued the Carter initiative because of opposition from areas potentially hosting the relocated population.

== Threat assessment ==

Threats to civilians and civilian life include NBC (Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical warfare) and others, like the more modern term CBRN (Chemical Biological Radiological and Nuclear). Threat assessment involves studying each threat so that preventative measures can be built into civilian life.

;Conventional

Refers to conventional explosives. A blast shelter designed to protect only from radiation and fallout would be much more vulnerable to conventional explosives. See also fallout shelter.

;Nuclear

Shelter intended to protect against nuclear blast effects would include thick concrete and other sturdy elements which are resistant to conventional explosives. The biggest threats from a nuclear attack are effects from the blast, fires and radiation. One of the most prepared countries for a nuclear attack is Switzerland. Almost every building in Switzerland has an &quot;abri&quot; (shelter) against the initial nuclear bomb and explosion followed by the fall-out. Because of this, many people use it as a safe to protect valuables, photos, financial information and so on. Switzerland also has air-raid and nuclear-raid sirens in every village.

;Dirty Bomb
A &quot;radiologically enhanced weapon&quot;, or &quot;dirty bomb&quot;, uses an explosive to spread radioactive material. This is a theoretical risk, and such weapons have not been used by terrorists. Depending on the quantity of the radioactive material, the dangers may be mainly psychological. Toxic effects can be managed by standard hazmat techniques.

;Biological

The threat here is primarily from disease-causing microorganisms such as bacteria and viruses.

;Chemical

Various chemical agents are a threat, such as nerve gas (VX, Sarin, and so on.).

== Stages ==

=== Mitigation ===

Mitigation is the process of actively preventing war or the release of nuclear weapons. It includes policy analysis, diplomacy, political measures, nuclear disarmament and more military responses such as a National Missile Defense and air defense artillery. In the case of counter-terrorism, mitigation would include diplomacy, intelligence gathering and direct action against terrorist groups. Mitigation may also be reflected in long-term planning such as the design of the interstate highway system and the placement of military bases further away from populated areas.

=== Preparation ===

Preparation consists of building blast shelters and pre-positioning information, supplies, and emergency infrastructure. For example, most larger cities in the U.S. now have underground emergency operations centers that can perform civil defense coordination. FEMA also has many underground facilities for the same purpose located near major railheads such as the ones in Denton, Texas and Mount Weather, Virginia.

Other measures would include continual government inventories of grain silos, the Strategic National Stockpile, the uncapping of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, the dispersal of lorry-transportable bridges, water purification, mobile refineries, mobile de-contamination facilities, mobile general and special purpose disaster mortuary facilities such as Disaster Mortuary Operational Response Team (DMORT) and DMORT-WMD, and other aids such as temporary housing to speed civil recovery.

On an individual scale, one means of preparation for exposure to nuclear fallout is to obtain potassium iodide (KI) tablets as a safety measure to protect the human thyroid gland from the uptake of dangerous radioactive iodine. Another measure is to cover the nose, mouth and eyes with a piece of cloth and sunglasses to protect against alpha particles, which are only an internal hazard.

To support and supplement efforts at national, regional and local level with regard to disaster prevention, the of those responsible for civil protection and the intervention in the event of disaster
* To establish a framework for effective and rapid cooperation between different civil protection services when mutual assistance is needed (police, fire service, healthcare service, public utility , voluntary agencies)
* To set up and implement training programs for intervention and coordination teams as well as assessment experts including joint courses and exchange systems
* To enhance the coherence of actions undertaken at international level in the field of civil protection, especially in the context of cooperation

Preparing also includes sharing information:
* To contribute to informing the public, in view of increasing citizens&#x27; level of self-protection
* To collect and disseminate validated emergency information
* To pool information on national civil protection capabilities, military and medical resources
* To ensure efficient information sharing between the different authorities

=== Response ===
Response consists first of warning civilians so they can enter fallout shelters and protect assets.

Staffing a response is always full of problems in a civil defense emergency. After an attack, conventional full-time emergency services are dramatically overloaded, with conventional fire fighting response times often exceeding several days. Some capability is maintained by local and state agencies, and an emergency reserve is provided by specialized military units, especially civil affairs, Military Police, Judge Advocates and combat engineers.

However, the traditional response to massed attack on civilian population centers is to maintain a mass-trained force of volunteer emergency workers. Studies in World War II showed that lightly trained (40 hours or less) civilians in organised teams can perform up to 95% of emergency activities when trained, liaised and supported by local government. In this plan, the populace rescues itself from most situations, and provides information to a central office to prioritize professional emergency services.

In the 1990s, this concept was revived by the Los Angeles Fire Department to cope with civil emergencies such as earthquakes. The program was widely adopted, providing standard terms for organization. In the U.S., this is now official federal policy, and it is implemented by community emergency response teams, under the Department of Homeland Security, which certifies training programs by local governments, and registers &quot;certified disaster service workers&quot; who complete such training.
=== Recovery ===

Recovery consists of rebuilding damaged infrastructure, buildings and production. The recovery phase is the longest and ultimately most expensive phase. Once the immediate &quot;crisis&quot; has passed, cooperation fades away and recovery efforts are often politicized or seen as economic opportunities.

Preparation for recovery can be very helpful. If mitigating resources are dispersed before the attack, cascades of social failures can be prevented. One hedge against bridge damage in riverine cities is to subsidize a &quot;tourist ferry&quot; that performs scenic cruises on the river. When a bridge is down, the ferry takes up the load.

== Civil defense organizations ==
Civil Defense is also the name of a number of organizations around the world dedicated to protecting civilians from military attacks, as well as to providing rescue services after natural and human-made disasters alike.

Worldwide protection is managed by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).

In a few countries such as Jordan and Singapore (see Singapore Civil Defence Force), civil defense is essentially the same organization as the fire brigade. In most countries, however, civil defense is a government-managed, volunteer-staffed organization, separate from the fire brigade and the ambulance service.

As the threat of Cold War eased, a number of such civil defense organizations have been disbanded or mothballed (as in the case of the Royal Observer Corps in the United Kingdom and the United States civil defense), while others have changed their focuses into providing rescue services after natural disasters (as for the State Emergency Service in Australian states). However, the ideals of Civil Defense have been brought back in the United States under FEMA&#x27;s Citizen Corps and Community Emergency Response Team (CERT).

In the United Kingdom Civil Defence work is carried out by Emergency Responders under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004, with assistance from voluntary groups such as RAYNET, Search and Rescue Teams and 4x4 Response. In Ireland, the Civil Defence is still very much an active organization and is occasionally called upon for its Auxiliary Fire Service and ambulance/rescue services when emergencies such as flash flooding occur and require additional manpower. The organization has units of trained firemen and medical responders based in key areas around the country.

=== By country ===
== See also ==

General:
* Nuclear warfare
* Nuclear holocaust
* Nuclear terrorism
* Industrial antiterrorism
* Infrastructure security
* Survivalism
* Weapon of mass destruction

== Notes and references ==
== External links ==

* Greece
* Large gallery of Bulgaria&#x27;s Civil Defense Mechanization
* The UK Civil Defence Project – History &amp; Photos 
* National Civil Defence College, Nagpur INDIA 
* Special Event Amateur Ham Radio Station operated from Bangalore, INDIA
* Protezione Civile Italian Civil Defense
* Dublin Civil Defence Ireland
* SEBEV Search and Rescue (originally a Civil Defence team in the UK)
* Civil Protection (Ministry of Interior, Spain).
* Civil Protection Villena – Spain
* Civil Defense Logo dies at 67, and Some Mourn its Passing, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 1 December 2006 by David Dunlap.
* Cold War Era Civil Defense Museum – Features much historical information about Civil Defense history, its equipment and methods, and many historical photographs and posters.
* Annotated bibliography for civil defense from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues
* The American Civil Defense Association
* Civil Defense Caves – Cold War community getaway in case of nuclear war located in Idaho
* Comprehensive Emergency Management Reference Material Repository 
* Ready.gov – The official preparedness site of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security
* &quot;Civil Defence&quot; – A site with details of the UK&#x27;s Civil Defence preparations, including those implemented during the Cold War such as the &quot;Burlington&quot; Central Government War HQ., at Corsham, Wiltshire.
* Emergency Planning in Lincolnshire 
* The official Civil Defence site for the Republic of Ireland
* The official Civil Defense site of São Paulo State – Brazil 
* Doctors for Disaster Preparedness
* Physicians for Civil Defense
* Dutch civil defense instructions in English
* Emergency Management Portal – online resources for emergency planners and managers
* The Norwegian Civil Defence
* German Federal Agency for Technical Relief – THW Technisches Hilfswerk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="0" end="13" title="Civil defense" label="Civil defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="17" end="33" title="Civil defense" label="civil protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q465727" start="93" end="106" title="non-combatant" label="non-combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="129" end="145" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="174" end="194" title="emergency management" label="emergency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="196" end="206" title="Risk management" label="prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q606332" start="246" end="266" title="emergency evacuation" label="emergency evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="432" end="435" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="440" end="458" title="strategic bombing" label="aerial bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="558" end="572" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="597" end="605" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141276" start="865" end="882" title="crisis management" label="crisis management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="896" end="916" title="emergency management" label="emergency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340208" start="966" end="986" title="Contingency plan" label="contingency planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827994" start="1167" end="1180" title="total defence" label="total defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1478" end="1493" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551476" start="1499" end="1528" title="German strategic bombing during World War I" label="bombing of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="1566" end="1574" title="zeppelin" label="zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q237253" start="1597" end="1611" title="Great Yarmouth" label="Great Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1638" end="1644" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q696016" start="1737" end="1742" title="Gotha G" label="Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="1837" end="1840" title="ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q448717" start="2000" end="2020" title="Air Raid Precautions" label="Air Raid Precautions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2141" end="2150" title="Aerial bombing of cities#European theatre" label="air-raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2203" end="2209" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="2760" end="2767" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124464" start="2858" end="2879" title="Civil Defence Service" label="Civil Defence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="2904" end="2915" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827284" start="3008" end="3030" title="Auxiliary Fire Service" label="Auxiliary Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972687" start="3054" end="3075" title="National Fire Service" label="National Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="3501" end="3515" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q909363" start="3860" end="3863" title="fuel gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="3865" end="3876" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="3881" end="3895" title="water supply" label="water supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="3969" end="3978" title="First Aid" label="First Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540126" start="4167" end="4178" title="headquarter" label="headquarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008689" start="4248" end="4263" title="decontamination" label="decontamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="4436" end="4443" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="4543" end="4558" title="incendiary bomb" label="incendiary bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q129261" start="4657" end="4711" title="Elektron (alloy)" label="magnesium alloy (&amp;quot;Elektron&amp;quot;) incendiary bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326110" start="4856" end="4866" title="waterproof" label="waterproof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333024" start="4867" end="4886" title="protective clothing" label="protective clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="4909" end="4919" title="gas attack" label="gas attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q389959" start="5095" end="5111" title="air-raid shelter" label="air-raid shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="5320" end="5334" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="5424" end="5437" title="Munich crisis" label="Munich crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q389959" start="5663" end="5679" title="Anderson shelter" label="Anderson shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5787" end="5803" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q754396" start="5848" end="5856" title="WWII gas mask" label="gas mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q389959" start="5874" end="5890" title="air-raid shelter" label="air-raid shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q389959" start="5901" end="5917" title="Anderson shelter" label="Anderson shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q389959" start="5931" end="5947" title="Morrison shelter" label="Morrison shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770547" start="6015" end="6023" title="blackout (wartime)" label="blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374637" start="6555" end="6575" title="Royal Observer Corps" label="Royal Observer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="6675" end="6692" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="6755" end="6770" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="7141" end="7150" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="7393" end="7421" title="Strategic bombing during World War II" label="strategic bombing of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7755" end="7768" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079193" start="7774" end="7800" title="Office of Civilian Defense" label="Office of Civilian Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328562" start="7893" end="7915" title="Department of the Army" label="Department of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q781210" start="8018" end="8034" title="Civil Air Patrol" label="Civil Air Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="8096" end="8100" title="US Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257440" start="8369" end="8386" title="Public Law 79-476" label="Public Law 79-476"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="8479" end="8488" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="8560" end="8569" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889621" start="8576" end="8597" title="Coast Guard Auxiliary" label="Coast Guard Auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="8640" end="8656" title="United States Coast Guard" label="U.S. Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="9641" end="9675" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="9689" end="9702" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9708" end="9722" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="9727" end="9739" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="9756" end="9767" title="Soviet Bloc" label="Soviet Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="9818" end="9829" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="9837" end="9843" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="9946" end="9957" title="Nuclear warfare" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124464" start="10027" end="10048" title="Civil Defence Service" label="Civil Defence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="10131" end="10161" title="Cold War" label="tensions between East and West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124460" start="10202" end="10221" title="Civil Defence Corps" label="Civil Defence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="10381" end="10395" title="nuclear warfare" label="nuclear attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="10433" end="10444" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379030" start="10569" end="10575" title="counties of the United Kingdom" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="10612" end="10626" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="10631" end="10648" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="10659" end="10664" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="10669" end="10677" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179058" start="10884" end="10905" title="Coventry City Council" label="Coventry City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="11454" end="11468" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="11733" end="11741" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978364" start="11756" end="11789" title="National Security Resources Board" label="National Security Resources Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q499144" start="12194" end="12208" title="Duck and Cover (film)" label="Duck and Cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q499144" start="12216" end="12231" title="Bert the Turtle" label="Bert the Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q625495" start="12262" end="12276" title="duck and cover" label="duck and cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062538" start="12307" end="12312" title="nuclear fireball" label="flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647192" start="12343" end="12371" title="Survival Under Atomic Attack" label="Survival Under Atomic Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432440" start="12385" end="12403" title="Fallout Protection" label="Fallout Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068019" start="12420" end="12447" title="Nuclear War Survival Skills" label="Nuclear War Survival Skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602346" start="12507" end="12524" title="Stars for Defense" label="Stars for Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196567" start="12601" end="12629" title="public service announcements" label="public service announcements"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="12758" end="12775" title="President Kennedy" label="President Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330233" start="13213" end="13221" title="CONELRAD" label="CONELRAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508200" start="13571" end="13579" title="Military simulation" label="war game"/>
<link wikidata="Q942582" start="13912" end="13933" title="cost-benefit analysis" label="cost-benefit analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155630" start="13941" end="13966" title="ballistic missile defense" label="ballistic missile defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820346" start="13968" end="13977" title="Nike Zeus" label="Nike Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="14036" end="14053" title="nuclear stockpile" label="nuclear stockpile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585693" start="14059" end="14067" title="efficacy" label="efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q863946" start="14091" end="14110" title="diminishing returns" label="diminishing returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="14174" end="14178" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="14353" end="14357" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="14447" end="14453" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="14838" end="14869" title="Chernobyl accident" label="1986 Chernobyl nuclear accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q561904" start="14885" end="14895" title="reservists" label="reservists"/>
<link wikidata="Q242412" start="14912" end="14921" title="mobilization" label="mobilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="15033" end="15037" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="15192" end="15203" title="radioactivity" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377734" start="15247" end="15343" title="Liquidator (Chernobyl)" label="decorated with medals for their work at containing the release of radiation into the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q464671" start="15362" end="15393" title="Deaths due to the Chernobyl disaster" label="the 56 deaths from the accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q637802" start="15572" end="15598" title="mutual assured destruction" label="mutual assured destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124460" start="16085" end="16104" title="Civil Defence Corps" label="Civil Defence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848832" start="16263" end="16294" title="Isle of Man Civil Defence Corps" label="Isle of Man Civil Defence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079447" start="16299" end="16320" title="Civil Defence Ireland" label="Civil Defence Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="16413" end="16448" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="16497" end="16528" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157002" start="16611" end="16645" title="comprehensive emergency management" label="comprehensive emergency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="16647" end="16663" title="Natural disaster" label="Natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="16706" end="16715" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="16835" end="16855" title="emergency management" label="emergency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q181467" start="16860" end="16877" title="homeland security" label="homeland security"/>
<link wikidata="Q105335448" start="16899" end="16908" title="Civil defense by country" label="countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="17092" end="17112" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q181467" start="17218" end="17235" title="homeland security" label="homeland security"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="17278" end="17284" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="17580" end="17600" title="emergency management" label="emergency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="17762" end="17768" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="17793" end="17797" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="17917" end="17931" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921956" start="18180" end="18200" title="Florika Fink-Hooijer" label="Florika Fink-Hooijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603194" start="18795" end="18818" title="State Emergency Service" label="State Emergency Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624171" start="18938" end="18970" title="Ministry of Emergency Situations (Russia)" label="Ministry of Emergency Situations"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="19156" end="19169" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="19180" end="19189" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="19462" end="19472" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932877" start="19920" end="19983" title="Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act" label="Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281340" start="20082" end="20109" title="Disaster Relief Act of 1974" label="Disaster Relief Act of 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="20432" end="20444" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="20814" end="20821" title="Nuclear warfare" label="Nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242560" start="20823" end="20833" title="Biological warfare" label="Biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="20839" end="20855" title="Chemical warfare" label="Chemical warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q265653" start="20895" end="20899" title="CBRN" label="CBRN"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394273" start="20948" end="20965" title="Threat assessment" label="Threat assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q91723" start="21112" end="21125" title="blast shelter" label="blast shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571844" start="21245" end="21260" title="fallout shelter" label="fallout shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="21584" end="21595" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q867805" start="21990" end="22000" title="dirty bomb" label="dirty bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q757138" start="22274" end="22280" title="dangerous goods" label="hazmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612896" start="22460" end="22469" title="nerve gas" label="nerve gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q421809" start="22471" end="22473" title="VX (nerve agent)" label="VX"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="22475" end="22480" title="Sarin" label="Sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="22601" end="22615" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="22678" end="22697" title="nuclear disarmament" label="nuclear disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156255" start="22736" end="22760" title="National Missile Defense" label="National Missile Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="22765" end="22786" title="air defense artillery" label="air defense artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488757" start="22858" end="22870" title="intelligence (information gathering)" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="23006" end="23024" title="interstate highway" label="interstate highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q91723" start="23158" end="23171" title="blast shelter" label="blast shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q128306" start="23497" end="23510" title="Denton, Texas" label="Denton, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950803" start="23515" end="23528" title="Mount Weather" label="Mount Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621808" start="23623" end="23651" title="Strategic National Stockpile" label="Strategic National Stockpile"/>
<link wikidata="Q609251" start="23674" end="23701" title="Strategic Petroleum Reserve (United States)" label="Strategic Petroleum Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281335" start="23896" end="23939" title="Disaster Mortuary Operational Response Team" label="Disaster Mortuary Operational Response Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23952" end="23961" title="DMORT-WMD" label="DMORT-WMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="24095" end="24110" title="nuclear fallout" label="nuclear fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q121874" start="24124" end="24140" title="potassium iodide" label="potassium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="24195" end="24202" title="thyroid" label="thyroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="24250" end="24256" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="24367" end="24381" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="24769" end="24781" title="fire service" label="fire service"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="24783" end="24793" title="healthcare" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="24803" end="24817" title="public utility" label="public utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571844" start="25609" end="25624" title="fallout shelter" label="fallout shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124634" start="26027" end="26040" title="Civil Affairs" label="civil affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q210815" start="26042" end="26057" title="Military Police" label="Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114562" start="26059" end="26073" title="Judge Advocate" label="Judge Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="26079" end="26094" title="combat engineer" label="combat engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26259" end="26271" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122786" start="26654" end="26681" title="Los Angeles Fire Department" label="Los Angeles Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="26721" end="26731" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199921" start="26884" end="26917" title="community emergency response team" label="community emergency response team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065854" start="28065" end="28131" title="United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs" label="United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065854" start="28133" end="28137" title="OCHA" label="OCHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="28168" end="28174" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="28179" end="28188" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522936" start="28194" end="28223" title="Singapore Civil Defence Force" label="Singapore Civil Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="28284" end="28296" title="fire brigade" label="fire brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q180481" start="28436" end="28445" title="ambulance" label="ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374637" start="28591" end="28611" title="Royal Observer Corps" label="Royal Observer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="28619" end="28633" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892373" start="28642" end="28669" title="United States civil defense" label="United States civil defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603194" start="28779" end="28802" title="State Emergency Service" label="State Emergency Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="28806" end="28823" title="Australia" label="Australian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="28893" end="28906" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122548" start="28925" end="28938" title="Citizen Corps" label="Citizen Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199921" start="28943" end="28976" title="Community Emergency Response Team" label="Community Emergency Response Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="28993" end="29007" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124452" start="29076" end="29104" title="Civil Contingencies Act 2004" label="Civil Contingencies Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q112043" start="29152" end="29158" title="RAYNET" label="RAYNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q741964" start="29160" end="29177" title="Search and Rescue" label="Search and Rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639518" start="29188" end="29200" title="4x4 Response" label="4x4 Response"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="29205" end="29212" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079447" start="29218" end="29231" title="Civil Defence Ireland" label="Civil Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q860333" start="29392" end="29406" title="flash flooding" label="flash flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="29484" end="29491" title="firemen" label="firemen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29496" end="29513" title="medical responder" label="medical responder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="29601" end="29616" title="Nuclear warfare" label="Nuclear warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q620562" start="29619" end="29636" title="Nuclear holocaust" label="Nuclear holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005754" start="29639" end="29656" title="Nuclear terrorism" label="Nuclear terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="29659" end="29683" title="Industrial antiterrorism" label="Industrial antiterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031597" start="29686" end="29709" title="Infrastructure security" label="Infrastructure security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229640" start="29712" end="29723" title="Survivalism" label="Survivalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="29726" end="29752" title="Weapon of mass destruction" label="Weapon of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589202" start="30214" end="30234" title="Ministry of Interior" label="Ministry of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="30236" end="30241" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7060" wikidata="Q383836" url="?curid=7060" title="Chymotrypsin">
<text>Chymotrypsin (, chymotrypsins A and B, alpha-chymar ophth, avazyme, chymar, chymotest, enzeon, quimar, quimotrase, alpha-chymar, alpha-chymotrypsin A, alpha-chymotrypsin) is a digestive enzyme component of pancreatic juice acting in the duodenum, where it performs proteolysis, the breakdown of proteins and polypeptides. Chymotrypsin preferentially cleaves peptide amide bonds where the side chain of the amino acid N-terminal to the scissile amide bond (the P1 position) is a large hydrophobic amino acid (tyrosine, tryptophan, and phenylalanine). These amino acids contain an aromatic ring in their side chain that fits into a hydrophobic pocket (the S1 position) of the enzyme. It is activated in the presence of trypsin. The hydrophobic and shape complementarity between the peptide substrate P1 side chain and the enzyme S1 binding cavity accounts for the substrate specificity of this enzyme. Chymotrypsin also hydrolyzes other amide bonds in peptides at slower rates, particularly those containing leucine at the P1 position.

Structurally, it is the archetypal structure for its superfamily, the PA clan of proteases.

== Activation ==

Chymotrypsin is synthesized in the pancreas. Its is chymotrypsinogen. Trypsin activates chymotrypsinogen by cleaving peptidic bonds in positions Arg15 – Ile16 and produces π-chymotrypsin. In turn, aminic group (-NH3+) of the Ile16 residue interacts with the side chain of Asp194, producing the &quot;oxyanion hole&quot; and the hydrophobic &quot;S1 pocket&quot;. Moreover, chymotrypsin induces its own activation by cleaving in positions 14–15, 146–147, and 148–149, producing α-chymotrypsin (which is more active and stable than π-chymotrypsin). The resulting molecule is a three-polypeptide molecule interconnected via disulfide bonds.

== Mechanism of action and kinetics ==

&quot;In vivo&quot;, chymotrypsin is a proteolytic enzyme (serine protease) acting in the digestive systems of many organisms. It facilitates the cleavage of peptide bonds by a hydrolysis reaction, which despite being thermodynamically favorable, occurs extremely slowly in the absence of a catalyst. The main substrates of chymotrypsin are peptide bonds in which the amino acid N-terminal to the bond is a tryptophan, tyrosine, phenylalanine, or leucine. Like many proteases, chymotrypsin also hydrolyses amide bonds &quot;in vitro&quot;, a virtue that enabled the use of substrate analogs such as N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine p-nitrophenyl amide for enzyme assays.

Chymotrypsin cleaves peptide bonds by attacking the unreactive carbonyl group with a powerful nucleophile, the serine 195 residue located in the active site of the enzyme, which briefly becomes covalently bonded to the substrate, forming an enzyme-substrate intermediate. Along with histidine 57 and aspartic acid 102, this serine residue constitutes the catalytic triad of the active site.
These findings rely on inhibition assays and the study of the kinetics of cleavage of the aforementioned substrate, exploiting the fact that the enzyme-substrate intermediate &quot;p&quot;-nitrophenolate has a yellow colour, enabling measurement of its concentration by measuring light absorbance at 410 nm.

Chymotrypsin catalysis of the hydrolysis of a protein substrate (in red) is performed in two steps.  First, the nucleophilicity of Ser-195 is enhanced by general-base catalysis in which the proton of the serine hydroxyl group is transferred to the imidazole moiety of His-57 during its attack on the electron-deficient carbonyl carbon of the protein-substrate main chain (k1 step). This occurs via the concerted action of the three-amino-acid residues in the catalytic triad. The buildup of negative charge on the resultant tetrahedral intermediate is stabilized in the enzyme&#x27;s active site&#x27;s oxyanion hole, by formation of two hydrogen bonds to adjacent main-chain amide-hydrogens.

The His-57 imidazolium moiety formed in the k1 step is a general acid catalyst for the k-1 reaction.  However, evidence for similar general-acid catalysis of the k2 reaction (Tet2) has been controverted; apparently water provides a proton to the amine leaving group.

Breakdown of Tet1 (via k3) generates an acyl enzyme, which is hydrolyzed with His-57 acting as a general base  (kH2O) in formation of a tetrahedral intermediate, that breaks down to regenerate the serine hydroxyl moiety, as well as the protein fragment with the newly formed carboxyl terminus.

== Uses ==
=== Medical uses ===
Chymotrypsin has been used during cataract surgery. It was marketed under the brand name Zolyse.

== Isozymes ==

==See also==
*Trypsin
*PA clan of proteases

==References==
== Further reading ==
* 
==External links==
* The MEROPS online database for peptidases and their inhibitors: S01.001 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q383836" start="0" end="12" title="Chymotrypsin" label="Chymotrypsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419557" start="176" end="192" title="digestive enzyme" label="digestive enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q863089" start="206" end="222" title="pancreatic juice" label="pancreatic juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q134955" start="237" end="245" title="duodenum" label="duodenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123" start="265" end="276" title="proteolysis" label="proteolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="484" end="495" title="hydrophobic" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="496" end="506" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="508" end="516" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="518" end="528" title="tryptophan" label="tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170545" start="534" end="547" title="phenylalanine" label="phenylalanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q210390" start="579" end="587" title="aromatic" label="aromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q898422" start="602" end="612" title="substituent" label="side chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="630" end="641" title="hydrophobe" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q127450" start="717" end="724" title="trypsin" label="trypsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119506" start="788" end="797" title="enzyme substrate" label="substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q483745" start="1006" end="1013" title="leucine" label="leucine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251477" start="1088" end="1099" title="superfamily (molecular biology)" label="superfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q24783967" start="1105" end="1112" title="PA clan" label="PA clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211935" start="1162" end="1173" title="protein biosynthesis" label="synthesized"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118589" start="1198" end="1214" title="chymotrypsinogen" label="chymotrypsinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="1727" end="1738" title="peptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="1767" end="1781" title="disulfide bond" label="disulfide bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q87324999" start="1884" end="1899" title="serine protease" label="serine protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="2002" end="2012" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183290" start="2600" end="2606" title="serine" label="serine"/>
<link wikidata="Q485277" start="2772" end="2781" title="histidine" label="histidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178450" start="2789" end="2802" title="aspartic acid" label="aspartic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q751908" start="2844" end="2859" title="catalytic triad" label="catalytic triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q656269" start="3055" end="3083" title="4-Nitrophenol" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-nitrophenolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127450" start="4606" end="4613" title="Trypsin" label="Trypsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24783967" start="4615" end="4622" title="PA clan" label="PA clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25712" start="4702" end="4708" title="MEROPS" label="MEROPS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7061" wikidata="Q16199921" url="?curid=7061" title="Community emergency response team">
<text>In the United States, Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) can refer to
* an implementation of FEMA&#x27;s National CERT Program, administered by a local sponsoring agency, which provides a standardized training and implementation framework to community members;
* an organization of volunteer emergency workers who have received specific training in basic disaster response skills, and who agree to supplement existing emergency responders in the event of a major disaster.

Sometimes programs and organizations take different names, such as neighborhood emergency response team (NERT), or neighborhood emergency team (NET).

The concept of civilian auxiliaries is similar to civil defense, which has a longer history. The CERT concept differs because it includes nonmilitary emergencies, and is coordinated with all levels of emergency authorities, local to national, via an overarching incident command system.

In 2022, the CERT program moved under FEMA&#x27;s community preparedness umbrella along with the Youth Preparedness Council.
== Organization ==
A local government agency, often a fire department, police department, or emergency management agency, agrees to sponsor CERT within its jurisdiction. The sponsoring agency liaises with, deploys and may train or supervise the training of CERT members. Many sponsoring agencies employ a full-time community-service person as liaison to the CERT members. In some communities, the liaison is a volunteer and CERT member.

As people are trained and agree to join the community emergency response effort, a CERT is formed. Initial efforts may result in a team with only a few members from across the community. As the number of members grow, a single community-wide team may subdivide. Multiple CERTs are organized into a hierarchy of teams consistent with ICS principles. This follows the ICS principle of span of control until the ideal distribution is achieved: one or more teams are formed at each neighborhood within a community.

A &quot;teen community emergency response team&quot; (&quot;teen CERT&quot;), or &quot;student emergency response team&quot; (&quot;SERT&quot;), can be formed from any group of teens. A teen CERT can be formed as a school club, service organization, venturing crew, explorer post, or the training can be added to a school&#x27;s graduation curriculum. Some CERTs form a club or service corporation, and recruit volunteers to perform training on behalf of the sponsoring agency. This reduces the financial and human resource burden on the sponsoring agency.

When not responding to disasters or large emergencies, CERTs may:
* raise funds for emergency response equipment in their community
* provide first-aid, crowd control or other services at community events
* hold planning, training, or recruitment meetings
* conduct or participate in disaster response exercises

Some sponsoring agencies use state and federal grants to purchase response tools and equipment for their members and teams (subject to Stafford Act limitations). Most CERTs also acquire their own supplies, tools, and equipment. As community members, CERTs are aware of the specific needs of their community and equip the teams accordingly.

== Response ==
The basic idea is to use CERT to perform the large number of tasks needed in emergencies. This frees highly trained professional responders for more technical tasks. Much of CERT training concerns the ICS and organization, so CERT members fit easily into larger command structures.

A team member may self-activate (self-deploy) when their own neighborhood is affected by disaster or when an incident takes place at their current location (ex. home, work, school, church, or if an accident occurred in front of them). They should not hear about an incident and drive or respond to an event unless told to do so by their team member or sponsoring agency (as specified in chapters 1 and 6 of the basic CERT training). An effort is made to report their response status to the sponsoring agency. A self-activated team will size up the loss in their neighborhood and begin performing the skills they have learned to minimize further loss of life, property, and environment. They will continue to respond safely until redirected or relieved by the sponsoring agency or professional responders on-scene.

Teams in neighborhoods not affected by disaster may be deployed or activated by the sponsoring agency. The sponsoring agency may communicate with neighborhood CERT leaders through an organic communication team. In some areas the communications may be by amateur radio, FRS, GMRS or MURS radio, dedicated telephone or fire-alarm networks. In other areas, relays of bicycle-equipped runners can effectively carry messages between the teams and the local emergency operations center.

The sponsoring agency may activate and dispatch teams in order to gather or respond to intelligence about an incident. Teams may be dispatched to affected neighborhoods, or organized to support operations. CERT members may augment support staff at an ICS or emergency operations center. Additional teams may also be created to guard a morgue, locate supplies and food, convey messages to and from other CERTs and local authorities, and other duties on an as-needed basis as identified by the team leader.

In the short term, CERTs perform data gathering, especially to locate mass-casualties requiring professional response, or situations requiring professional rescues, simple fire-fighting tasks (for example, small fires, turning off gas), light search and rescue, damage evaluation of structures, triage and first aid. In the longer term, CERTs may assist in the evacuation of residents, or assist with setting up a neighborhood shelter.

While responding, CERT members are temporary volunteer government workers. In some areas, (such as California, Hawaii and Kansas) registered, activated CERT members are eligible for worker&#x27;s compensation for on-the-job injuries during declared disasters.

== Member roles ==
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) recommends that the standard, minimum ten-person team be comprised as follows:
* &quot;CERT leader/incident commander&quot;. Generally, the first CERT team member arriving on the scene is the designated incident commander (IC) until the arrival of someone more competent. This person makes the IC initial assessment of the scene and determines the appropriate course of action for team members; assumes role of safety officer until assigned to another team member; assigns team member roles if not already assigned; designates triage area, treatment area, morgue, and vehicle traffic routes; coordinates and directs team operations; determines logistical needs (water, food, medical supplies, transportation, equipment, and so on) and determines ways to meet those needs through team members or citizen volunteers on the scene; collects and writes reports on the operation and victims; and communicates and coordinates with the incident commander, local authorities, and other CERT team leaders. The IC is identified by two pieces of crossed tape on the hard hat.
* &quot;Safety officer/dispatch&quot;. Checks team members prior to deployment to ensure they are safe and equipped for the operation; determines safe or unsafe working environments; ensures team accountability; supervises operations (when possible) where team members and victims are at direct physical risk, and alerts team members when unsafe conditions arise. Advises team members of any updates on the situation. Keeps tabs on the situation as it unfolds
* &quot;Fire suppression team (2 people)&quot;. Work under the supervision of a team leader to suppress small fires in designated work areas or as needed; when not accomplishing their primary mission, assist the search and rescue team or triage team; assist in evacuation and transport as needed; assist in the triage or treatment area as needed, other duties as assigned; communicate with Team Leader.
* &quot;Search and rescue team/extraction (2)&quot;. Work under the supervision of a team leader, searching for and providing rescue of victims as is prudent under the conditions, also bringing injured people to triage or the hospital for medical treatment ; when not accomplishing their primary mission, assist the fire suppression team, assist in the triage or treatment area as needed; other duties as assigned; communicate with team leader.
* &quot;Medical triage team/field medic (2)&quot;. Work under the supervision of a team leader, providing START triage for victims found at the scene; marking victims with category of injury per the standard operating procedures; when not accomplishing their primary mission, assist the fire suppression team if needed, assist the search and rescue team if needed, assist in the medical triage area if needed, assist in the treatment area if needed, other duties as assigned; communicate with IC.

* &quot;Medical treatment team (2)&quot;. Work under the supervision of the team leader, providing medical treatment to victims within the scope of their training. This task is normally accomplished in the treatment area, however, it may take place in the affected area as well. When not accomplishing their primary mission, assist the fire suppression team as needed, assist the medical triage team as needed; other duties as assigned; communicate with the team leader.
* &quot;Team leader&quot;. Supervises designated tasks they are assigned to. Gives reports to dispatch and IC.

Because every CERT member in a community receives the same core instruction, any team member has the training necessary to assume any of these roles. This is important during a disaster response because not all members of a regular team may be available to respond. Hasty teams may be formed by whichever members are responding at the time. Additionally, members may need to adjust team roles due to stress, fatigue, injury, or other circumstances.

== Training ==
While state and local jurisdictions will implement training in the manner that best suits the community, FEMA&#x27;s National CERT Program has an established curriculum. Jurisdictions may augment the training, but are strongly encouraged to deliver the entire core content. The CERT core curriculum for the basic course is composed of the following nine units (time is instructional hours):
* &quot;Unit 1: Disaster preparedness&quot; (2.5 hrs). Topics include (in part) identifying local disaster threats, disaster impact, mitigation and preparedness concepts, and an overview of citizen corps and CERT. Hands on skills include team-building exercises, and shutting off utilities.
* &quot;Unit 2: Fire safety&quot; (2.5 hrs). Students learn about fire chemistry, mitigation practices, hazardous materials identification, suppression options, and are introduced to the concept of size-up. Hands-on skills include using a fire extinguisher to suppress a live flame, and wearing basic protective gear. Firefighting standpipes as well as unconventional firefighting methods are also covered.
* &quot;Unit 3: Disaster medical operations part 1&quot; (2.5 hrs). Students learn to identify and treat certain life-threatening conditions in a disaster setting, as well as START triage. Hands-on skills include performing head-tilt/chin-lift, practicing bleeding control techniques, and performing triage as an exercise.
* &quot;Unit 4: Disaster medical operations part 2&quot; (2.5 hrs). Topics cover mass casualty operations, public health, assessing patients, and treating injuries. Students practice patient assessment, and various treatment techniques.
* &quot;Unit 5: Light search and rescue operations&quot; (2.5 hrs). Size-up is expanded as students learn about assessing structural damage, marking structures that have been searched, search techniques, as well as rescue techniques and cribbing. Hands-on activities include lifting and cribbing an object, and practicing rescue carries.
* &quot;Unit 6: CERT organization&quot; (1.5 hrs). Students are introduced to several concepts from the ICS, and local team organization and communication is explained. Hands-on skills include a table-top exercise focusing on incident command and control.
* &quot;Unit 7: Disaster psychology&quot; (1 hr). Responder well-being and dealing with victim trauma are the topics of this unit.
* &quot;Unit 8: Terrorism and CERT&quot; (2.5 hrs). Students learn how terrorists may choose targets, what weapons they may use, and identifying when chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, or explosive weapons may have been deployed. Students learn about CERT roles in preparing for and responding to terrorist attacks. A table-top exercise highlights topics covered.
* &quot;Unit 9: Course review and disaster simulation&quot; (2.5 hrs). Students take a written exam, then participate in a real-time practical disaster simulation where the different skill areas are put to the test. A critique follows the exercise where students and instructors have an opportunity to learn from mistakes and highlight exemplary actions. Students may be given a certificate of completion at the conclusion of the course.

CERT training emphasizes safely &quot;doing the most good for the most people as quickly as possible&quot; when responding to a disaster. For this reason, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) training is not included in the core curriculum, as it is time- and responder-intensive in a mass-casualty incident. However, many jurisdictions encourage or require CERT members to obtain CPR training. Many CERT programs provide or encourage members to take additional first aid training. Some CERT members may also take training to become a certified first responder or emergency medical technician.

Many CERT programs also provide training in amateur radio operation, shelter operations, flood response, community relations, mass care, the ICS, and the National Incident Management System (NIMS).

Each unit of CERT training is ideally delivered by professional responders or other experts in the field addressed by the unit. This is done to help build unity between CERT members and responders, keep the attention of students, and help the professional response organizations be comfortable with the training which CERT members receive.

Each course of instruction is ideally facilitated by one or more instructors certified in the CERT curriculum by the state or sponsoring agency. Facilitating instructors provide continuity between units, and help ensure that the CERT core curriculum is being delivered successfully. Facilitating instructors also perform set-up and tear-down of the classroom, provide instructional materials for the course, record student attendance and other tasks which assist the professional responder in delivering their unit as efficiently as possible.

CERT training is provided free to interested members of the community, and is delivered in a group classroom setting. People may complete the training without obligation to join a CERT. Citizen corps grant funds can be used to print and provide each student with a printed manual. Some sponsoring agencies use citizen corps grant funds to purchase disaster response tool kits. These kits are offered as an incentive to join a CERT, and must be returned to the sponsoring agency when members resign from CERT.

Some sponsoring agencies require a criminal background-check of all trainees before allowing them to participate on a CERT. For example, the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, requires all volunteers to pass a background check, while the city of Austin, Texas, does not require a background check to take part in training classes, but requires members to undergo a background check in order to receive a CERT badge and directly assist first responders during an activation of the emergency operations center. However, most programs do not require a criminal background check in order to participate.

The CERT curriculum (including the &quot;Train-the-Trainer&quot; and program manager courses) was updated in 2019 to reflect feedback from instructors across the nation. 

== FEMA Position Qualification System ==
In 2021 FEMA published Position Qualification System standards for CERT programs:

* FEMA CERT volunteer (Type 2/1)
* FEMA CERT section chief
* FEMA CERT team leader (Type 2/1)

Programs who choose to participate must have CERT members complete a position task book every 2 years:

* FEMA CERT volunteer type 2
* FEMA CERT volunteer type 1
* FEMA CERT section chief
* FEMA CERT team leader type 2
* FEMA CERT team leader type 1

== See also ==
* Disaster Preparedness and Response TeamPakistan based non-governmental organization modeled after CERT.
* Local Emergency Planning Committee
* Medical Reserve Corps

==References==
== External links ==
* Citizen Corps CERT
* CERT Training Materials (Program Manager, Trainer, Participant...)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16199921" start="22" end="62" title="Community emergency response team" label="Community Emergency Response Team (CERT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="99" end="103" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="FEMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188844" start="288" end="297" title="Volunteering" label="volunteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362384" start="424" end="443" title="emergency responder" label="emergency responder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199921" start="547" end="583" title="Community emergency response team" label="neighborhood emergency response team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199921" start="585" end="589" title="Community emergency response team" label="NERT"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199921" start="595" end="622" title="Community emergency response team" label="neighborhood emergency team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199921" start="624" end="627" title="Community emergency response team" label="NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="681" end="694" title="civil defense" label="civil defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660964" start="893" end="916" title="incident command system" label="incident command system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="1065" end="1081" title="local government" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="1098" end="1113" title="fire department" label="fire department"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="1115" end="1132" title="police department" label="police department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="1137" end="1157" title="emergency management" label="emergency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660964" start="1815" end="1818" title="Incident Command System" label="ICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816351" start="1865" end="1880" title="span of control" label="span of control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920452" start="2244" end="2253" title="Venturing (Boy Scouts of America)" label="venturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421404" start="2260" end="2268" title="Exploring (Learning for Life)" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="4502" end="4509" title="Organic (military)" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="4573" end="4586" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713856" start="4588" end="4591" title="Family Radio Service" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501633" start="4593" end="4597" title="GMRS" label="GMRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934415" start="4601" end="4605" title="Multi-Use Radio Service" label="MURS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370726" start="5059" end="5086" title="emergency operations center" label="emergency operations center"/>
<link wikidata="Q780067" start="5602" end="5608" title="triage" label="triage"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="5613" end="5622" title="first aid" label="first aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5843" end="5853" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="5855" end="5861" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="5866" end="5872" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520843" start="8549" end="8554" title="simple triage and rapid treatment" label="START"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568322" start="10618" end="10631" title="team-building" label="team-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q757138" start="10775" end="10794" title="hazardous materials" label="hazardous materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q190672" start="10910" end="10927" title="fire extinguisher" label="fire extinguisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520843" start="11253" end="11265" title="START triage" label="START triage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951584" start="11875" end="11883" title="Cribbing (rescue)" label="cribbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308825" start="12292" end="12302" title="critical incident stress management" label="well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q654426" start="12327" end="12333" title="Psychological trauma" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="12434" end="12444" title="terrorism" label="terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q265653" start="12513" end="12570" title="CBRNE" label="chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, or explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="13331" end="13360" title="cardiopulmonary resuscitation" label="cardiopulmonary resuscitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907476" start="13460" end="13482" title="mass-casualty incident" label="mass-casualty incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="13637" end="13646" title="first aid" label="first aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362384" start="13710" end="13735" title="certified first responder" label="certified first responder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497094" start="13739" end="13767" title="emergency medical technician" label="emergency medical technician"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="13814" end="13827" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973480" start="13924" end="13959" title="National Incident Management System" label="National Incident Management System"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="15513" end="15536" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="15608" end="15621" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370726" start="15842" end="15869" title="emergency operations center" label="emergency operations center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281336" start="16622" end="16661" title="Disaster Preparedness and Response Team" label="Disaster Preparedness and Response Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="16661" end="16669" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664001" start="16728" end="16762" title="Local Emergency Planning Committee" label="Local Emergency Planning Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806416" start="16765" end="16786" title="Medical Reserve Corps" label="Medical Reserve Corps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7063" wikidata="Q184393" url="?curid=7063" title="Catapult">
<text>A catapult is a ballistic device used to launch a projectile a great distance without the aid of gunpowder or other propellants – particularly various types of ancient and medieval siege engines. A catapult uses the sudden release of stored potential energy to propel its payload. Most convert tension or torsion energy that was more slowly and manually built up within the device before release, via springs, bows, twisted rope, elastic, or any of numerous other materials and mechanisms.

During wars in the ancient times, the catapult was usually known to be the strongest heavy weaponry. In modern times the term can apply to devices ranging from a simple hand-held implement (also called a &quot;slingshot&quot;) to a mechanism for launching aircraft from a ship.

The earliest catapults date to at least the 7th century BC, with King Uzziah of Judah recorded as equipping the walls of Jerusalem with machines that shot &quot;great stones&quot;. Catapults are mentioned in Yajurveda under the name &quot;Jyah&quot; in chapter 30, verse 7. In the 5th century BC the mangonel appeared in ancient China, a type of traction trebuchet and catapult. Early uses were also attributed to Ajatashatru of Magadha in his 5th century BC war against the Licchavis. Greek catapults were invented in the early 4th century BC, being attested by Diodorus Siculus as part of the equipment of a Greek army in 399 BC, and subsequently used at the siege of Motya in 397 BC.

==Etymology==
The word &#x27;catapult&#x27; comes from the Latin &#x27;catapulta&#x27;, which in turn comes from the Greek (&quot;katapeltēs&quot;), itself from κατά (&quot;kata&quot;), &quot;downwards&quot; and πάλλω (&quot;pallō&quot;), &quot;to toss, to hurl&quot;. Catapults were invented by the ancient Greeks and in ancient India where they were used by the Magadhan King Ajatashatru around the early to mid 5th century BC.

== Greek and Roman catapults ==


The catapult and crossbow in Greece are closely intertwined. Primitive catapults were essentially &quot;the product of relatively straightforward attempts to increase the range and penetrating power of missiles by strengthening the bow which propelled them&quot;. The historian Diodorus Siculus (fl. 1st century BC), described the invention of a mechanical arrow-firing catapult (&quot;katapeltikon&quot;) by a Greek task force in 399 BC. The weapon was soon after employed against Motya (397 BC), a key Carthaginian stronghold in Sicily. Diodorus is assumed to have drawn his description from the highly rated history of Philistus, a contemporary of the events then. The introduction of crossbows however, can be dated further back: according to the inventor Hero of Alexandria (fl. 1st century AD), who referred to the now lost works of the 3rd-century BC engineer Ctesibius, this weapon was inspired by an earlier foot-held crossbow, called the &quot;gastraphetes&quot;, which could store more energy than the Greek bows. A detailed description of the &quot;gastraphetes&quot;, or the &quot;belly-bow&quot;, along with a watercolor drawing, is found in Heron&#x27;s technical treatise &quot;Belopoeica&quot;.

A third Greek author, Biton (fl. 2nd century BC), whose reliability has been positively reevaluated by recent scholarship, described two advanced forms of the &quot;gastraphetes&quot;, which he credits to Zopyros, an engineer from southern Italy. Zopyrus has been plausibly equated with a Pythagorean of that name who seems to have flourished in the late 5th century BC. He probably designed his bow-machines on the occasion of the sieges of Cumae and Milet between 421 BC and 401 BC. The bows of these machines already featured a winched pull back system and could apparently throw two missiles at once.

Philo of Byzantium provides probably the most detailed account on the establishment of a theory of belopoietics (&quot;belos&quot; = &quot;projectile&quot;; &quot;poietike&quot; = &quot;(art) of making&quot;) circa 200 BC. The central principle to this theory was that &quot;all parts of a catapult, including the weight or length of the projectile, were proportional to the size of the torsion springs&quot;. This kind of innovation is indicative of the increasing rate at which geometry and physics were being assimilated into military enterprises.

From the mid-4th century BC onwards, evidence of the Greek use of arrow-shooting machines becomes more dense and varied: arrow firing machines (&quot;katapaltai&quot;) are briefly mentioned by Aeneas Tacticus in his treatise on siegecraft written around 350 BC. An extant inscription from the Athenian arsenal, dated between 338 and 326 BC, lists a number of stored catapults with shooting bolts of varying size and springs of sinews. The later entry is particularly noteworthy as it constitutes the first clear evidence for the switch to torsion catapults, which are more powerful than the more-flexible crossbows and which came to dominate Greek and Roman artillery design thereafter. This move to torsion springs was likely spurred by the engineers of Philip II of Macedonia. Another Athenian inventory from 330 to 329 BC includes catapult bolts with heads and flights. As the use of catapults became more commonplace, so did the training required to operate them. Many Greek children were instructed in catapult usage, as evidenced by &quot;a 3rd Century B.C. inscription from the island of Ceos in the Cyclades [regulating] catapult shooting competitions for the young&quot;. Arrow firing machines in action are reported from Philip II&#x27;s siege of Perinth (Thrace) in 340 BC. At the same time, Greek fortifications began to feature high towers with shuttered windows in the top, which could have been used to house anti-personnel arrow shooters, as in Aigosthena. Projectiles included both arrows and (later) stones that were sometimes lit on fire. Onomarchus of Phocis first used catapults on the battlefield against Philip II of Macedon. Philip&#x27;s son, Alexander the Great, was the next commander in recorded history to make such use of catapults on the battlefield as well as to use them during sieges.

The Romans started to use catapults as arms for their wars against Syracuse, Macedon, Sparta and Aetolia (3rd and 2nd centuries BC). The Roman machine known as an arcuballista was similar to a large crossbow. Later the Romans used ballista catapults on their warships.

== Other ancient catapults ==
In chronological order:
* 19th century BC, Egypt, walls of the fortress of Buhen appear to contain platforms for siege weapons.
* c.750 BC, Judah, King Uzziah is documented as having overseen the construction of machines to &quot;shoot great stones&quot;.
* between 484 and 468 BC, India, Ajatashatru is recorded in Jaina texts as having used catapults in his campaign against the Licchavis.
* between 500 and 300 BC, China, recorded use of mangonels. They were probably used by the Mohists as early as the 4th century BC, descriptions of which can be found in the &quot;Mojing&quot; (compiled in the 4th century BC). In Chapter 14 of the &quot;Mojing&quot;, the mangonel is described hurling hollowed out logs filled with burning charcoal at enemy troops. The mangonel was carried westward by the Avars and appeared next in the eastern Mediterranean by the late 6th century AD, where it replaced torsion powered siege engines such as the ballista and onager due to its simpler design and faster rate of fire. The Byzantines adopted the mangonel possibly as early as 587, the Persians in the early 7th century, and the Arabs in the second half of the 7th century. The Franks and Saxons adopted the weapon in the 8th century.

== Medieval catapults ==

Castles and fortified walled cities were common during this period and catapults were used as siege weapons against them. As well as their use in attempts to breach walls, incendiary missiles, or diseased carcasses or garbage could be catapulted over the walls.

Defensive techniques in the Middle Ages progressed to a point that rendered catapults largely ineffective. The Viking siege of Paris (AD 885–6) &quot;saw the employment by both sides of virtually every instrument of siege craft known to the classical world, including a variety of catapults&quot;, to little effect, resulting in failure.

The most widely used catapults throughout the Middle Ages were as follows:

; Ballista: Ballistae were similar to giant crossbows and were designed to work through torsion. The projectiles were large arrows or darts made from wood with an iron tip. These arrows were then shot &quot;along a flat trajectory&quot; at a target. Ballistae were accurate, but lacked firepower compared with that of a mangonel or trebuchet. Because of their immobility, most ballistae were constructed on site following a siege assessment by the commanding military officer.
; Springald: The springald&#x27;s design resembles that of the ballista, being a crossbow powered by tension. The springald&#x27;s frame was more compact, allowing for use inside tighter confines, such as the inside of a castle or tower, but compromising its power.
; Mangonel: This machine was designed to throw heavy projectiles from a &quot;bowl-shaped bucket at the end of its arm&quot;. Mangonels were mostly used for “firing various missiles at fortresses, castles, and cities,” with a range of up to . These missiles included anything from stones to excrement to rotting carcasses. Mangonels were relatively simple to construct, and eventually wheels were added to increase mobility.
; Onager: Mangonels are also sometimes referred to as Onagers. Onager catapults initially launched projectiles from a sling, which was later changed to a &quot;bowl-shaped bucket&quot;. The word &quot;Onager&quot; is derived from the Greek word &quot;onagros&quot; for &quot;wild ass&quot;, referring to the &quot;kicking motion and force&quot; that were recreated in the Mangonel&#x27;s design. Historical records regarding onagers are scarce. The most detailed account of Mangonel use is from &quot;Eric Marsden&#x27;s translation of a text written by Ammianus Marcellius in the 4th Century AD&quot; describing its construction and combat usage.
; Trebuchet: Trebuchets were probably the most powerful catapult employed in the Middle Ages. The most commonly used ammunition were stones, but &quot;darts and sharp wooden poles&quot; could be substituted if necessary. The most effective kind of ammunition though involved fire, such as &quot;firebrands, and deadly Greek Fire&quot;. Trebuchets came in two different designs: Traction, which were powered by people, or Counterpoise, where the people were replaced with &quot;a weight on the short end&quot;. The most famous historical account of trebuchet use dates back to the siege of Stirling Castle in 1304, when the army of Edward I constructed a giant trebuchet known as Warwolf, which then proceeded to &quot;level a section of [castle] wall, successfully concluding the siege&quot;.
; Couillard: A simplified trebuchet, where the trebuchet&#x27;s single counterweight is split, swinging on either side of a central support post.
; Leonardo da Vinci&#x27;s catapult: Leonardo da Vinci sought to improve the efficiency and range of earlier designs. His design incorporated a large wooden leaf spring as an accumulator to power the catapult. Both ends of the bow are connected by a rope, similar to the design of a bow and arrow. The leaf spring was not used to pull the catapult armature directly, rather the rope was wound around a drum. The catapult armature was attached to this drum which would be turned until enough potential energy was stored in the deformation of the spring. The drum would then be disengaged from the winding mechanism, and the catapult arm would snap around. Though no records exist of this design being built during Leonardo&#x27;s lifetime, contemporary enthusiasts have reconstructed it.

== Modern use ==

=== Military ===
The last large scale military use of catapults was during the trench warfare of World War I. During the early stages of the war, catapults were used to throw hand grenades across no man&#x27;s land into enemy trenches. They were eventually replaced by small mortars.

The SPBG (Silent Projector of Bottles and Grenades) was a Soviet proposal for an anti-tank weapon that launched grenades from a spring-loaded shuttle up to .

Special variants called aircraft catapults are used to launch planes from land bases and sea carriers when the takeoff runway is too short for a powered takeoff or simply impractical to extend. Ships also use them to launch torpedoes and deploy bombs against submarines.

In 2024, during the Gaza war, a trebuchet created by private initiative of an IDF reserve unit was used to throw firebrands over the border into Lebanon, in order to set on fire the undergrowth which offered camouflage to Hezbollah fighters.

===Toys, sports, entertainment===
In the 1840s, the invention of vulcanized rubber allowed the making of small hand-held catapults, either improvised from Y-shaped sticks or manufactured for sale; both were popular with children and teenagers. These devices were also known as slingshots in the United States.

Small catapults, referred to as &quot;traps&quot;, are still widely used to launch clay targets into the air in the sport of clay pigeon shooting.

In the 1990s and early 2000s, a powerful catapult, a trebuchet, was used by thrill-seekers first on private property and in 2001–2002 at Middlemoor Water Park, Somerset, England, to experience being catapulted through the air for . The practice has been discontinued due to a fatality at the Water Park. There had been an injury when the trebuchet was in use on private property. Injury and death occurred when those two participants failed to land onto the safety net. The operators of the trebuchet were tried, but found not guilty of manslaughter, though the jury noted that the fatality might have been avoided had the operators &quot;imposed stricter safety measures.&quot; Human cannonball circus acts use a catapult launch mechanism, rather than gunpowder, and are risky ventures for the human cannonballs.

Early launched roller coasters used a catapult system powered by a diesel engine or a dropped weight to acquire their momentum, such as Shuttle Loop installations between 1977 and 1978. The catapult system for roller coasters has been replaced by flywheels and later linear motors.

&quot;Pumpkin chunking&quot; is another widely popularized use, in which people compete to see who can launch a pumpkin the farthest by mechanical means (although the world record is held by a pneumatic air cannon).

===Smuggling===
In January 2011, a homemade catapult was discovered that was used to smuggle cannabis into the United States from Mexico. The machine was found from the border fence with bales of cannabis ready to launch.

== See also ==

* Aircraft catapult
* Centrifugal gun
* List of siege engines
* Mangonel
* Mass driver
* National Catapult Contest
* Sling (weapon)
* SPBG
* Trebuchet
== Notes ==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* .
* .
* .

== External links ==
* 
* .
* .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184393" start="2" end="10" title="Catapult" label="catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q184631" start="16" end="25" title="ballistics" label="ballistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="50" end="60" title="projectile" label="projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="97" end="106" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="116" end="126" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="181" end="193" title="siege engine" label="siege engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="241" end="257" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="294" end="301" title="Tension (mechanics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q826575" start="305" end="312" title="Torsion (mechanics)" label="torsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13672" start="701" end="710" title="slingshot" label="slingshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="737" end="767" title="Aircraft catapult" label="launching aircraft from a ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q313216" start="840" end="846" title="Uzziah" label="Uzziah"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="850" end="855" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q47142" start="978" end="987" title="Yajurveda" label="Yajurveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q921249" start="1070" end="1078" title="mangonel" label="mangonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="1091" end="1104" title="ancient China" label="ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="1125" end="1134" title="trebuchet" label="trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q379242" start="1184" end="1195" title="Ajatashatru" label="Ajatashatru"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="1199" end="1206" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242360" start="1245" end="1254" title="Licchavi (kingdom)" label="Licchavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="1333" end="1349" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502459" start="1431" end="1445" title="siege of Motya" label="siege of Motya"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1517" end="1522" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1575" end="1580" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1758" end="1772" title="ancient Greeks" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="1780" end="1793" title="ancient India" label="ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q12459974" start="1822" end="1835" title="Haryanka dynasty" label="Magadhan King"/>
<link wikidata="Q379242" start="1836" end="1847" title="Ajatashatru" label="Ajatashatru"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="1940" end="1948" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="2201" end="2217" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2405" end="2410" title="Sicilian Wars#The Second Sicilian War (410 BC–340 BC)" label="Motya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="2427" end="2439" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="2454" end="2460" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q712572" start="2545" end="2554" title="Philistus" label="Philistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q161853" start="2683" end="2701" title="Hero of Alexandria" label="Hero of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41766" start="2790" end="2799" title="Ctesibius" label="Ctesibius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350168" start="2877" end="2889" title="gastraphetes" label="gastraphetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640496" start="3158" end="3163" title="Biton (writer)" label="Biton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3341" end="3348" title="Zopyrus of Tarentum" label="Zopyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="3367" end="3381" title="Taranto" label="southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="3425" end="3436" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q243456" start="3578" end="3583" title="Cumae" label="Cumae"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="3588" end="3593" title="Milet" label="Milet"/>
<link wikidata="Q334570" start="3742" end="3760" title="Philo of Byzantium" label="Philo of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q405969" start="4487" end="4502" title="Aeneas Tacticus" label="Aeneas Tacticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="4587" end="4595" title="Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q826575" start="4833" end="4840" title="torsion (mechanics)" label="torsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="4946" end="4951" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="5525" end="5534" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5551" end="5558" title="Perinth" label="Perinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="5560" end="5566" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827860" start="5755" end="5765" title="Aigosthena" label="Aigosthena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584301" start="5852" end="5862" title="Onomarchus" label="Onomarchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="5921" end="5941" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="5962" end="5981" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="6181" end="6189" title="Syracuse, Italy" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6277" end="6289" title="arcuballista" label="arcuballista"/>
<link wikidata="Q219433" start="6345" end="6353" title="ballista" label="ballista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002656" start="6489" end="6494" title="Buhen" label="Buhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q313216" start="6566" end="6572" title="Uzziah" label="Uzziah"/>
<link wikidata="Q379242" start="6703" end="6714" title="Ajatashatru" label="Ajatashatru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376731" start="6795" end="6804" title="Licchavi (tribe)" label="Licchavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q921249" start="6855" end="6863" title="mangonel" label="mangonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="6897" end="6903" title="Mohist" label="Mohist"/>
<link wikidata="Q272411" start="6979" end="6997" title="Mozi" label="&amp;quot;Mojing&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="7212" end="7217" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="7582" end="7588" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="7593" end="7599" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="7666" end="7672" title="Castle" label="Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="7688" end="7701" title="walled cities" label="walled cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="7760" end="7772" title="siege weapon" label="siege weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609860" start="7838" end="7857" title="Early thermal weapons" label="incendiary missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q815192" start="8040" end="8061" title="Siege of Paris (885–886)" label="Viking siege of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q219433" start="8346" end="8354" title="Ballista" label="Ballista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261384" start="8823" end="8832" title="Springald" label="Springald"/>
<link wikidata="Q921249" start="9089" end="9097" title="Mangonel" label="Mangonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19779" start="9514" end="9520" title="Onager (siege weapon)" label="Onager"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="10162" end="10171" title="Trebuchet" label="Trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q179537" start="10478" end="10488" title="Greek Fire" label="Greek Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="10749" end="10764" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681822" start="10839" end="10846" title="Warwolf" label="Warwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="10955" end="10964" title="Trebuchet" label="Couillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="11136" end="11153" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q773544" start="11256" end="11267" title="leaf spring" label="leaf spring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11274" end="11285" title=":wikt:accumulator" label="accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="11382" end="11395" title="bow and arrow" label="bow and arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="11984" end="11998" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12002" end="12013" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="12080" end="12092" title="hand grenade" label="hand grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q773403" start="12101" end="12119" title="no man&amp;#x27;s land" label="no man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="12180" end="12187" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="12373" end="12390" title="aircraft catapult" label="aircraft catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="12641" end="12649" title="Gaza war" label="Gaza war"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="12699" end="12702" title="Israel Defence Forces" label="IDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="12843" end="12852" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188631" start="12929" end="12939" title="vulcanized" label="vulcanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="12940" end="12946" title="natural rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q13672" start="13141" end="13151" title="slingshots" label="slingshots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130059" start="13258" end="13269" title="clay target" label="clay target"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130059" start="13300" end="13320" title="clay pigeon shooting" label="clay pigeon shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920860" start="14002" end="14018" title="Human cannonball" label="Human cannonball"/>
<link wikidata="Q47928" start="14019" end="14025" title="circus" label="circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q627421" start="14144" end="14167" title="launched roller coaster" label="launched roller coaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280423" start="14274" end="14286" title="Shuttle Loop" label="Shuttle Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q183576" start="14385" end="14393" title="flywheel" label="flywheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164566" start="14405" end="14417" title="linear motor" label="linear motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797273" start="14427" end="14443" title="Pumpkin chunking" label="Pumpkin chunking"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="14723" end="14730" title="Smuggling" label="smuggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="14731" end="14739" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="14879" end="14896" title="Aircraft catapult" label="Aircraft catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062753" start="14899" end="14914" title="Centrifugal gun" label="Centrifugal gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687850" start="14917" end="14938" title="List of siege engines" label="List of siege engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q921249" start="14941" end="14949" title="Mangonel" label="Mangonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q868705" start="14952" end="14963" title="Mass driver" label="Mass driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000012" start="14966" end="14991" title="National Catapult Contest" label="National Catapult Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q199771" start="14994" end="15008" title="Sling (weapon)" label="Sling (weapon)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15011" end="15015" title="SPBG" label="SPBG"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="15018" end="15027" title="Trebuchet" label="Trebuchet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="7066" wikidata="Q878026" url="?curid=7066" title="Cinquain">
<text>Cinquain is a class of poetic forms that employ a 5-line pattern. Earlier used to describe any five-line form, it now refers to one of several forms that are defined by specific rules and guidelines.

==American cinquain==
The modern form, known as American cinquain is inspired by Japanese haiku and tanka and is akin in spirit to that of the Imagists.

In her 1915 collection titled &quot;Verse&quot;, published a year after her death, Adelaide Crapsey included 28 cinquains. Crapsey&#x27;s American Cinquain form developed in two stages. The first, fundamental form is a stanza of five lines of accentual verse, in which the lines comprise, in order, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 1 stresses. Then Crapsey decided to make the criterion a stanza of five lines of accentual-syllabic verse, in which the lines comprise, in order, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 1 stresses and 2, 4, 6, 8, and 2 syllables. Iambic feet were meant to be the standard for the cinquain, which made the dual criteria match perfectly. Some resource materials define classic cinquains as solely iambic, but that is not necessarily so. In contrast to the Eastern forms upon which she based them, Crapsey always titled her cinquains, effectively utilizing the title as a sixth line. Crapsey&#x27;s cinquain depends on strict structure and intense physical imagery to communicate a mood or feeling.

The form is illustrated by Crapsey&#x27;s &quot;November Night&quot;:

Listen...&lt;br&gt;
With faint dry sound,&lt;br&gt;
Like steps of passing ghosts,&lt;br&gt;
The leaves, frost-crisp&#x27;d, break from the trees&lt;br&gt;
And fall.

The Scottish poet William Soutar also wrote over one hundred American cinquains (he labelled them &quot;epigrams&quot;) between 1933 and 1940.

==Cinquain variations==

The Crapsey cinquain has subsequently seen a number of variations by modern poets, including:

==Didactic cinquain==

The didactic cinquain is closely related to the Crapsey cinquain. It is an informal cinquain widely taught in elementary schools and has been featured in, and popularized by, children&#x27;s media resources, including &quot;Junie B. Jones&quot; and PBS Kids. This form is also embraced by young adults and older poets for its expressive simplicity. The prescriptions of this type of cinquain refer to word count, not syllables and stresses. Ordinarily, the first line is a one-word title, the subject of the poem; the second line is a pair of adjectives describing that title; the third line is a three-word phrase that gives more information about the subject (often a list of three gerunds); the fourth line consists of four words describing feelings related to that subject; and the fifth line is a single word synonym or other reference for the subject from line one.
For example:

Snow
Silent, white
Dancing, falling, drifting
Covering everything it touches
Blanket
==Other cinquains==
==See also==
* Quintain (poetry)
* Gogyōshi
* Poetry

==References==
==External links==
* Essay-Introduction to American cinquains</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q878026" start="0" end="8" title="Cinquain" label="Cinquain"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="23" end="29" title="Poetry" label="poetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37707" start="291" end="296" title="haiku" label="haiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q258331" start="301" end="306" title="tanka" label="tanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q746727" start="344" end="352" title="Imagism" label="Imagists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681702" start="438" end="454" title="Adelaide Crapsey" label="Adelaide Crapsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="672" end="680" title="Stress (linguistics)" label="stresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018623" start="1598" end="1612" title="William Soutar" label="William Soutar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313085" start="2091" end="2105" title="Junie B. Jones" label="Junie B. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245159" start="2116" end="2124" title="PBS Kids" label="PBS Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="2551" end="2557" title="gerund" label="gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065382" start="2873" end="2890" title="Quintain (poetry)" label="Quintain (poetry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279455" start="2893" end="2901" title="Gogyōshi" label="Gogyōshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="2904" end="2910" title="Poetry" label="Poetry"/>
</links>
</doc>
