<doc id="5530" wikidata="Q159535" url="?curid=5530" title="Conspiracy theory">
<text>A conspiracy theory is an explanation for an event or situation that asserts the existence of a conspiracy (generally by powerful sinister groups, often political in motivation), when other explanations are more probable. The term generally has a negative connotation, implying that the appeal of a conspiracy theory is based in prejudice, emotional conviction, or insufficient evidence. A conspiracy theory is distinct from a conspiracy; it refers to a hypothesized conspiracy with specific characteristics, including but not limited to opposition to the mainstream consensus among those who are qualified to evaluate its accuracy, such as scientists or historians.

Conspiracy theories tend to be internally consistent and correlate with each other; they are generally designed to resist falsification either by evidence against them or a lack of evidence for them. They are reinforced by circular reasoning: both evidence against the conspiracy &quot;and&quot; absence of evidence for it are misinterpreted as evidence of its truth. Stephan Lewandowsky observes &quot;This interpretation relies on the notion that, the stronger the evidence against a conspiracy, the more the conspirators must want people to believe their version of events.&quot; As a consequence, the conspiracy becomes a matter of faith rather than something that can be proven or disproven. Studies have linked belief in conspiracy theories to distrust of authority and political cynicism. Some researchers suggest that conspiracist ideation—belief in conspiracy theories—may be psychologically harmful or pathological. Such belief is correlated with psychological projection, paranoia, and Machiavellianism.

Psychologists usually attribute belief in conspiracy theories to a number of psychopathological conditions such as paranoia, schizotypy, narcissism, and insecure attachment, or to a form of cognitive bias called &quot;illusory pattern perception&quot;. It has also been linked with the so-called Dark triad personality types, whose common feature is lack of empathy. However, a 2020 review article found that most cognitive scientists view conspiracy theorizing as typically nonpathological, given that unfounded belief in conspiracy is common across both historical and contemporary cultures, and may arise from innate human tendencies towards gossip, group cohesion, and religion. One historical review of conspiracy theories concluded that &quot;Evidence suggests that the aversive feelings that people experience when in crisis—fear, uncertainty, and the feeling of being out of control—stimulate a motivation to make sense of the situation, increasing the likelihood of perceiving conspiracies in social situations.&quot;

Historically, conspiracy theories have been closely linked to prejudice, propaganda, witch hunts, wars, and genocides. They are often strongly believed by the perpetrators of terrorist attacks, and were used as justification by Timothy McVeigh and Anders Breivik, as well as by governments such as Nazi Germany, the Soviet Union, and Turkey. AIDS denialism by the government of South Africa, motivated by conspiracy theories, caused an estimated 330,000 deaths from AIDS. QAnon and denialism about the 2020 United States presidential election results led to the January 6 United States Capitol attack, and belief in conspiracy theories about genetically modified foods led the government of Zambia to reject food aid during a famine, at a time when three million people in the country were suffering from hunger. Conspiracy theories are a significant obstacle to improvements in public health, encouraging opposition to such public health measures as vaccination and water fluoridation. They have been linked to outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases. Other effects of conspiracy theories include reduced trust in scientific evidence, radicalization and ideological reinforcement of extremist groups, and negative consequences for the economy.

Conspiracy theories once limited to fringe audiences have become commonplace in mass media, the Internet, and social media, emerging as a cultural phenomenon of the late 20th and early 21st centuries. They are widespread around the world and are often commonly believed, some even held by the majority of the population. Interventions to reduce the occurrence of conspiracy beliefs include maintaining an open society, encouraging people to use analytical thinking, and reducing feelings of uncertainty, anxiety, or powerlessness.

== Origin and usage ==
The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; defines &quot;conspiracy theory&quot; as &quot;the theory that an event or phenomenon occurs as a result of a conspiracy between interested parties; &quot;spec.&quot; a belief that some covert but influential agency (typically political in motivation and oppressive in intent) is responsible for an unexplained event&quot;. It cites a 1909 article in &quot;The American Historical Review&quot; as the earliest usage example, although it also appeared in print for several decades before.

The earliest known usage was by the American author Charles Astor Bristed, in a letter to the editor published in &quot;The New York Times&quot; on 11 January 1863. He used it to refer to claims that British aristocrats were intentionally weakening the United States during the American Civil War in order to advance their financial interests.

The term is also used as a way to discredit dissenting analyses. Robert Blaskiewicz comments that examples of the term were used as early as the nineteenth century and states that its usage has always been derogatory. According to a study by Andrew McKenzie-McHarg, in contrast, in the nineteenth century the term &quot;conspiracy theory&quot; simply &quot;suggests a plausible postulate of a conspiracy&quot; and &quot;did not, at this stage, carry any connotations, either negative or positive&quot;, though sometimes a postulate so-labeled was criticized. The author and activist George Monbiot argued that the terms &quot;conspiracy theory&quot; and &quot;conspiracy theorist&quot; are misleading, as conspiracies truly exist and theories are &quot;rational explanations subject to disproof&quot;. Instead, he proposed the terms &quot;conspiracy fiction&quot; and &quot;conspiracy fantasist&quot;.

=== Alleged CIA origins ===
The term &quot;conspiracy theory&quot; is itself the subject of a conspiracy theory, which posits that the term was popularized by the CIA in order to discredit conspiratorial believers, particularly critics of the Warren Commission, by making them a target of ridicule. In his 2013 book &quot;Conspiracy Theory in America&quot;, the political scientist Lance deHaven-Smith wrote that the term entered everyday language in the United States after 1964, the year in which the Warren Commission published its findings on the assassination of John F. Kennedy, with &quot;The New York Times&quot; running five stories that year using the term.

Whether the CIA was responsible for popularising the term &quot;conspiracy theory&quot; was analyzed by Michael Butter, a Professor of American Literary and Cultural History at the University of Tübingen. Butter wrote in 2020 that the CIA document &quot;Concerning Criticism of the Warren Report&quot;, which proponents of the theory use as evidence of CIA motive and intention, does not contain the phrase &quot;conspiracy theory&quot; in the singular, and only uses the term &quot;conspiracy theories&quot; once, in the sentence: &quot;Conspiracy theories have frequently thrown suspicion on our organisation , for example, by falsely alleging that Lee Harvey Oswald worked for us.&quot;

==Difference from conspiracy==
A conspiracy theory is not simply a conspiracy, which refers to any covert plan involving two or more people. In contrast, the term &quot;conspiracy theory&quot; refers to &quot;hypothesized&quot; conspiracies that have specific characteristics. For example, conspiracist beliefs invariably oppose the mainstream consensus among those people who are qualified to evaluate their accuracy, such as scientists or historians. Conspiracy theorists see themselves as having privileged access to socially persecuted knowledge or a stigmatized mode of thought that separates them from the masses who believe the official account. Michael Barkun describes a conspiracy theory as a &quot;template imposed upon the world to give the appearance of order to events&quot;.

Real conspiracies, even very simple ones, are difficult to conceal and routinely experience unexpected problems. In contrast, conspiracy theories suggest that conspiracies are unrealistically successful and that groups of conspirators, such as bureaucracies, can act with near-perfect competence and secrecy. The causes of events or situations are simplified to exclude complex or interacting factors, as well as the role of chance and unintended consequences. Nearly all observations are explained as having been deliberately planned by the alleged conspirators.

In conspiracy theories, the conspirators are usually claimed to be acting with extreme malice. As described by Robert Brotherton:

==Examples==
A conspiracy theory may take any matter as its subject, but certain subjects attract greater interest than others. Favored subjects include famous deaths and assassinations, morally dubious government activities, suppressed technologies, and &quot;false flag&quot; terrorism. Among the longest-standing and most widely recognized conspiracy theories are notions concerning the assassination of John F. Kennedy, the 1969 Apollo Moon landings, and the 9/11 terrorist attacks, as well as numerous theories pertaining to alleged plots for world domination by various groups, both real and imaginary.

==Popularity==
Conspiracy beliefs are widespread around the world. In rural Africa, common targets of conspiracy theorizing include societal elites, enemy tribes, and the Western world, with conspirators often alleged to enact their plans via sorcery or witchcraft; one common belief identifies modern technology as itself being a form of sorcery, created with the goal of harming or controlling the people. In China, one widely published conspiracy theory claims that a number of events including the rise of Hitler, the 1997 Asian financial crisis, and climate change were planned by the Rothschild family, which may have led to effects on discussions about China&#x27;s currency policy.

Conspiracy theories once limited to fringe audiences have become commonplace in mass media, contributing to conspiracism emerging as a cultural phenomenon in the United States of the late 20th and early 21st centuries. The general predisposition to believe conspiracy theories cuts across partisan and ideological lines. Conspiratorial thinking is correlated with antigovernmental orientations and a low sense of political efficacy, with conspiracy believers perceiving a governmental threat to individual rights and displaying a deep skepticism that who one votes for really matters.

Conspiracy theories are often commonly believed, some even being held by the majority of the population. A broad cross-section of Americans today gives credence to at least some conspiracy theories. For instance, a study conducted in 2016 found that 10% of Americans think the chemtrail conspiracy theory is &quot;completely true&quot; and 20–30% think it is &quot;somewhat true&quot;. This puts &quot;the equivalent of 120 million Americans in the &#x27;chemtrails are real&#x27; camp&quot;. Belief in conspiracy theories has therefore become a topic of interest for sociologists, psychologists and experts in folklore.

Conspiracy theories are widely present on the Web in the form of blogs and YouTube videos, as well as on social media. Whether the Web has increased the prevalence of conspiracy theories or not is an open research question. The presence and representation of conspiracy theories in search engine results has been monitored and studied, showing significant variation across different topics, and a general absence of reputable, high-quality links in the results.

One conspiracy theory that propagated through former US President Barack Obama&#x27;s time in office claimed that he was born in Kenya, instead of Hawaii where he was actually born. Former governor of Arkansas and political opponent of Obama Mike Huckabee made headlines in 2011 when he, among other members of Republican leadership, continued to question Obama&#x27;s citizenship status.

==Types==
A conspiracy theory can be local or international, focused on single events or covering multiple incidents and entire countries, regions and periods of history. According to Russell Muirhead and Nancy Rosenblum, historically, traditional conspiracism has entailed a &quot;theory&quot;, but over time, &quot;conspiracy&quot; and &quot;theory&quot; have become decoupled, as modern conspiracism is often without any kind of theory behind it.

===Walker&#x27;s five kinds===
Jesse Walker (2013) has identified five kinds of conspiracy theories:

* The &quot;Enemy Outside&quot; refers to theories based on figures alleged to be scheming against a community from without.
* The &quot;Enemy Within&quot; finds the conspirators lurking inside the nation, indistinguishable from ordinary citizens.
* The &quot;Enemy Above&quot; involves powerful people manipulating events for their own gain.
* The &quot;Enemy Below&quot; features the lower classes working to overturn the social order.
* The &quot;Benevolent Conspiracies&quot; are angelic forces that work behind the scenes to improve the world and help people.

===Barkun&#x27;s three types===
Michael Barkun has identified three classifications of conspiracy theory:

* &quot;Event conspiracy theories&quot;. This refers to limited and well-defined events. Examples may include such conspiracies theories as those concerning the Kennedy assassination, 9/11, and the spread of AIDS.
* &quot;Systemic conspiracy theories&quot;. The conspiracy is believed to have broad goals, usually conceived as securing control of a country, a region, or even the entire world. The goals are sweeping, whilst the conspiratorial machinery is generally simple: a single, evil organization implements a plan to infiltrate and subvert existing institutions. This is a common scenario in conspiracy theories that focus on the alleged machinations of Jews, Freemasons, Communism, or the Catholic Church.
* &quot;Superconspiracy theories&quot;. For Barkun, such theories link multiple alleged conspiracies together hierarchically. At the summit is a distant but all-powerful evil force. His cited examples are the ideas of David Icke and Milton William Cooper.

===Rothbard: shallow vs. deep===
Murray Rothbard argues in favor of a model that contrasts &quot;deep&quot; conspiracy theories to &quot;shallow&quot; ones. According to Rothbard, a &quot;shallow&quot; theorist observes an event and asks &quot;Cui bono?&quot; (&quot;Who benefits?&quot;), jumping to the conclusion that a posited beneficiary is responsible for covertly influencing events. On the other hand, the &quot;deep&quot; conspiracy theorist begins with a hunch and then seeks out evidence. Rothbard describes this latter activity as a matter of confirming with certain facts one&#x27;s initial paranoia.

==Lack of evidence==
Belief in conspiracy theories is generally based not on evidence, but in the faith of the believer. Noam Chomsky contrasts conspiracy theory to institutional analysis which focuses mostly on the public, long-term behavior of publicly known institutions, as recorded in, for example, scholarly documents or mainstream media reports. Conspiracy theory conversely posits the existence of secretive coalitions of individuals and speculates on their alleged activities. Belief in conspiracy theories is associated with biases in reasoning, such as the conjunction fallacy.

Clare Birchall at King&#x27;s College London describes conspiracy theory as a &quot;form of popular knowledge or interpretation&quot;. The use of the word &#x27;knowledge&#x27; here suggests ways in which conspiracy theory may be considered in relation to legitimate modes of knowing. The relationship between legitimate and illegitimate knowledge, Birchall claims, is closer than common dismissals of conspiracy theory contend.

Theories involving multiple conspirators that are proven to be correct, such as the Watergate scandal, are usually referred to as investigative journalism or historical analysis rather than conspiracy theory. Bjerg (2016) writes: &quot;the way we normally use
the term conspiracy theory excludes instances where the theory has been
generally accepted as true. The Watergate scandal serves as the standard
reference.&quot; By contrast, the term &quot;Watergate conspiracy theory&quot; is used to refer to a variety of hypotheses in which those convicted in the conspiracy were in fact the victims of a deeper conspiracy. There are also attempts to analyze the theory of conspiracy theories (conspiracy theory theory) to ensure that the term &quot;conspiracy theory&quot; is used to refer to narratives that have been debunked by experts, rather than as a generalized dismissal.

==Rhetoric==

Conspiracy theory rhetoric exploits several important cognitive biases, including proportionality bias, attribution bias, and confirmation bias. Their arguments often take the form of asking reasonable questions, but without providing an answer based on strong evidence. Conspiracy theories are most successful when proponents can gather followers from the general public, such as in politics, religion and journalism. These proponents may not necessarily believe the conspiracy theory; instead, they may just use it in an attempt to gain public approval. Conspiratorial claims can act as a successful rhetorical strategy to convince a portion of the public via appeal to emotion.

Conspiracy theories typically justify themselves by focusing on gaps or ambiguities in knowledge, and then arguing that the true explanation for this must be a conspiracy. In contrast, any evidence that directly supports their claims is generally of low quality. For example, conspiracy theories are often dependent on eyewitness testimony, despite its unreliability, while disregarding objective analyses of the evidence.

Conspiracy theories are not able to be falsified and are reinforced by fallacious arguments. In particular, the logical fallacy circular reasoning is used by conspiracy theorists: both evidence against the conspiracy and an absence of evidence for it are re-interpreted as evidence of its truth, whereby the conspiracy becomes a matter of faith rather than something that can be proved or disproved. The epistemic strategy of conspiracy theories has been called &quot;cascade logic&quot;: each time new evidence becomes available, a conspiracy theory is able to dismiss it by claiming that even more people must be part of the cover-up. Any information that contradicts the conspiracy theory is suggested to be disinformation by the alleged conspiracy. Similarly, the continued lack of evidence directly supporting conspiracist claims is portrayed as confirming the existence of a conspiracy of silence; the fact that other people have not found or exposed any conspiracy is taken as evidence that those people are part of the plot, rather than considering that it may be because no conspiracy exists. This strategy lets conspiracy theories insulate themselves from neutral analyses of the evidence, and makes them resistant to questioning or correction, which is called &quot;epistemic self-insulation&quot;.
Conspiracy theorists often take advantage of false balance in the media. They may claim to be presenting a legitimate alternative viewpoint that deserves equal time to argue its case; for example, this strategy has been used by the Teach the Controversy campaign to promote intelligent design, which often claims that there is a conspiracy of scientists suppressing their views. If they successfully find a platform to present their views in a debate format, they focus on using rhetorical &quot;ad hominems&quot; and attacking perceived flaws in the mainstream account, while avoiding any discussion of the shortcomings in their own position.

The typical approach of conspiracy theories is to challenge any action or statement from authorities, using even the most tenuous justifications. Responses are then assessed using a double standard, where failing to provide an immediate response to the satisfaction of the conspiracy theorist will be claimed to prove a conspiracy. Any minor errors in the response are heavily emphasized, while deficiencies in the arguments of other proponents are generally excused.

In science, conspiracists may suggest that a scientific theory can be disproven by a single perceived deficiency, even though such events are extremely rare. In addition, both disregarding the claims and attempting to address them will be interpreted as proof of a conspiracy. Other conspiracist arguments may not be scientific; for example, in response to the IPCC Second Assessment Report in 1996, much of the opposition centered on promoting a procedural objection to the report&#x27;s creation. Specifically, it was claimed that part of the procedure reflected a conspiracy to silence dissenters, which served as motivation for opponents of the report and successfully redirected a significant amount of the public discussion away from the science.

==Consequences==

Historically, conspiracy theories have been closely linked to prejudice, witch hunts, wars, and genocides. They are often strongly believed by the perpetrators of terrorist attacks, and were used as justification by Timothy McVeigh, Anders Breivik and Brenton Tarrant, as well as by governments such as Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. AIDS denialism by the government of South Africa, motivated by conspiracy theories, caused an estimated 330,000 deaths from AIDS, while belief in conspiracy theories about genetically modified foods led the government of Zambia to reject food aid during a famine, at a time when 3 million people in the country were suffering from hunger.

Conspiracy theories are a significant obstacle to improvements in public health. People who believe in health-related conspiracy theories are less likely to follow medical advice, and more likely to use alternative medicine instead. Conspiratorial anti-vaccination beliefs, such as conspiracy theories about pharmaceutical companies, can result in reduced vaccination rates and have been linked to outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases. Health-related conspiracy theories often inspire resistance to water fluoridation, and contributed to the impact of the Lancet MMR autism fraud.

Conspiracy theories are a fundamental component of a wide range of radicalized and extremist groups, where they may play an important role in reinforcing the ideology and psychology of their members as well as further radicalizing their beliefs. These conspiracy theories often share common themes, even among groups that would otherwise be fundamentally opposed, such as the antisemitic conspiracy theories found among political extremists on both the far right and far left. More generally, belief in conspiracy theories is associated with holding extreme and uncompromising viewpoints, and may help people in maintaining those viewpoints. While conspiracy theories are not always present in extremist groups, and do not always lead to violence when they are, they can make the group more extreme, provide an enemy to direct hatred towards, and isolate members from the rest of society. Conspiracy theories are most likely to inspire violence when they call for urgent action, appeal to prejudices, or demonize and scapegoat enemies.

Conspiracy theorizing in the workplace can also have economic consequences. For example, it leads to lower job satisfaction and lower commitment, resulting in workers being more likely to leave their jobs. Comparisons have also been made with the effects of workplace rumors, which share some characteristics with conspiracy theories and result in both decreased productivity and increased stress. Subsequent effects on managers include reduced profits, reduced trust from employees, and damage to the company&#x27;s image.

Conspiracy theories can divert attention from important social, political, and scientific issues. In addition, they have been used to discredit scientific evidence to the general public or in a legal context. Conspiratorial strategies also share characteristics with those used by lawyers who are attempting to discredit expert testimony, such as claiming that the experts have ulterior motives in testifying, or attempting to find someone who will provide statements to imply that expert opinion is more divided than it actually is.

It is possible that conspiracy theories may also produce some compensatory benefits to society in certain situations. For example, they may help people identify governmental deceptions, particularly in repressive societies, and encourage government transparency. However, real conspiracies are normally revealed by people working within the system, such as whistleblowers and journalists, and most of the effort spent by conspiracy theorists is inherently misdirected. The most dangerous conspiracy theories are likely to be those that incite violence, scapegoat disadvantaged groups, or spread misinformation about important societal issues.

==Interventions==
===Target audience===
Strategies to address conspiracy theories have been divided into two categories based on whether the target audience is the conspiracy theorists or the general public. These strategies have been described as reducing either the supply or the demand for conspiracy theories. Both approaches can be used at the same time, although there may be issues of limited resources, or if arguments are used which may appeal to one audience at the expense of the other.

Brief scientific literacy interventions, particularly those focusing on critical thinking skills, can effectively undermine conspiracy beliefs and related behaviors. Research led by Penn State scholars, published in the &quot;Journal of Consumer Research&quot;, found that enhancing scientific knowledge and reasoning through short interventions, such as videos explaining concepts like correlation and causation, reduces the endorsement of conspiracy theories. These interventions were most effective against conspiracy theories based on faulty reasoning and were successful even among groups prone to conspiracy beliefs. The studies, involving over 2,700 participants, highlight the importance of educational interventions in mitigating conspiracy beliefs, especially when timed to influence critical decision-making.

====General public====
People who feel empowered are more resistant to conspiracy theories. Methods to promote empowerment include encouraging people to use analytical thinking, priming people to think of situations where they are in control, and ensuring that decisions by society and government are seen to follow procedural fairness (the use of fair decision-making procedures).

Methods of refutation which have shown effectiveness in various circumstances include: providing facts that demonstrate the conspiracy theory is false, attempting to discredit the source, explaining how the logic is invalid or misleading, and providing links to fact-checking websites. It can also be effective to use these strategies in advance, informing people that they could encounter misleading information in the future, and why the information should be rejected (also called inoculation or prebunking). While it has been suggested that discussing conspiracy theories can raise their profile and make them seem more legitimate to the public, the discussion can put people on guard instead as long as it is sufficiently persuasive.

Other approaches to reduce the appeal of conspiracy theories in general among the public may be based in the emotional and social nature of conspiratorial beliefs. For example, interventions that promote analytical thinking in the general public are likely to be effective. Another approach is to intervene in ways that decrease negative emotions, and specifically to improve feelings of personal hope and empowerment.

====Conspiracy theorists====
It is much more difficult to convince people who already believe in conspiracy theories. Conspiracist belief systems are not based on external evidence, but instead use circular logic where every belief is supported by other conspiracist beliefs. In addition, conspiracy theories have a &quot;self-sealing&quot; nature, in which the types of arguments used to support them make them resistant to questioning from others.

Characteristics of successful strategies for reaching conspiracy theorists have been divided into several broad categories: 1) Arguments can be presented by &quot;trusted messengers&quot;, such as people who were formerly members of an extremist group. 2) Since conspiracy theorists think of themselves as people who value critical thinking, this can be affirmed and then redirected to encourage being more critical when analyzing the conspiracy theory. 3) Approaches demonstrate empathy, and are based on building understanding together, which is supported by modeling open-mindedness in order to encourage the conspiracy theorists to do likewise. 4) The conspiracy theories are not attacked with ridicule or aggressive deconstruction, and interactions are not treated like an argument to be won; this approach can work with the general public, but among conspiracy theorists it may simply be rejected.

Interventions that reduce feelings of uncertainty, anxiety, or powerlessness result in a reduction in conspiracy beliefs. Other possible strategies to mitigate the effect of conspiracy theories include education, media literacy, and increasing governmental openness and transparency. Due to the relationship between conspiracy theories and political extremism, the academic literature on deradicalization is also important.

One approach describes conspiracy theories as resulting from a &quot;crippled epistemology&quot;, in which a person encounters or accepts very few relevant sources of information. A conspiracy theory is more likely to appear justified to people with a limited &quot;informational environment&quot; who only encounter misleading information. These people may be &quot;epistemologically isolated&quot; in self-enclosed networks. From the perspective of people within these networks, disconnected from the information available to the rest of society, believing in conspiracy theories may appear to be justified. In these cases, the solution would be to break the group&#x27;s informational isolation.

===Reducing transmission===
Public exposure to conspiracy theories can be reduced by interventions that reduce their ability to spread, such as by encouraging people to reflect before sharing a news story. Researchers Carlos Diaz Ruiz and Tomas Nilsson have proposed technical and rhetorical interventions to counter the spread of conspiracy theories on social media.
===Government policies===
The primary defense against conspiracy theories is to maintain an open society, in which many sources of reliable information are available, and government sources are known to be credible rather than propaganda. Additionally, independent nongovernmental organizations are able to correct misinformation without requiring people to trust the government. The absence of civil rights and civil liberties reduces the number of information sources available to the population, which may lead people to support conspiracy theories. Since the credibility of conspiracy theories can be increased if governments act dishonestly or otherwise engage in objectionable actions, avoiding such actions is also a relevant strategy.

Joseph Pierre has said that mistrust in authoritative institutions is the core component underlying many conspiracy theories and that this mistrust creates an epistemic vacuum and makes individuals searching for answers vulnerable to misinformation. Therefore, one possible solution is offering consumers a seat at the table to mend their mistrust in institutions. Regarding the challenges of this approach, Pierre has said, &quot;The challenge with acknowledging areas of uncertainty within a public sphere is that doing so can be weaponized to reinforce a post-truth view of the world in which everything is debatable, and any counter-position is just as valid. Although I like to think of myself as a middle of the road kind of individual, it is important to keep in mind that the truth does not always lie in the middle of a debate, whether we are talking about climate change, vaccines, or antipsychotic medications.&quot;

Researchers have recommended that public policies should take into account the possibility of conspiracy theories relating to any policy or policy area, and prepare to combat them in advance. Conspiracy theories have suddenly arisen in the context of policy issues as disparate as land-use laws and bicycle-sharing programs. In the case of public communications by government officials, factors that improve the effectiveness of communication include using clear and simple messages, and using messengers which are trusted by the target population. Government information about conspiracy theories is more likely to be believed if the messenger is perceived as being part of someone&#x27;s in-group. Official representatives may be more effective if they share characteristics with the target groups, such as ethnicity.

In addition, when the government communicates with citizens to combat conspiracy theories, online methods are more efficient compared to other methods such as print publications. This also promotes transparency, can improve a message&#x27;s perceived trustworthiness, and is more effective at reaching underrepresented demographics. However, , many governmental websites do not take full advantage of the available information-sharing opportunities. Similarly, social media accounts need to be used effectively in order to achieve meaningful communication with the public, such as by responding to requests that citizens send to those accounts. Other steps include adapting messages to the communication styles used on the social media platform in question, and promoting a culture of openness. Since mixed messaging can support conspiracy theories, it is also important to avoid conflicting accounts, such as by ensuring the accuracy of messages on the social media accounts of individual members of the organization.

===Public health campaigns===

Successful methods for dispelling conspiracy theories have been studied in the context of public health campaigns. A key characteristic of communication strategies to address medical conspiracy theories is the use of techniques that rely less on emotional appeals. It is more effective to use methods that encourage people to process information rationally. The use of visual aids is also an essential part of these strategies. Since conspiracy theories are based on intuitive thinking, and visual information processing relies on intuition, visual aids are able to compete directly for the public&#x27;s attention.

In public health campaigns, information retention by the public is highest for loss-framed messages that include more extreme outcomes. However, excessively appealing to catastrophic scenarios (e.g. low vaccination rates causing an epidemic) may provoke anxiety, which is associated with conspiracism and could increase belief in conspiracy theories instead. Scare tactics have sometimes had mixed results, but are generally considered ineffective. An example of this is the use of images that showcase disturbing health outcomes, such as the impact of smoking on dental health. One possible explanation is that information processed via the fear response is typically not evaluated rationally, which may prevent the message from being linked to the desired behaviors.

A particularly important technique is the use of focus groups to understand exactly what people believe, and the reasons they give for those beliefs. This allows messaging to focus on the specific concerns that people identify, and on topics that are easily misinterpreted by the public, since these are factors which conspiracy theories can take advantage of. In addition, discussions with focus groups and observations of the group dynamics can indicate which anti-conspiracist ideas are most likely to spread.

Interventions that address medical conspiracy theories by reducing powerlessness include emphasizing the principle of informed consent, giving patients all the relevant information without imposing decisions on them, to ensure that they have a sense of control. Improving access to healthcare also reduces medical conspiracism. However, doing so by political efforts can also fuel additional conspiracy theories, which occurred with the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) in the United States. Another successful strategy is to require people to watch a short video when they fulfil requirements such as registration for school or a drivers&#x27; license, which has been demonstrated to improve vaccination rates and signups for organ donation.

Another approach is based on viewing conspiracy theories as narratives which express personal and cultural values, making them less susceptible to straightforward factual corrections, and more effectively addressed by counter-narratives. Counter-narratives can be more engaging and memorable than simple corrections, and can be adapted to the specific values held by individuals and cultures. These narratives may depict personal experiences, or alternatively they can be cultural narratives. In the context of vaccination, examples of cultural narratives include stories about scientific breakthroughs, about the world before vaccinations, or about heroic and altruistic researchers. The themes to be addressed would be those that could be exploited by conspiracy theories to increase vaccine hesitancy, such as perceptions of vaccine risk, lack of patient empowerment, and lack of trust in medical authorities.

===Backfire effects===
It has been suggested that directly countering misinformation can be counterproductive. For example, since conspiracy theories can reinterpret disconfirming information as part of their narrative, refuting a claim can result in accidentally reinforcing it, which is referred to as a &quot;backfire effect&quot;. In addition, publishing criticism of conspiracy theories can result in legitimizing them. In this context, possible interventions include carefully selecting which conspiracy theories to refute, requesting additional analyses from independent observers, and introducing cognitive diversity into conspiratorial communities by undermining their poor epistemology. Any legitimization effect might also be reduced by responding to more conspiracy theories rather than fewer.

There are psychological mechanisms by which backfire effects could potentially occur, but the evidence on this topic is mixed, and backfire effects are very rare in practice. A 2020 review of the scientific literature on backfire effects found that there have been widespread failures to replicate their existence, even under conditions that would be theoretically favorable to observing them. Due to the lack of reproducibility, most researchers believe that backfire effects are either unlikely to occur on the broader population level, or they only occur in very specific circumstances, or they do not exist. Brendan Nyhan, one of the researchers who initially proposed the occurrence of backfire effects, wrote in 2021 that the persistence of misinformation is most likely due to other factors.

In general, people do reject conspiracy theories when they learn about their contradictions and lack of evidence. For most people, corrections and fact-checking are very unlikely to have a negative impact, and there is no specific group of people in which backfire effects have been consistently observed. Presenting people with factual corrections, or highlighting the logical contradictions in conspiracy theories, has been demonstrated to have a positive effect in many circumstances. For example, this has been studied in the case of informing believers in 9/11 conspiracy theories about statements by actual experts and witnesses. One possibility is that criticism is most likely to backfire if it challenges someone&#x27;s worldview or identity. This suggests that an effective approach may be to provide criticism while avoiding such challenges.

== Psychology ==
The widespread belief in conspiracy theories has become a topic of interest for sociologists, psychologists, and experts in folklore since at least the 1960s, when a number of conspiracy theories arose regarding the assassination of U.S. President John F. Kennedy. Sociologist Türkay Salim Nefes underlines the political nature of conspiracy theories. He suggests that one of the most important characteristics of these accounts is their attempt to unveil the &quot;real but hidden&quot; power relations in social groups. The term &quot;conspiracism&quot; was popularized by academic Frank P. Mintz in the 1980s. According to Mintz, conspiracism denotes &quot;belief in the primacy of conspiracies in the unfolding of history&quot;:

Research suggests, on a psychological level, conspiracist ideation—belief in conspiracy theories—can be harmful or pathological, and is highly correlated with psychological projection, as well as with paranoia, which is predicted by the degree of a person&#x27;s Machiavellianism. The propensity to believe in conspiracy theories is strongly associated with the mental health disorder of schizotypy. Conspiracy theories once limited to fringe audiences have become commonplace in mass media, emerging as a cultural phenomenon of the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Exposure to conspiracy theories in news media and popular entertainment increases receptiveness to conspiratorial ideas, and has also increased the social acceptability of fringe beliefs.

Conspiracy theories often make use of complicated and detailed arguments, including ones which appear to be analytical or scientific. However, belief in conspiracy theories is primarily driven by emotion. One of the most widely confirmed facts about conspiracy theories is that belief in a single conspiracy theory tends be correlated with belief in other conspiracy theories. This even applies when the conspiracy theories directly contradict each other, e.g. believing that Osama bin Laden was already dead before his compound in Pakistan was attacked makes the same person more likely to believe that he is still alive. One conclusion from this finding is that the content of a conspiracist belief is less important than the idea of a coverup by the authorities. Analytical thinking aids in reducing belief in conspiracy theories, in part because it emphasizes rational and critical cognition.

Some psychological scientists assert that explanations related to conspiracy theories can be, and often are &quot;internally consistent&quot; with strong beliefs that had previously been held prior to the event that sparked the conspiracy. People who believe in conspiracy theories tend to believe in other unsubstantiated claims – including pseudoscience and paranormal phenomena.

===Attractions===

Psychological motives for believing in conspiracy theories can be categorized as epistemic, existential, or social. These motives are particularly acute in vulnerable and disadvantaged populations. However, it does not appear that the beliefs help to address these motives; in fact, they may be self-defeating, acting to make the situation worse instead. For example, while conspiratorial beliefs can result from a perceived sense of powerlessness, exposure to conspiracy theories immediately suppresses personal feelings of autonomy and control. Furthermore, they also make people less likely to take actions that could improve their circumstances.

This is additionally supported by the fact that conspiracy theories have a number of disadvantageous attributes. For example, they promote a negative and distrustful view of other people and groups, who are allegedly acting based on antisocial and cynical motivations. This is expected to lead to increased alienation and anomie, and reduced social capital. Similarly, they depict the public as ignorant and powerless against the alleged conspirators, with important aspects of society determined by malevolent forces, a viewpoint which is likely to be disempowering.

Each person may endorse conspiracy theories for one of many different reasons. The most consistently demonstrated characteristics of people who find conspiracy theories appealing are a feeling of alienation, unhappiness or dissatisfaction with their situation, an unconventional worldview, and a feeling of disempowerment. While various aspects of personality affect susceptibility to conspiracy theories, none of the Big Five personality traits are associated with conspiracy beliefs.

The political scientist Michael Barkun, discussing the usage of &quot;conspiracy theory&quot; in contemporary American culture, holds that this term is used for a belief that explains an event as the result of a secret plot by exceptionally powerful and cunning conspirators to achieve a malevolent end. According to Barkun, the appeal of conspiracism is threefold:

This third point is supported by research of Roland Imhoff, professor of social psychology at the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz. The research suggests that the smaller the minority believing in a specific theory, the more attractive it is to conspiracy theorists. Humanistic psychologists argue that even if a posited cabal behind an alleged conspiracy is almost always perceived as hostile, there often remains an element of reassurance for theorists. This is because it is a consolation to imagine that difficulties in human affairs are created by humans, and remain within human control. If a cabal can be implicated, there may be a hope of breaking its power or of joining it. Belief in the power of a cabal is an implicit assertion of human dignity—an unconscious affirmation that man is responsible for his own destiny.

People formulate conspiracy theories to explain, for example, power relations in social groups and the perceived existence of evil forces. Proposed psychological origins of conspiracy theorising include projection; the personal need to explain &quot;a significant event [with] a significant cause;&quot; and the product of various kinds and stages of thought disorder, such as paranoid disposition, ranging in severity to diagnosable mental illnesses. Some people prefer socio-political explanations over the insecurity of encountering random, unpredictable, or otherwise inexplicable events. According to Berlet and Lyons, &quot;Conspiracism is a particular narrative form of scapegoating that frames demonized enemies as part of a vast insidious plot against the common good, while it valorizes the scapegoater as a hero for sounding the alarm&quot;.

===Causes===
Some psychologists believe that a search for meaning is common in conspiracism. Once cognized, confirmation bias and avoidance of cognitive dissonance may reinforce the belief. In a context where a conspiracy theory has become embedded within a social group, communal reinforcement may also play a part.

Inquiry into possible motives behind the accepting of irrational conspiracy theories has linked these beliefs to distress resulting from an event that occurred, such as the events of 9/11. Additional research suggests that &quot;delusional ideation&quot; is the trait most likely to indicate a stronger belief in conspiracy theories. Research also shows an increased attachment to these irrational beliefs leads to a decreased desire for civic engagement. Belief in conspiracy theories is correlated with low intelligence, lower analytical thinking, anxiety disorders, paranoia, and authoritarian beliefs.

Professor Quassim Cassam argues that conspiracy theorists hold their beliefs due to flaws in their thinking and more precisely, their intellectual character. He cites philosopher Linda Trinkaus Zagzebski and her book &quot;Virtues of the Mind&quot; in outlining intellectual virtues (such as humility, caution and carefulness) and intellectual vices (such as gullibility, carelessness and closed-mindedness). Whereas intellectual virtues help in reaching sound examination, intellectual vices &quot;impede effective and responsible inquiry&quot;, meaning that those who are prone to believing in conspiracy theories possess certain vices while lacking necessary virtues.

Some researchers have suggested that conspiracy theories could be partially caused by psychological mechanisms the human brain possesses for detecting dangerous coalitions. Such a mechanism could have been useful in the small-scale environment humanity evolved in but are mismatched in a modern, complex society and thus &quot;misfire&quot;, perceiving conspiracies where none exist.

====Projection====
Some historians have argued that psychological projection is prevalent amongst conspiracy theorists. This projection, according to the argument, is manifested in the form of attribution of undesirable characteristics of the self to the conspirators. Historian Richard Hofstadter stated that:

Hofstadter also noted that &quot;sexual freedom&quot; is a vice frequently attributed to the conspiracist&#x27;s target group, noting that &quot;very often the fantasies of true believers reveal strong sadomasochistic outlets, vividly expressed, for example, in the delight of anti-Masons with the cruelty of Masonic punishments&quot;.

====Physiology====
Marcel Danesi suggests that people who believe conspiracy theories have difficulty rethinking situations. Exposure to those theories has caused neural pathways which are more rigid and less subject to change. Initial susceptibility to believing the lies, dehumanizing language, and metaphors of these theories leads to the acceptance of larger and more extensive theories because the hardened neural pathways are already present. Repetition of the &quot;facts&quot; of conspiracy theories and their connected lies simply reinforces the rigidity of those pathways. Thus, conspiracy theories and dehumanizing lies are not mere hyperbole, they can actually change the way people think:

==Sociology==
In addition to psychological factors such as conspiracist ideation, sociological factors also help account for who believes in which conspiracy theories. Such theories tend to get more traction among election losers in society, for example, and the emphasis of conspiracy theories by elites and leaders tends to increase belief among followers who have higher levels of conspiracy thinking. Christopher Hitchens described conspiracy theories as the &quot;exhaust fumes of democracy&quot;: the unavoidable result of a large amount of information circulating among a large number of people.

Conspiracy theories may be emotionally satisfying, by assigning blame to a group to which the theorist does not belong and so absolving the theorist of moral or political responsibility in society. Likewise, Roger Cohen writing for &quot;The New York Times&quot; has said that, &quot;captive minds; ... resort to conspiracy theory because it is the ultimate refuge of the powerless. If you cannot change your own life, it must be that some greater force controls the world.&quot;

Sociological historian Holger Herwig found in studying German explanations for the origins of World War I, &quot;Those events that are most important are hardest to understand because they attract the greatest attention from myth makers and charlatans.&quot; Justin Fox of &quot;Time&quot; magazine argues that Wall Street traders are among the most conspiracy-minded group of people, and ascribes this to the reality of some financial market conspiracies, and to the ability of conspiracy theories to provide necessary orientation in the market&#x27;s day-to-day movements.

===Influence of critical theory===

Bruno Latour notes that the language and intellectual tactics of critical theory have been appropriated by those he describes as conspiracy theorists, including climate-change denialists and the 9/11 Truth movement: &quot;Maybe I am taking conspiracy theories too seriously, but I am worried to detect, in those mad mixtures of knee-jerk disbelief, punctilious demands for proofs, and free use of powerful explanation from the social neverland, many of the weapons of social critique.&quot;

===Fusion paranoia===
Michael Kelly, a &quot;Washington Post&quot; journalist and critic of anti-war movements on both the left and right, coined the term &quot;fusion paranoia&quot; to refer to a political convergence of left-wing and right-wing activists around anti-war issues and civil liberties, which he said were motivated by a shared belief in conspiracism or shared anti-government views.

Barkun has adopted this term to refer to how the synthesis of paranoid conspiracy theories, which were once limited to American fringe audiences, has given them mass appeal and enabled them to become commonplace in mass media, thereby inaugurating an unrivaled period of people actively preparing for apocalyptic or millenarian scenarios in the United States of the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Barkun notes the occurrence of lone-wolf conflicts with law enforcement acting as proxy for threatening the established political powers.

==Viability ==
As evidence that undermines an alleged conspiracy grows, the number of alleged conspirators also grows in the minds of conspiracy theorists. This is because of an assumption that the alleged conspirators often have competing interests. For example, if Republican President George W. Bush is allegedly responsible for the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and the Democratic party did not pursue exposing this alleged plot, that must mean that both the Democratic and Republican parties are conspirators in the alleged plot. It also assumes that the alleged conspirators are so competent that they can fool the entire world, but so incompetent that even the unskilled conspiracy theorists can find mistakes they make that prove the fraud. At some point, the number of alleged conspirators, combined with the contradictions within the alleged conspirators&#x27; interests and competence, becomes so great that maintaining the theory becomes an obvious exercise in absurdity.

The physicist David Robert Grimes estimated the time it would take for a conspiracy to be exposed based on the number of people involved. His calculations used data from the PRISM surveillance program, the Tuskegee syphilis experiment, and the FBI forensic scandal. Grimes estimated that:
* A Moon landing hoax would require the involvement of 411,000 people and would be exposed within 3.68 years;
* Climate-change fraud would require a minimum of 29,083 people (published climate scientists only) and would be exposed within 26.77 years, or up to 405,000 people, in which case it would be exposed within 3.70 years;
* A vaccination conspiracy would require a minimum of 22,000 people (without drug companies) and would be exposed within at least 3.15 years and at most 34.78 years depending on the number involved;
* A conspiracy to suppress a cure for cancer would require 714,000 people and would be exposed within 3.17 years.
Grimes&#x27;s study did not consider exposure by sources outside of the alleged conspiracy. It only considered exposure from within the alleged conspiracy through whistleblowers or through incompetence. Subsequent comments on the PubPeer website point out that these calculations must exclude successful conspiracies since, by definition, we don&#x27;t know about them, and are wrong by an order of magnitude about Bletchley Park, which remained a secret far longer than Grimes&#x27; calculations predicted.

==Terminology==

The term &quot;truth seeker&quot; is adopted by some conspiracy theorists when describing themselves on social media. Conspiracy theorists are often referred to derogatorily as &quot;cookers&quot; in Australia. The term &quot;cooker&quot; is also loosely associated with the far right.

==Politics==
The philosopher Karl Popper described the central problem of conspiracy theories as a form of fundamental attribution error, where every event is generally perceived as being intentional and planned, greatly underestimating the effects of randomness and unintended consequences. In his book &quot;The Open Society and Its Enemies&quot;, he used the term &quot;the conspiracy theory of society&quot; to denote the idea that social phenomena such as &quot;war, unemployment, poverty, shortages ... [are] the result of direct design by some powerful individuals and groups&quot;. Popper argued that totalitarianism was founded on conspiracy theories which drew on imaginary plots which were driven by paranoid scenarios predicated on tribalism, chauvinism, or racism. He also noted that conspirators very rarely achieved their goal.

Historically, real conspiracies have usually had little effect on history and have had unforeseen consequences for the conspirators, in contrast to conspiracy theories which often posit grand, sinister organizations, or world-changing events, the evidence for which has been erased or obscured. As described by Bruce Cumings, history is instead &quot;moved by the broad forces and large structures of human collectivities&quot;.

===Arab world===
Conspiracy theories are a prevalent feature of Arab culture and politics. Variants include conspiracies involving colonialism, Zionism, superpowers, oil, and the war on terrorism, which is often referred to in Arab media as a &quot;war against Islam&quot;. For example, &quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot;, an infamous hoax document purporting to be a Jewish plan for world domination, is commonly read and promoted in the Muslim world. Roger Cohen has suggested that the popularity of conspiracy theories in the Arab world is &quot;the ultimate refuge of the powerless&quot;. Al-Mumin Said has noted the danger of such theories, for they &quot;keep us not only from the truth but also from confronting our faults and problems&quot;. Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri used conspiracy theories about the United States to gain support for al-Qaeda in the Arab world, and as rhetoric to distinguish themselves from similar groups, although they may not have believed the conspiratorial claims themselves.

===Turkey===
Conspiracy theories are a prevalent feature of culture and politics in Turkey. Conspiracism is an important phenomenon in understanding Turkish politics. This is explained by a desire to &quot;make up for our lost Ottoman grandeur&quot;, the humiliation of perceiving Turkey as part of &quot;the malfunctioning half&quot; of the world, and a &quot;low level of media literacy among the Turkish population.&quot;

There are a wide variety of conspiracy theories including the Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory, the international Jewish conspiracy theory, and the war against Islam conspiracy theory. For example, Islamists, dissatisfied with the modernist and secularist reforms that took place throughout the history of the Ottoman Empire and the Turkish Republic, have put forward many conspiracy theories to defame the Treaty of Lausanne, an important peace treaty for the country, and the republic&#x27;s founder Kemal Atatürk. Another example is the Sèvres syndrome, a reference to the Treaty of Sèvres of 1920, a popular belief in Turkey that dangerous internal and external enemies, especially the West, are &quot;conspiring to weaken and carve up the Turkish Republic&quot;.

===United States===
The historian Richard Hofstadter addressed the role of paranoia and conspiracism throughout U.S. history in his 1964 essay &quot;The Paranoid Style in American Politics&quot;. Bernard Bailyn&#x27;s classic &quot;The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution&quot; (1967) notes that a similar phenomenon could be found in North America during the time preceding the American Revolution. Conspiracism labels people&#x27;s attitudes as well as the type of conspiracy theories that are more global and historical in proportion.

Harry G. West and others have noted that while conspiracy theorists may often be dismissed as a fringe minority, certain evidence suggests that a wide range of the U.S. maintains a belief in conspiracy theories. West also compares those theories to hypernationalism and religious fundamentalism. Theologian Robert Jewett and philosopher John Shelton Lawrence attribute the enduring popularity of conspiracy theories in the U.S. to the Cold War, McCarthyism, and counterculture rejection of authority. They state that among both the left-wing and right-wing, there remains a willingness to use real events, such as Soviet plots, inconsistencies in the Warren Report, and the 9/11 attacks, to support the existence of unverified and ongoing large-scale conspiracies.

In his studies of &quot;American political demonology&quot;, historian Michael Paul Rogin too analyzed this paranoid style of politics that has occurred throughout American history. Conspiracy theories frequently identify an imaginary subversive group that is supposedly attacking the nation and requires the government and allied forces to engage in harsh extra-legal repression of those threatening subversives. Rogin cites examples from the Red Scares of 1919, to McCarthy&#x27;s anti-communist campaign in the 1950s and more recently fears of immigrant hordes invading the US. Unlike Hofstadter, Rogin saw these &quot;countersubversive&quot; fears as frequently coming from those in power and dominant groups, instead of from the dispossessed. Unlike Robert Jewett, Rogin blamed not the counterculture, but America&#x27;s dominant culture of liberal individualism and the fears it stimulated to explain the periodic eruption of irrational conspiracy theories. The Watergate scandal has also been used to bestow legitimacy to other conspiracy theories, with Richard Nixon himself commenting that it served as a &quot;Rorschach ink blot&quot; which invited others to fill in the underlying pattern.

Historian Kathryn S. Olmsted cites three reasons why Americans are prone to believing in government conspiracies theories:

# Genuine government overreach and secrecy during the Cold War, such as Watergate, the Tuskegee syphilis experiment, Project MKUltra, and the CIA&#x27;s assassination attempts on Fidel Castro in collaboration with mobsters.
# Precedent set by official government-sanctioned conspiracy theories for propaganda, such as claims of German infiltration of the U.S. during World War II or the debunked claim that Saddam Hussein played a role in the 9/11 attacks.
# Distrust fostered by the government&#x27;s spying on and harassment of dissenters, such as the Sedition Act of 1918, COINTELPRO, and as part of various Red Scares.

Alex Jones referenced numerous conspiracy theories for convincing his supporters to endorse Ron Paul over Mitt Romney in the 2012 Republican Party presidential primaries and Donald Trump over Hillary Clinton in the 2016 United States presidential election. Into the 2020s, the QAnon conspiracy theory alleges that Trump is fighting against a deep-state cabal of child sex-abusing and Satan-worshipping Democrats.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==References==
Informational notes
Citations
==Further reading==
* 
* Burnett, Thom. &quot;Conspiracy Encyclopedia: The Encyclopedia of Conspiracy Theories&quot;
* 
* 
* De Graaf, Beatrice and Zwierlein, Cornel (eds.) &quot;Security and Conspiracy in History, 16th to 21st Century&quot;. &quot;Historical Social Research&quot; 38, Special Issue, 2013
* Fleming, Chris and Emma A. Jane. &quot;Modern Conspiracy: The Importance of Being Paranoid&quot;. New York and London: Bloomsbury, 2014. .
* Goertzel, Ted. &quot;Belief in conspiracy theories&quot;. &quot;Political Psychology&quot; (1994): 731–742. online 
* Harris, Lee. &quot;The Trouble with Conspiracy Theories&quot;. &quot;The American&quot;, 12 January 2013.
* Hofstadter, Richard. &quot;The Paranoid Style in American Politics&quot; (1954). online
* 
* 
* 
* Oliver, J. Eric, and Thomas J. Wood. &quot;Conspiracy theories and the paranoid style(s) of mass opinion&quot;. &quot;American Journal of Political Science&quot; 58.4 (2014): 952–966.online
* 
* 
* Slosson, W. &quot;The &#x27;Conspiracy&#x27; Superstition&quot;. &quot;The Unpopular Review&quot;, Vol. VII, No. 14, 1917.
* Sunstein, Cass R., and Adrian Vermeule. &quot;Conspiracy theories: Causes and cures&quot;. &quot;Journal of Political Philosophy&quot; 17.2 (2009): 202–227. online
* Uscinski, Joseph E. and Joseph M. Parent, &quot;American Conspiracy Theories&quot; (2014) excerpt
* Uscinski, Joseph E. &quot;The 5 Most Dangerous Conspiracy Theories of 2016&quot;. &quot;Politico Magazine&quot; (22 Aug 2016)
* 
==External links==

* Conspiracy Theories, &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="2" end="19" title="Conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q930164" start="96" end="106" title="conspiracy" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q661062" start="256" end="267" title="connotation" label="connotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="641" end="650" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="655" end="665" title="historians" label="historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="790" end="803" title="Falsifiability" label="falsification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="891" end="909" title="circular reasoning" label="circular reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192820" start="1036" end="1055" title="Stephan Lewandowsky" label="Stephan Lewandowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q245781" start="1454" end="1462" title="Cynicism (contemporary)" label="cynicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="1494" end="1515" title="Conspiracy theory" label="conspiracist ideation"/>
<link wikidata="Q608353" start="1625" end="1649" title="psychological projection" label="psychological projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="1651" end="1659" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q69976101" start="1665" end="1681" title="Machiavellianism (psychology)" label="Machiavellianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="1799" end="1807" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099410" start="1809" end="1819" title="schizotypy" label="schizotypy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186529" start="1821" end="1831" title="narcissism" label="narcissism"/>
<link wikidata="Q909609" start="1837" end="1856" title="insecure attachment" label="insecure attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127759" start="1874" end="1888" title="cognitive bias" label="cognitive bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q619675" start="1902" end="1929" title="illusory pattern perception" label="illusory pattern perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266051" start="1980" end="1990" title="Dark triad" label="Dark triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="2042" end="2049" title="empathy" label="empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="2098" end="2118" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="2774" end="2783" title="prejudice" label="prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="2785" end="2795" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="2797" end="2807" title="witch hunt" label="witch hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="2810" end="2813" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="2820" end="2828" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="2887" end="2904" title="Terrorism" label="terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q220850" start="2940" end="2955" title="Timothy McVeigh" label="Timothy McVeigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q44220" start="2960" end="2974" title="Anders Breivik" label="Anders Breivik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3010" end="3022" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3028" end="3040" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741620" start="3046" end="3052" title="Conspiracy theories in Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333233" start="3054" end="3068" title="AIDS denialism" label="AIDS denialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3090" end="3102" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q51213808" start="3184" end="3189" title="QAnon" label="QAnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122942665" start="3194" end="3203" title="Election denial movement in the United States" label="denialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="3214" end="3254" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="3274" end="3312" title="January 6 United States Capitol attack" label="January 6 United States Capitol attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580679" start="3328" end="3380" title="GMO conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories about genetically modified foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="3403" end="3409" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="3438" end="3444" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165947" start="3517" end="3523" title="hunger" label="hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="3591" end="3604" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="3663" end="3674" title="vaccination" label="vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125466" start="3679" end="3697" title="water fluoridation" label="water fluoridation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907939" start="3737" end="3764" title="vaccine-preventable disease" label="vaccine-preventable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320364" start="3829" end="3848" title="scientific evidence" label="scientific evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q466439" start="3898" end="3907" title="Extremism" label="extremist"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="3950" end="3957" title="economy" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="4040" end="4050" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="4056" end="4064" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="4070" end="4082" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="4098" end="4117" title="cultural phenomenon" label="cultural phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505605" start="4365" end="4377" title="open society" label="open society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751139" start="4405" end="4424" title="analytical thinking" label="analytical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="4525" end="4550" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q389936" start="4914" end="4944" title="The American Historical Review" label="The American Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q127781" start="5098" end="5119" title="Charles Astor Bristed" label="Charles Astor Bristed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5166" end="5184" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114878" start="5285" end="5342" title="United Kingdom and the American Civil War" label="weakening the United States during the American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092720" start="5435" end="5445" title="Dissenting opinion" label="dissenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q390147" start="5974" end="5988" title="George Monbiot" label="George Monbiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="6125" end="6133" title="theories" label="theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="6457" end="6460" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q722319" start="6537" end="6554" title="Warren Commission" label="Warren Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="6845" end="6877" title="assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassination of John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153978" start="7144" end="7166" title="University of Tübingen" label="University of Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48745" start="7614" end="7631" title="Lee Harvey Oswald" label="Lee Harvey Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q930164" start="7721" end="7731" title="conspiracy" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="8081" end="8090" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="8095" end="8105" title="historians" label="historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234195" start="8307" end="8321" title="Michael Barkun" label="Michael Barkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="8689" end="8702" title="Bureaucracy" label="bureaucracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q420474" start="9402" end="9412" title="false flag" label="false flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321697" start="9531" end="9563" title="John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories" label="assassination of John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190706" start="9569" end="9594" title="Moon landing conspiracy theories" label="1969 Apollo Moon landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q22763" start="9604" end="9626" title="9/11 conspiracy theories" label="9/11 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="10253" end="10267" title="rise of Hitler" label="rise of Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="10273" end="10300" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="1997 Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="10306" end="10320" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q159386" start="10341" end="10358" title="Rothschild family" label="Rothschild family"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909702" start="10411" end="10439" title="Monetary policy of China" label="China&amp;#x27;s currency policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="10522" end="10532" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="10577" end="10596" title="cultural phenomenon" label="cultural phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q727908" start="11305" end="11332" title="chemtrail conspiracy theory" label="chemtrail conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="11639" end="11647" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="11696" end="11699" title="World Wide Web" label="Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="11715" end="11719" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="11725" end="11732" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="11755" end="11767" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="11932" end="11945" title="search engine" label="search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137784" start="12234" end="12293" title="Barack Obama citizenship conspiracy theories" label="born in Kenya, instead of Hawaii where he was actually born"/>
<link wikidata="Q158813" start="12355" end="12368" title="Mike Huckabee" label="Mike Huckabee"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="12424" end="12434" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q112537427" start="12687" end="12703" title="Russell Muirhead" label="Russell Muirhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q96845246" start="12708" end="12723" title="Nancy Rosenblum" label="Nancy Rosenblum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186951" start="12985" end="12997" title="Jesse Walker" label="Jesse Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234195" start="13654" end="13668" title="Michael Barkun" label="Michael Barkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321697" start="13890" end="13911" title="Kennedy assassination conspiracies" label="Kennedy assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="13913" end="13917" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q840825" start="13927" end="13941" title="discredited AIDS origins theories" label="spread of AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q282728" start="14390" end="14394" title="International Jewish conspiracy" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704324" start="14396" end="14406" title="Masonic conspiracy theories" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q622454" start="14408" end="14417" title="Red Scare" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917138" start="14426" end="14441" title="Vatican conspiracy theories" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q333118" start="14661" end="14671" title="David Icke" label="David Icke"/>
<link wikidata="Q961961" start="14676" end="14697" title="Milton William Cooper" label="Milton William Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="14733" end="14748" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q426783" start="14944" end="14952" title="Cui bono" label="Cui bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="15435" end="15447" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041185" start="15479" end="15501" title="institutional analysis" label="institutional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292797" start="15641" end="15657" title="mainstream media" label="mainstream media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745415" start="15882" end="15901" title="conjunction fallacy" label="conjunction fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="15922" end="15948" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="16418" end="16435" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127717" start="16464" end="16488" title="investigative journalism" label="investigative journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="16492" end="16511" title="historical analysis" label="historical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127759" start="17280" end="17294" title="cognitive bias" label="cognitive bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q97933249" start="17308" end="17328" title="proportionality bias" label="proportionality bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q849538" start="17330" end="17346" title="attribution bias" label="attribution bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q431498" start="17352" end="17369" title="confirmation bias" label="confirmation bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914471" start="17888" end="17905" title="appeal to emotion" label="appeal to emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q651669" start="18058" end="18078" title="Argument from ignorance" label="must be a conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422884" start="18227" end="18247" title="eyewitness testimony" label="eyewitness testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="18371" end="18380" title="falsifiability" label="falsified"/>
<link wikidata="Q186150" start="18403" end="18423" title="fallacious arguments" label="fallacious arguments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="18460" end="18478" title="circular reasoning" label="circular reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432679" start="19687" end="19700" title="false balance" label="false balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q724479" start="19874" end="19895" title="Teach the Controversy" label="Teach the Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172618" start="19916" end="19934" title="intelligent design" label="intelligent design"/>
<link wikidata="Q189183" start="20138" end="20148" title="ad hominem" label="ad hominem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239681" start="20801" end="20818" title="scientific theory" label="scientific theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q233691" start="21117" end="21146" title="IPCC Second Assessment Report" label="IPCC Second Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="21590" end="21599" title="prejudice" label="prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="21601" end="21611" title="witch hunt" label="witch hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="21614" end="21617" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="21624" end="21632" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="21691" end="21700" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q220850" start="21744" end="21759" title="Timothy McVeigh" label="Timothy McVeigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q44220" start="21761" end="21775" title="Anders Breivik" label="Anders Breivik"/>
<link wikidata="Q62066211" start="21780" end="21795" title="Brenton Tarrant" label="Brenton Tarrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="21831" end="21843" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21852" end="21864" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333233" start="21866" end="21880" title="AIDS denialism" label="AIDS denialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="21902" end="21914" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580679" start="22012" end="22064" title="GMO conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories about genetically modified foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="22087" end="22093" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="22122" end="22128" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165947" start="22197" end="22203" title="hunger" label="hunger"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="22272" end="22285" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806456" start="22370" end="22384" title="medical advice" label="medical advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="22409" end="22429" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110304251" start="22454" end="22470" title="anti-vaccination" label="anti-vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q16801232" start="22488" end="22538" title="Big Pharma conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories about pharmaceutical companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907939" start="22617" end="22644" title="vaccine-preventable disease" label="vaccine-preventable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125466" start="22710" end="22728" title="water fluoridation" label="water fluoridation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119129" start="22767" end="22790" title="Lancet MMR autism fraud" label="Lancet MMR autism fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="23169" end="23180" title="Antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="23246" end="23255" title="far right" label="far right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129409" start="23260" end="23268" title="far left" label="far left"/>
<link wikidata="Q720829" start="25128" end="25151" title="government transparency" label="government transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="25247" end="25260" title="whistleblower" label="whistleblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="25266" end="25276" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13579947" start="25485" end="25499" title="misinformation" label="misinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="25791" end="25822" title="Supply and demand" label="either the supply or the demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374574" start="26259" end="26287" title="Journal of Consumer Research" label="Journal of Consumer Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q868575" start="26893" end="26902" title="Empowerment" label="empowered"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751139" start="27011" end="27030" title="analytical thinking" label="analytical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619" start="27032" end="27039" title="Priming (psychology)" label="priming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751139" start="28181" end="28200" title="analytical thinking" label="analytical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987190" start="28306" end="28322" title="negative emotion" label="negative emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="28595" end="28609" title="circular logic" label="circular logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384354" start="30141" end="30157" title="deradicalization" label="deradicalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="30545" end="30562" title="Epistemology" label="epistemologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415581" start="30581" end="30603" title="filter bubble" label="self-enclosed networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q505605" start="31338" end="31350" title="open society" label="open society"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="31641" end="31653" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="31658" end="31673" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="33609" end="33617" title="in-group" label="in-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="34881" end="34894" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439369" start="35767" end="35780" title="Scare tactics" label="Scare tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126687" start="36227" end="36238" title="focus group" label="focus group"/>
<link wikidata="Q764527" start="36810" end="36826" title="informed consent" label="informed consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="37129" end="37148" title="Affordable Care Act" label="Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q56641686" start="38221" end="38238" title="vaccine hesitancy" label="vaccine hesitancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13579947" start="38419" end="38433" title="misinformation" label="misinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303778" start="39432" end="39453" title="Replication crisis" label="failures to replicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425625" start="39569" end="39584" title="reproducibility" label="reproducibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q22763" start="40517" end="40541" title="9/11 conspiracy theories" label="9/11 conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321697" start="40991" end="41022" title="John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories" label="a number of conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="41039" end="41056" title="John F. Kennedy assassination" label="the assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="41075" end="41090" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="41092" end="41103" title="Sociologist" label="Sociologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q608353" start="41720" end="41744" title="psychological projection" label="psychological projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="41762" end="41770" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q69976101" start="41824" end="41840" title="Machiavellianism (psychology)" label="Machiavellianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099410" start="41949" end="41959" title="schizotypy" label="schizotypy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="42041" end="42051" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="42067" end="42086" title="cultural phenomenon" label="cultural phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="42795" end="42810" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751139" start="43085" end="43104" title="Analytical thinking" label="Analytical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="43559" end="43572" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="43577" end="43587" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q868575" start="44053" end="44066" title="empowerment" label="powerlessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="44577" end="44587" title="Social alienation" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17930" start="44592" end="44598" title="anomie" label="anomie"/>
<link wikidata="Q214693" start="44612" end="44626" title="social capital" label="social capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="45035" end="45045" title="Social alienation" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q868575" start="45146" end="45160" title="disempowerment" label="disempowerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q378132" start="45257" end="45284" title="Big Five personality traits" label="Big Five personality traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234195" start="45350" end="45364" title="Michael Barkun" label="Michael Barkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="45766" end="45783" title="social psychology" label="social psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q161982" start="45791" end="45826" title="Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz" label="Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q23364" start="45963" end="45987" title="Humanistic psychology" label="Humanistic psychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q176640" start="47062" end="47068" title="randomness" label="random"/>
<link wikidata="Q431498" start="47488" end="47505" title="confirmation bias" label="confirmation bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="47523" end="47543" title="cognitive dissonance" label="cognitive dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4150820" start="47652" end="47674" title="communal reinforcement" label="communal reinforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="47871" end="47886" title="September 11 attacks" label="events of 9/11."/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="48248" end="48264" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="48267" end="48275" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="48281" end="48294" title="authoritarian" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269546" start="48315" end="48329" title="Quassim Cassam" label="Quassim Cassam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356374" start="48484" end="48508" title="Linda Trinkaus Zagzebski" label="Linda Trinkaus Zagzebski"/>
<link wikidata="Q608353" start="49414" end="49438" title="psychological projection" label="psychological projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12369646" start="50030" end="50043" title="Marcel Danesi" label="Marcel Danesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="51119" end="51139" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566314" start="51526" end="51537" title="Roger Cohen" label="Roger Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="51556" end="51574" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="51893" end="51904" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317596" start="52058" end="52068" title="Justin Fox" label="Justin Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="52078" end="52082" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q355237" start="52411" end="52423" title="Bruno Latour" label="Bruno Latour"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="52476" end="52491" title="critical theory" label="critical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="52572" end="52593" title="climate change denial" label="climate-change denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265692" start="52606" end="52625" title="9/11 Truth movement" label="9/11 Truth movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000001" start="52925" end="52938" title="Michael Kelly (editor)" label="Michael Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="52948" end="52963" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="52995" end="53003" title="anti-war" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="53187" end="53202" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q646407" start="53278" end="53293" title="Anti-statism" label="anti-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="53517" end="53527" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="53603" end="53614" title="apocalypticism" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="53618" end="53629" title="millenarianism" label="millenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="54131" end="54145" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q23769872" start="54836" end="54855" title="David Robert Grimes" label="David Robert Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420597" start="54996" end="55022" title="PRISM (surveillance program)" label="PRISM surveillance program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420011" start="55028" end="55056" title="Tuskegee syphilis experiment" label="Tuskegee syphilis experiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55066" end="55086" title="FBI Laboratory#Controversy" label="FBI forensic scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190706" start="55115" end="55132" title="Moon landing conspiracy theories" label="Moon landing hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="55223" end="55243" title="Global warming conspiracy theory" label="Climate-change fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q16801232" start="55657" end="55683" title="Big Pharma conspiracy theory" label="suppress a cure for cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891828" start="55983" end="55990" title="PubPeer" label="PubPeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="56168" end="56182" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824114" start="56462" end="56469" title="cooker (slang)" label="cookers"/>
<link wikidata="Q65041906" start="56554" end="56563" title="far-right politics in Australia" label="far right"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="56595" end="56606" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q575786" start="56673" end="56702" title="fundamental attribution error" label="fundamental attribution error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066598" start="56876" end="56908" title="The Open Society and Its Enemies" label="The Open Society and Its Enemies"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="57175" end="57190" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482645" start="57310" end="57319" title="tribalism" label="tribalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q226418" start="57321" end="57331" title="chauvinism" label="chauvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="57336" end="57342" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135789" start="57497" end="57519" title="unforeseen consequence" label="unforeseen consequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q483927" start="57721" end="57734" title="Bruce Cumings" label="Bruce Cumings"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="57904" end="57908" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="57984" end="57991" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="58019" end="58035" title="war on terrorism" label="war on terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968565" start="58089" end="58106" title="war against Islam" label="war against Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="58133" end="58168" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190084" start="58188" end="58192" title="hoax" label="hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566314" start="58306" end="58317" title="Roger Cohen" label="Roger Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="58603" end="58618" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q186316" start="58623" end="58640" title="Ayman al-Zawahiri" label="Ayman al-Zawahiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="58710" end="58718" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="58960" end="58966" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="59103" end="59110" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914942" start="59364" end="59395" title="Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory" label="Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59401" end="59439" title="International Jewish conspiracy#Turkey" label="international Jewish conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968565" start="59449" end="59484" title="war against Islam conspiracy theory" label="war against Islam conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="59499" end="59508" title="Islamism" label="Islamists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="59532" end="59541" title="modernity" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="59546" end="59556" title="secularism" label="secularist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="59708" end="59726" title="Treaty of Lausanne" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="59803" end="59816" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7665828" start="59841" end="59856" title="Sèvres syndrome" label="Sèvres syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q182515" start="59877" end="59893" title="Treaty of Sèvres" label="Treaty of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="59987" end="59995" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q982698" start="60104" end="60122" title="Richard Hofstadter" label="Richard Hofstadter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="60145" end="60153" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131110" start="60182" end="60194" title="History of the United States" label="U.S. history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756089" start="60219" end="60258" title="The Paranoid Style in American Politics" label="The Paranoid Style in American Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q822286" start="60266" end="60280" title="Bernard Bailyn" label="Bernard Bailyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741349" start="60302" end="60352" title="The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution" label="The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="60460" end="60479" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="60869" end="60885" title="hypernationalism" label="hypernationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9149" start="60890" end="60914" title="religious fundamentalism" label="religious fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257580" start="60957" end="60978" title="John Shelton Lawrence" label="John Shelton Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="61055" end="61063" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="61065" end="61076" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="61082" end="61096" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q722319" start="61271" end="61284" title="Warren Commission" label="Warren Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="61294" end="61298" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q27064203" start="61457" end="61475" title="Michael Paul Rogin" label="Michael Paul Rogin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="62354" end="62371" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="62447" end="62460" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q488532" start="62506" end="62524" title="Rorschach test" label="Rorschach ink blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="62784" end="62793" title="Watergate" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420011" start="62799" end="62827" title="Tuskegee syphilis experiment" label="Tuskegee syphilis experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q815614" start="62829" end="62844" title="Project MKUltra" label="Project MKUltra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808496" start="62865" end="62903" title="assassination attempts on Fidel Castro" label="assassination attempts on Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397667" start="63119" end="63167" title="Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda link allegations" label="Saddam Hussein played a role in the 9/11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445331" start="63266" end="63286" title="Sedition Act of 1918" label="Sedition Act of 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q644439" start="63288" end="63298" title="COINTELPRO" label="COINTELPRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q622454" start="63323" end="63332" title="Red Scare" label="Red Scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q319121" start="63336" end="63346" title="Alex Jones" label="Alex Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="63428" end="63436" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="63442" end="63453" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q937607" start="63461" end="63505" title="2012 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="2012 Republican Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="63510" end="63522" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="63528" end="63543" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="63551" end="63591" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q51213808" start="63613" end="63636" title="QAnon conspiracy theory" label="QAnon conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964162" start="63678" end="63688" title="Deep state in the United States" label="deep-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416414" start="63689" end="63694" title="cabal" label="cabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="63738" end="63747" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63881" end="63945" title="Conspiracy Encyclopedia: The Encyclopedia of Conspiracy Theories" label="Conspiracy Encyclopedia: The Encyclopedia of Conspiracy Theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317529" start="64084" end="64110" title="Historical Social Research" label="Historical Social Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q259513" start="65376" end="65411" title="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5541" wikidata="Q172216" url="?curid=5541" title="Coral Sea Islands">
<text>The Coral Sea Islands Territory is an external territory of Australia which comprises a group of small and mostly uninhabited tropical islands and reefs in the Coral Sea, north-east of Queensland, Australia. The only inhabited island is Willis Island. The territory covers , most of which is ocean, extending east and south from the outer edge of the Great Barrier Reef and includes Heralds Beacon Island, Osprey Reef, the Willis Group and fifteen other reef/island groups. Cato Island is the highest point in the Territory.

== History and status ==

The Coral Sea Islands were first charted in 1803. In the 1870s and 1880s the islands were mined for guano but the absence of a reliable supply of fresh water prevented long-term habitation. The Coral Sea Islands became an Australian external territory in 1969 by the &quot;Coral Sea Islands Act&quot; and extended in 1997 to include Elizabeth Reef and Middleton Reef nearly 800 km further south.

The two latter reefs are much closer to Lord Howe Island, New South Wales, (about ) than to the southernmost island of the rest of the territory, Cato Island. The islands, cays and reefs of the Great Barrier Reef are not part of the territory, belonging to Queensland instead. The outer edge of the Great Barrier Reef is the boundary between Queensland and the Coral Sea Islands Territory.

The territory is a possession or external territory of Australia, administered from Canberra. Previously it was administered by the Attorney-General&#x27;s Department and the Department of Transport and Regional Services. It is the only external territory not created by transfer from the United Kingdom or by the mandate of the United Nations. Defence is the responsibility of Australia, and the territory is visited regularly by the Royal Australian Navy.

Australia maintains automatic weather stations on many of the isles and reefs, and claims a exclusive fishing zone. There is no economic activity (except for a significant but as yet unquantified charter fishing and diving industry), and only a staff of three or four people to run the meteorological station on Willis Island (South Islet), established in 1921. In November 2011, the Australian government announced that a protected area was planned in the Coral Sea.

The Supreme Court of Norfolk Island has jurisdiction over the islands; however, the laws of the Australian Capital Territory apply. The territory&#x27;s FIPS 10-4 code is CR, whereas ISO 3166 includes it in Australia (AU).

In June 2004, a symbolic political protest run by gay rights activists based in Australia, declared the Coral Sea Islands to be a sovereign micronation. On 17 November 2017 the same group declared the kingdom to be &#x27;dissolved&#x27;, following the results of the Australian Marriage Law Postal Survey.

== Geography ==
There are about 30 separate reefs and atolls, twelve being wholly submerged or drying only during low tide, and 18 others with a total of about 51 islets and cays (18 alone on the atoll Lihou Reef), some of which are vegetated. The atolls exhibit a wide range of size, from a few kilometres in diameter to perhaps the second largest atoll in the world by total area (including lagoon): Lihou Reef, with a lagoon size of and an area of , which compares to a combined land area of the 18 individual islets of only . The islands are all very low.

The Willis Islets are important nesting areas for birds and turtles but contain negligible natural resources. They comprise less than of land. There is no port or harbour, only offshore anchorage.

Most of the atolls fall into two groups, while Mellish Reef to the east, and Middleton Reef and Elizabeth Reef to the south are grouped separately:

===Northwestern Group===
# Osprey Reef (submerged atoll roughly oval in shape, measuring , covering around , with lagoon up to deep)
# Shark Reef (small elongated submerged reef south of Osprey Reef, with a minimum depth of )
# Bougainville Reef (small submerged atoll, , area with lagoon, dries at half tide)
# East Holmes Reef (submerged atoll, about , area with lagoon)
# West Holmes Reef (submerged atoll east of East Holmes Reef, about , area with lagoon that is open on the West side, two small cays)
# Flora Reef (small submerged atoll, 5 by 4 km, about )
# Diane Bank (sunken atoll, depths of less than 10 m over an area of 65 by 25 km, or , along the northern edge 3 m deep, with Sand Cay in the Northwest, 3 m high)
# North Moore Reef (small submerged atoll, 4 by 3 km, area including lagoon that is open on the Northwest side)
# South Moore Reef (small submerged reef 5 km South of North Moore Reef)
# Willis Islets (sunken atoll, bank 45 by 19 km, bank area more than , 3 islets on the Northwestern side: North Cay, Mid Islet almost 8 m high, South Islet or Willis Island 10 m high)
# Magdelaine Cays &amp; Coringa Islets (one large, partially sunken atoll structure, almost 90 by 30 km, bank area about ), 2 islets of the Magdelaine Cays in the North: North West Islet (area approximately ) and South East Cay (area ); 2 islets of the Coringa Islets 50 to 60 km further Southwest: Southwest Islet or Coringa Islet (area 0.173 km2), and Chilcott Islet (area 0.163 km2)
# Herald Cays, Northeast Cay (encircled by a reef of 3 by 3 km, total area 6 km2, land area 0.34 km2)
# Herald Cays, Southwest Cay (4 km Southwest of Northeast Cay, encircled by a reef of 2 by 2 km, total area 3 km2, land area 0.188 km2)
# Lihou Reef and Cays (largest atoll in the coral sea, with a size of 2500 km2, land area 0.91 km2)
# Diamond Islets &amp; Tregosse Reefs (large, partially sunken atoll, 100 by 52 km, area of the bank over 3000 km2, with 4 islets and 2 small submerged reefs in the Northeast and Southeast: West Diamond Islet, Central Diamond Islet, East Diamond Islet on the Northeastern rim of the former atoll, and South Diamond Islet, East Tregosse Reef and West Tregosse Reef on the Southern rim)
# North Flinders Reef (large atoll, 34 by 23 km, area 600 km2, with 2 islets, Flinders Cay being the larger one with a length of 200 m and a height of 3 m)
# South Flinders Reef (atoll, 15 by 5 km, 60 km2)
# Herald&#x27;s Surprise (small submerged reef North of Flinders Reefs, 3 by 2 km)
# Dart Reef (small submerged reef Northwest of Flinders Reefs, 3 by 3 km, area 6 km2 including small lagoon that is open to the North)
# Malay Reef (small submerged reef, not clearly defined, no breakers, difficult to see)
# Abington Reef (submerged reef, nearly awash, 4 by 2.5 km, area 7 km2)
# Marion Reef (Large circular atoll formation that is composed of three main units located on the Eastern side: Marion, Long and Wansfell; and a number of smaller reefs on the west. The formation sits atop a submarine feature known as the Marion Plateau which is separated from the larger Coral Sea Plateau to the north by the Townsville Trough. Three small sand cays are located on the eastern side of Marion Reef: Paget Cay, on Long Reef, Carola Cay, south of Long Reef, and Brodie Cay, on Wansfell Reef.)

The atolls of the Northwestern Group, except Osprey Reef and Shark Reef in the north, and Marion Reef in the south, are located on the Coral Sea Plateau (Queensland Plateau), a contiguous area of depths less than 1000 m.

* Flinders Reefs (North and South), Herald&#x27;s Surprise and Dart Reef form a cluster of reefs of 66 by 26 km.
* Magdelaine Cays, Coringa Islets and Herald Cays are part of the 8856 km2 Coringa-Herald National Nature Reserve, created on 16 August 1982 and located around 400 km east of Cairns and 220 to 320 km from the outer edge of the Great Barrier Reef. The 6 islets of the nature reserve have areas from 0.16 to 0.37 km2, for a total of 1.24 km2.
* Lihou Reef was declared a Nature Reserve on 16 August 1982, with an area of 8440 km2.

The Nature Reserves were created to protect wildlife in the respective areas of the territory; together they form the Coral Sea Reserves Ramsar Site.

===Mellish Reef===

#Mellish Reef, being about 300 km to the east of the Northwestern Group, thus the most distant from the Australian continent of all the reefs and atolls of the Coral Sea Islands Territory, is not considered to be part of any group. It has the outline of a boomerang-shaped platform around 10 km in length and 3 km across, area 25 km2. The surrounding reefs, which enclose a narrow lagoon, are completely submerged at high tide. Near the centre of the lagoon is the only permanent land of the reef - Heralds-Beacon Islet. The island is a small cay measuring 600 m by 120 m, area 57,000 m2, only rising a few ms above the high-water mark. The reef was discovered and named by Captain Alexander Bristow in the whaling ship on 5 April 1812. The wrecked on the reef on 16 August 1856. erected the first beacon on the cay, using wreckage from &quot;Duroc&quot;.

===Southeasterly Group===
#Frederick Reefs: The reefs form a semi-enclosed lagoon, known as Anchorage Sound, with an opening on the North side. The complex measures about 10 by 4 km, with an area of 30 km2. On the southern side of the reef lies Observatory Cay, the only permanently dry land, although there are a few of others cays that can be awash at high tide.
#Kenn Reefs, submerged atoll of about 15 by 8 km, area 40 km2, islet Observatory Cay in the Southeast, 2 m high
#Saumarez Reefs, southernmost reefs to be located on the Coral Sea Shelf; three main reefs and numerous smaller reefs that form a large crescent-shaped formation open to the northwest, about 27 by 14 km, area less than 300 km2. There are two sand cays: North East Cay and South West Cay.
#Wreck Reefs: atoll 25 by 5 km, area 75 km2, open on the North. Islets found on the reefs include Bird Islet, West Islet and Porpoise Cay.
#Cato Reef: Cato bank 21 by 13 km, area 200 km2 of depths less than 17 m; Cato Reef encircles an area of 3.3 by 1.8 km, area 5 km2 including lagoon; Cato Island, in the West of the lagoon, 650 by 300 m, area 0.15 km2, 6 m high. Close to the Southeast corner of Cato bank is Hutchison Rock, with 1 m depth over. Cato Island is the highest point in the Territory.

===Extreme South===
Elizabeth and Middleton reefs, together with reefs around Lord Howe Island (New South Wales) 150 km to the south, are regarded as the southernmost coral reefs in the world. Their location, where tropical and temperate ocean currents meet, contributes to an unusually diverse assemblage of marine species. These mostly submerged atolls which dry only during low tide were added to the territory only in 1989. They are located on the Lord Howe Rise. Already on 23 December 1987, they were protected as the Elizabeth and Middleton Reefs Marine National Park Reserve, which has an area of 1,880 km2.

# Elizabeth Reef, atoll about 8.2 km by 5.5 km, area 51 km2 including lagoon, one islet: Elizabeth Island (Elizabeth Cay), no vegetation, 600 m by 400 m (area 0.2 km2), highest point 0.8 m. At low tides, much of the reef flat is exposed.
# Middleton Reef, atoll about 8.9 km by 6.3 km, area 37 km2 including lagoon, one islet: The Sound, 100 m by 70 m (area 5,000 m2), highest point 1.5 m (close to the northern end). At low tides, much of the reef flat is exposed.

===Overview of islets and cays===


==Man-made structures==
Automatic, unmanned weather stations are located on the following reefs or atolls:

*Bougainville Reef
*Cato Island
*Flinders Reef (Flinders Coral Cay)
*Frederick Reef
*Holmes Reef
*Lihou Reef (Turtle Islet)
*Marion Reef
*Moore Reef

Lighthouses are located on following reefs or islands:

*Bougainville Reef
*East Diamond Islet
*Frederick Reefs
*Lihou Reef
*Saumarez Reef

Willis Island, the only inhabited island, has a number of structures.

==See also==

* List of islands of Australia
* Gay and Lesbian Kingdom of the Coral Sea Islands
==References==
==Notes==
==External links==
* Coral Sea Islands History and the list of other Australia territories (Australian Government, Attorney-General&#x27;s Department)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172216" start="4" end="31" title="Coral Sea Islands" label="Coral Sea Islands Territory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38" end="56" title="States and territories of Australia#External territories" label="external territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="60" end="69" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82931" start="160" end="169" title="Coral Sea" label="Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="185" end="195" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179368" start="237" end="250" title="Willis Island" label="Willis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="351" end="369" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107392" start="406" end="417" title="Osprey Reef" label="Osprey Reef"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="474" end="485" title="Cato Reef#Cato Island" label="Cato Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="652" end="657" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363416" start="885" end="899" title="Elizabeth Reef" label="Elizabeth Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842037" start="904" end="918" title="Middleton Reef" label="Middleton Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="989" end="1005" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="1007" end="1022" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="1143" end="1161" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1395" end="1404" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="1424" end="1432" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044789" start="1472" end="1506" title="Attorney-General&amp;#x27;s Department (Australia)" label="Attorney-General&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294421" start="1515" end="1560" title="Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government (Australia)" label="Department of Transport and Regional Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q741691" start="1775" end="1796" title="Royal Australian Navy" label="Royal Australian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="1901" end="1908" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179368" start="2111" end="2124" title="Willis Island (Coral Sea)" label="Willis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644961" start="2272" end="2303" title="Supreme Court of Norfolk Island" label="Supreme Court of Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="2364" end="2392" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063249" start="2421" end="2430" title="FIPS 10-4" label="FIPS 10-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q106487" start="2451" end="2459" title="ISO 3166" label="ISO 3166"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423680" start="2583" end="2643" title="Gay and Lesbian Kingdom of the Coral Sea Islands" label="declared the Coral Sea Islands to be a sovereign micronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37655554" start="2759" end="2796" title="Australian Marriage Law Postal Survey" label="Australian Marriage Law Postal Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="2843" end="2847" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="2853" end="2858" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q503481" start="2973" end="2976" title="cay" label="cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824810" start="3001" end="3011" title="Lihou Reef National Nature Reserve" label="Lihou Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="3192" end="3198" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172216" start="3364" end="3377" title="Willis Islets" label="Willis Islets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107392" start="3734" end="3745" title="Osprey Reef" label="Osprey Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179368" start="4620" end="4633" title="Willis Island (Coral Sea)" label="Willis Islets"/>
<link wikidata="Q113570623" start="5913" end="5932" title="Flinders Reef (Coral Sea)" label="North Flinders Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q113570623" start="6069" end="6088" title="Flinders Reef (Coral Sea)" label="South Flinders Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q113570623" start="7228" end="7242" title="Flinders Reef (Coral Sea)" label="Flinders Reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132804" start="7414" end="7452" title="Coringa-Herald National Nature Reserve" label="Coringa-Herald National Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q189133" start="7514" end="7520" title="Cairns" label="Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824810" start="7682" end="7692" title="Lihou Reef National Nature Reserve" label="Lihou Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169493" start="7887" end="7917" title="Coral Sea Reserves Ramsar Site" label="Coral Sea Reserves Ramsar Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q172216" start="7941" end="7953" title="Mellish Reef" label="Mellish Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q973740" start="8647" end="8659" title="whaling ship" label="whaling ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498608" start="8824" end="8839" title="Frederick Reefs" label="Frederick Reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389491" start="9163" end="9173" title="Kenn Reefs" label="Kenn Reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427415" start="9275" end="9289" title="Saumarez Reefs" label="Saumarez Reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037675" start="9563" end="9574" title="Wreck Reefs" label="Wreck Reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053601" start="9702" end="9711" title="Cato Reef" label="Cato Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363416" start="10084" end="10093" title="Elizabeth Reef" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842037" start="10098" end="10107" title="Middleton Reef" label="Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="10142" end="10158" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="10160" end="10175" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q371513" start="10516" end="10530" title="Lord Howe Rise" label="Lord Howe Rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331346" start="10588" end="10646" title="Elizabeth and Middleton Reefs Marine National Park Reserve" label="Elizabeth and Middleton Reefs Marine National Park Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363416" start="10683" end="10697" title="Elizabeth Reef" label="Elizabeth Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842037" start="10921" end="10935" title="Middleton Reef" label="Middleton Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510366" start="11669" end="11697" title="List of islands of Australia" label="List of islands of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423680" start="11700" end="11748" title="Gay and Lesbian Kingdom of the Coral Sea Islands" label="Gay and Lesbian Kingdom of the Coral Sea Islands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5551" wikidata="Q800" url="?curid=5551" title="Costa Rica">
<text>Costa Rica (, ; ; literally &quot;Rich Coast&quot;), officially the Republic of Costa Rica, is a country in the Central American region of North America. It borders Nicaragua to the north, the Caribbean Sea to the northeast, Panama to the southeast, and the Pacific Ocean to the southwest, as well as maritime border with Ecuador to the south of Cocos Island. It has a population of around five million in a land area of nearly . An estimated people live in the capital and largest city, San José, with around two million people in the surrounding metropolitan area.

The sovereign state is a presidential republic. It has a long-standing and stable constitutional democracy and a highly educated workforce. The country spends roughly 6.9% of its budget (2016) on education, compared to a global average of 4.4%. Its economy, once heavily dependent on agriculture, has diversified to include sectors such as finance, corporate services for foreign companies, pharmaceuticals, and ecotourism. Many foreign manufacturing and services companies operate in Costa Rica&#x27;s Free Trade Zones (FTZ) where they benefit from investment and tax incentives.

Costa Rica was inhabited by indigenous peoples before coming under Spanish rule in the 16th century. It remained a peripheral colony of the empire until independence as part of the First Mexican Empire, followed by membership in the Federal Republic of Central America, from which it formally declared independence in 1847. Following the brief Costa Rican Civil War in 1948, it permanently abolished its army in 1949, becoming one of only a few sovereign nations without a standing army.

The country has consistently performed favorably in the Human Development Index (HDI), placing 58th in the world , and fifth in Latin America. It has also been cited by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as having attained much higher human development than other countries at the same income levels, with a better record on human development and inequality than the median of the region. It performs well in comparisons of democratic governance, press freedom, subjective happiness and sustainable wellbeing. It has the 26th freest press according to the 2024 Press Freedom Index, it is the 35th most democratic country according to the 2021 Freedom in the World index, and it is the 23rd happiest country in the 2023 World Happiness Report. It is also a major tourist destination in the continent.

== History ==

=== Pre-Columbian period ===

Historians have classified the Indigenous people of Costa Rica as belonging to the Intermediate Area, where the peripheries of the Mesoamerican and Andean native cultures overlapped. More recently, pre-Columbian Costa Rica has also been described as part of the Isthmo-Colombian Area.

Stone tools, the oldest evidence of human occupation in Costa Rica, are associated with the arrival of various groups of hunter-gatherers about 10,000 to 7,000 years BCE in the Turrialba Valley. The presence of Clovis culture type spearheads and arrows from South America opens the possibility that, in this area, two different cultures coexisted.

Agriculture became evident in the populations that lived in Costa Rica about 5,000 years ago. They mainly grew tubers and roots. For the first and second millennia BCE there were already settled farming communities. These were small and scattered, although the timing of the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture as the main livelihood in the territory is still unknown.

The earliest use of pottery appears around 2,000 to 3,000 BCE. Shards of pots, cylindrical vases, platters, gourds, and other vases decorated with grooves, prints, and some modeled after animals have been found.

The influence of Indigenous peoples on modern Costa Rican culture has been relatively small compared to other nations since the country lacked a strong native civilization to begin with. Most of the native population was absorbed into the Spanish-speaking colonial society through inter-marriage, except for some small remnants, the most significant of which are the Bribri and Boruca tribes who still inhabit the mountains of the Cordillera de Talamanca, in the southeastern part of Costa Rica, near the frontier with Panama.

=== Spanish colonization ===
The name , meaning &quot;rich coast&quot; in the Spanish language, was in some accounts first applied by Christopher Columbus, who sailed to the eastern shores of Costa Rica during his final voyage in 1502, and reported vast quantities of gold jewelry worn by natives. The name may also have come from conquistador Gil González Dávila, who landed on the west coast in 1522, encountered natives, and obtained some of their gold, sometimes by violent theft and sometimes as gifts from local leaders.
During most of the colonial period, Costa Rica was the southernmost province of the Captaincy General of Guatemala, nominally part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain. The captaincy general was a largely autonomous entity within the Spanish Empire. Costa Rica&#x27;s distance from the capital of the captaincy in Guatemala, its legal prohibition under mercantilist Spanish law from trade with its southern neighbor Panama, then part of the Viceroyalty of New Granada (i.e. Colombia), and lack of resources such as gold and silver, made Costa Rica into a poor, isolated, and sparsely-inhabited region within the Spanish Empire. Costa Rica was described as &quot;the poorest and most miserable Spanish colony in all America&quot; by a Spanish governor in 1719.

Another important factor behind Costa Rica&#x27;s poverty was the lack of a significant Indigenous population available for (forced labor), which meant most of the Costa Rican settlers had to work on their land, preventing the establishment of large (plantations). For all these reasons, Costa Rica was, by and large, unappreciated and overlooked by the Spanish Crown and left to develop on its own. The circumstances during this period are believed to have led to many of the idiosyncrasies for which Costa Rica has become known, while concomitantly setting the stage for Costa Rica&#x27;s development as a more egalitarian society than the rest of its neighbors. Costa Rica became a &quot;rural democracy&quot; with no oppressed mestizo or indigenous class. It was not long before Spanish settlers turned to the hills, where they found rich volcanic soil and a milder climate than that of the lowlands.

=== Independence ===

Like the rest of Central America, Costa Rica never fought for independence from Spain. On 15 September 1821, after the final Spanish defeat in the Mexican War of Independence (1810–1821), the authorities in Guatemala declared the independence of all of Central America. That date is still celebrated as Independence Day in Costa Rica even though, technically, under the Spanish Constitution of 1812 that had been readopted in 1820, Nicaragua and Costa Rica had become an autonomous province with its capital in León.

On March 3, 1824, the government of the State of Costa Rica officially proposed to the municipality of Nicoya its voluntary incorporation into the country, through a document in which it invited it &quot;if it was convenient to join its Province without going against its will.&quot; On July 4, an open town hall was convened in Nicoya to discuss the matter, but attendees declined the invitation under the argument &quot;that this Party... cannot be dissident.&quot;

On July 25, 1824, a second plebiscite was called in the city of Nicoya. After deliberation, the incorporation into Costa Rica was decided in an open town hall meeting, preparing a record in which the main reasons for it were noted, pointing out the advantages in terms of trade, the desire to participate in the advances that are palpable in Costa Rica, the economic, administrative and public service benefits, the creation of schools, security and quiet, referring to the state of war that Nicaragua was experiencing at that time and the fear that it would spread to the Partido populations, in addition to point out the poverty in which its towns find themselves and the geography of the territory as justifications for the union. Three days later, another similar plebiscite was held in Santa Cruz, with the same result. The election was by majority vote, with 77% of the Party&#x27;s population in favor of incorporation, and 23% against it. The town of Guanacaste was the only one that declined annexation, due to the ties its residents had with the city of Rivas, Nicaragua.

Upon independence, Costa Rican authorities faced the issue of officially deciding the future of the country. Two bands formed: the Imperialists, defended by Cartago and Heredia cities, which were in favor of joining the Mexican Empire, and the Republicans, represented by the cities of San José and Alajuela who defended full independence. Because of the lack of agreement on these two possible outcomes, the first civil war in Costa Rica occurred. The Battle of Ochomogo took place on the Hill of Ochomogo, located in the Central Valley in 1823. The conflict was won by the Republicans and, as a consequence, the city of Cartago lost its status as the capital, which moved to San José.
In 1838, long after the Federal Republic of Central America ceased to function in practice, Costa Rica formally withdrew and proclaimed itself sovereign. The considerable distance and poor communication routes between Guatemala City and the Central Plateau, where most of the Costa Rican population lived then and still lives now, meant the local population had little allegiance to the federal government in Guatemala. Since colonial times, Costa Rica has been reluctant to become economically tied with the rest of Central America. Even today, despite most of its neighbors&#x27; efforts to increase regional integration, Costa Rica has remained more independent.

Until 1849, when it became part of Panama, Chiriquí was part of Costa Rica. Costa Rican pride was assuaged for the loss of this eastern (or southern) territory with the acquisition of Guanacaste, in the north.

=== Economic growth in the 19th century ===

Coffee was first planted in Costa Rica in 1808, and by the 1820s, it surpassed tobacco, sugar, and cacao as a primary export. Coffee production remained Costa Rica&#x27;s principal source of wealth well into the 20th century, creating a wealthy class of growers, the so-called Coffee Barons. The revenue helped to modernize the country.

Most of the coffee exported was grown around the main centers of population in the Central Plateau and then transported by oxcart to the Pacific port of Puntarenas after the main road was built in 1846. By the mid-1850s the main market for coffee was Britain. It soon became a high priority to develop an effective transportation route from the Central Plateau to the Atlantic Ocean. For this purpose, in the 1870s, the Costa Rican government contracted with U.S. businessman Minor C. Keith to build a railroad from San José to the Caribbean port of Limón. Despite enormous difficulties with construction, disease, and financing, the railroad was completed in 1890.

Most Afro-Costa Ricans descend from Jamaican immigrants who worked in the construction of that railway and now make up about 3% of Costa Rica&#x27;s population. U.S. convicts, Italians, and Chinese immigrants also participated in the construction project. In exchange for completing the railroad, the Costa Rican government granted Keith large tracts of land and a lease on the train route, which he used to produce bananas and export them to the United States. As a result, bananas came to rival coffee as the principal Costa Rican export, while foreign-owned corporations (including the United Fruit Company later) began to hold a major role in the national economy and eventually became a symbol of the exploitative export economy. The major labor dispute between the peasants and the United Fruit Company (The Great Banana Strike) was a major event in the country&#x27;s history and was an important step that would eventually lead to the formation of effective trade unions in Costa Rica, as the company was required to sign a collective agreement with its workers in 1938.

==== 20th century ====

Historically, Costa Rica has generally enjoyed greater peace and more consistent political stability than many of its fellow Latin American nations. Since the late 19th century, however, Costa Rica has experienced two significant periods of violence. In 1917–1919, General Federico Tinoco Granados ruled as a military dictator until he was overthrown and forced into exile. The unpopularity of Tinoco&#x27;s regime led, after he was overthrown, to a considerable decline in the size, wealth, and political influence of the Costa Rican military. In 1948, José Figueres Ferrer led an armed uprising in the wake of a disputed presidential election between Rafael Ángel Calderón Guardia (who had been president between 1940 and 1944) and Otilio Ulate Blanco. With more than 2,000 dead, the resulting 44-day Costa Rican Civil War was the bloodiest event in Costa Rica during the 20th century.

The victorious rebels formed a government junta that abolished the military all together and oversaw the drafting of a new constitution by a democratically elected assembly. Having enacted these reforms, the junta transferred power to Ulate on 8 November 1949. After the &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot;, Figueres became a national hero, winning the country&#x27;s first democratic election under the new constitution in 1953. Since then, Costa Rica has held 15 additional presidential elections, the latest in 2022. With uninterrupted democracy dating back to at least 1948, the country is the region&#x27;s most stable.

== Geography ==

Costa Rica borders the Caribbean Sea to the east, and the Pacific Ocean to the west. Costa Rica also borders Nicaragua to the north and Panama to the south.

The highest point in the country is Cerro Chirripó, at . The highest volcano in the country is the Irazú Volcano () and the largest lake is Lake Arenal. There are 14 known volcanoes in Costa Rica, and six of them have been active in the last 75 years.

=== Climate ===
Costa Rica experiences a tropical climate year-round. There are two seasons. The dry season is December to April, and the rainy season is May to November. March and April are the hottest months in the country, while December and January are the coldest. However, there are rainy days in the dry season, as well as weeks without rain in the wet season.

=== Flora and fauna ===

Despite its size, Costa Rica is one of the countries with the greatest biodiversity in all of Latin America.

One national park, the Corcovado National Park, is internationally renowned among ecologists for its biodiversity (including big cats and tapirs) and is where visitors can expect to see an abundance of wildlife. Corcovado is the one park in Costa Rica where all four Costa Rican monkey species can be found. These include the white-headed capuchin, the mantled howler, the endangered Geoffroy&#x27;s spider monkey, and the Central American squirrel monkey, found only on the Pacific coast of Costa Rica and a small part of Panama and considered endangered until 2008 when its status was upgraded to vulnerable. Deforestation, illegal pet trading, and hunting are the main reasons for its threatened status. La Amistad and Chirripó present the climate of the páramo, at a height of more than 3000 meters above sea level, providing other types of flora and fauna, such as the white-nosed coati, the sooty thrush and &quot;Rogiera amoena&quot;. Costa Rica is the first tropical country to have stopped and reversed deforestation; it has successfully restored its forestry and developed an ecosystem service to teach biologists and ecologists about its environmental protection measures. The country had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.65/10, ranking it 118th globally out of 172 countries.

== Economy ==

The country has been considered economically stable with moderate inflation, estimated at 2.6% in 2017, and moderately high GDP growth, which increased from US$41.3 billion in 2011 to US$52.6 billion in 2015. The estimated GDP for 2018 is US$59.0 billion and the estimated GDP per capita (purchasing power parity) is Intl$17,559.1. The growing debt and budget deficit are the country&#x27;s primary concerns. A 2017 study by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development warned that reducing the foreign debt must be a very high priority for the government. Other fiscal reforms were also recommended to moderate the budget deficit.

Many foreign companies (manufacturing and services) operate in Costa Rica&#x27;s Free Trade Zones (FTZ) where they benefit from investment and tax incentives. Well over half of that type of investment has come from the U.S. According to the government, the zones supported over 82,000 direct jobs and 43,000 indirect jobs in 2015. Companies with facilities in the America Free Zone in Heredia, for example, include Intel, Dell, HP, Bayer, Bosch, DHL, IBM and Okay Industries.

Of the 2016 GDP, 5.5% was generated by agriculture, 18.6% by industry, and 75.9% by services. For the region, its unemployment level is moderately high (8.2% in 2016, according to the IMF). Although 20.5% of the population lives below the poverty line (2017), Costa Rica has one of the highest standards of living in Central America.

High-quality health care is provided by the government at a low cost to the users. Housing is also very affordable. Costa Rica is recognized in Latin America for the quality of its educational system, a result of which is that the country has one of the highest literacy rates in Latin America, 97%. General Basic Education is mandatory and provided without cost to the user. A US government report confirms that the country has &quot;historically placed a high priority on education and the creation of a skilled workforce&quot; but notes that the high school drop-out rate is increasing. As well, Costa Rica would benefit from more courses in languages such as English, Portuguese, Mandarin, and French and also in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM).

Costa Rica sources much of its energy from renewables and is undertaking reforestation projects to reduce its overall greenhouse gas emissions. In 2007, the Costa Rican government announced the commitment for Costa Rica to become the first carbon neutral country by 2021. Costa Rica would be, according to its leaders, the first country in the world to have launched in 2019 a comprehensive decarbonization plan (net zero carbon emissions by 2050).

=== Trade and foreign investment ===

Costa Rica has free trade agreements with many countries, including the US. There are no significant trade barriers that would affect imports and the country has been lowering its tariffs to other Central American countries. The country&#x27;s Free Trade Zones provide incentives for manufacturing and service industries to operate in Costa Rica. In 2015, the zones supported over 82 thousand direct jobs and 43 thousand indirect jobs 2015, and average wages in the FTZ were 1.8 times greater than the average for private enterprise work in the rest of the country. In 2016, Amazon.com for example, had some 3,500 employees in Costa Rica and planned to increase that by 1,500 in 2017, making it an important employer.

The central location provides access to American markets and direct ocean access to Europe and Asia. The most important exports in 2015 (in order of dollar value) were medical instruments, bananas, tropical fruits, integrated circuits, and orthopedic appliances. Total imports in that year were US$15 billion. The most significant products imported in 2015 (in order of dollar value) were refined petroleum, automobiles, packaged medications, broadcasting equipment, and computers. The total exports were US$12.6 billion for a trade deficit of US$2.39 billion in 2015.
Pharmaceuticals, financial outsourcing, software development, and ecotourism have become the prime industries in Costa Rica&#x27;s economy. High levels of education among its residents make the country an attractive investment location. Since 1999, tourism earns more foreign exchange than the combined exports of the country&#x27;s three main cash crops: bananas and pineapples especially, but also other crops, including coffee. Coffee production played a key role in Costa Rica&#x27;s history and in 2006, was the third cash crop export. As a small country, Costa Rica now provides under 1% of the world&#x27;s coffee production. In 2015, the value of coffee exports was US$305.9 million, a small part of the total agricultural exports of US$2.7 billion. Coffee production increased by 13.7% percent in 2015–16, declined by 17.5% in 2016–17 but was expected to increase by about 15% in the subsequent year.

Costa Rica has developed a system of payments for environmental services. Similarly, Costa Rica has a tax on water pollution to penalize businesses and homeowners that dump sewage, agricultural chemicals, and other pollutants into waterways. In May 2007, the Costa Rican government announced its intentions to become 100% carbon neutral by 2021. By 2015, 93 percent of the country&#x27;s electricity came from renewable sources. In 2019, the country produced 99.62% of its electricity from renewable sources and ran completely on renewable sources for 300 continuous days.

In 1996, the Forest Law was enacted to provide direct financial incentives to landowners for the provision of environmental services. This helped reorient the forestry sector away from commercial timber production and the resulting deforestation and helped create awareness of the services it provides for the economy and society (i.e., carbon fixation, hydrological services such as producing fresh drinking water, biodiversity protection, and provision of scenic beauty).

A 2016 report by the U.S. government report identifies other challenges facing Costa Rica as it works to expand its economy by working with companies from the US (and probably from other countries). The major concerns identified were as follows:
* The ports, roads, railways, and water delivery systems would benefit from major upgrading, a concern voiced by other reports too. Attempts by China to invest in upgrading such aspects were &quot;stalled by bureaucratic and legal concerns&quot;.
* The bureaucracy is &quot;often slow and cumbersome&quot;.

=== Tourism ===


Costa Rica had 2.9 million foreign visitors in 2016, up 10% from 2015. In 2015, the tourism sector was responsible for 5.8% of the country&#x27;s GDP, or $3.4 billion. In 2016, the highest number of tourists came from the United States, with 1,000,000 visitors, followed by Europe with 434,884 arrivals. According to Costa Rica Vacations, once tourists arrive in the country, 22% go to Tamarindo, 18% go to Arenal, 17% pass through Liberia (where the Daniel Oduber Quirós International Airport is located), 16% go to San José, the country&#x27;s capital (passing through Juan Santamaría International Airport), while 18% choose Manuel Antonio and 7% Monteverde.

By 2004, tourism was generating more revenue and foreign exchange than bananas and coffee combined. In 2016, the World Travel &amp; Tourism Council&#x27;s estimates indicated a direct contribution to the GDP of 5.1% and 110,000 direct jobs in Costa Rica; the total number of jobs indirectly supported by tourism was 271,000.

A pioneer of ecotourism, Costa Rica draws many tourists to its extensive series of national parks and other protected areas. The trail Camino de Costa Rica supports this by allowing travelers to walk across the country from the Atlantic to the Pacific coast. In the 2011 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index, Costa Rica ranked 44th in the world and second among Latin American countries after Mexico in 2011. By the time of the 2017 report, the country had reached 38th place, slightly behind Panama. The Ethical Traveler group&#x27;s ten countries on their 2017 list of The World&#x27;s Ten Best Ethical Destinations includes Costa Rica. The country scored highest in environmental protection among the winners. Costa Rica began reversing deforestation in the 1990s, and they are moving towards using only renewable energy, with 93% of all its energy being renewable.

== Government and politics ==
=== Administrative divisions ===
Costa Rica is composed of seven provinces, which in turn are divided into 82 cantons (, plural ), each of which is directed by a mayor. Mayors are chosen democratically every four years by each canton. There are no provincial legislatures. The cantons are further divided into 488 districts ().

=== Foreign relations ===
Costa Rica is an active member of the United Nations and the Organization of American States. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights and the United Nations University of Peace are based in Costa Rica. It is also a member of many other international organizations related to human rights and democracy, such as the Community of Democracies. The main foreign policy objective of Costa Rica is to foster human rights and sustainable development as a way to secure stability and growth.

Costa Rica is a member of the International Criminal Court, without a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the United States military (as covered under Article 98). Costa Rica is an observer of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie.

On 10 September 1961, some months after Fidel Castro declared Cuba a socialist state, Costa Rican President Mario Echandi ended diplomatic relations with Cuba through &quot;Executive Decree Number 2&quot;. This freeze lasted 47 years until President Óscar Arias Sánchez re-established normal relations on 18 March 2009, saying, &quot;If we have been able to turn the page with regimes as profoundly different to our reality as occurred with the USSR or, more recently, with the Republic of China, how would we not do it with a country that is geographically and culturally much nearer to Costa Rica?&quot; Arias announced that both countries would exchange ambassadors.

Costa Rica has a long-term disagreement with Nicaragua over the San Juan River, which defines the border between the two countries, and Costa Rica&#x27;s rights of navigation on the river. On 14 July 2009, the International Court of Justice in the Hague upheld Costa Rica&#x27;s navigation rights for commercial purposes to subsistence fishing on their side of the river. An 1858 treaty extended navigation rights to Costa Rica, but Nicaragua denied passenger travel and fishing were part of the deal; the court ruled Costa Ricans on the river were not required to have Nicaraguan tourist cards or visas as Nicaragua argued, but, in a nod to the Nicaraguans, ruled that Costa Rican boats and passengers must stop at the first and last Nicaraguan port along their route. They must also have an identity document or passport. Nicaragua can also impose timetables on Costa Rican traffic. Nicaragua may require Costa Rican boats to display the flag of Nicaragua but may not charge them for departure clearance from its ports. These were all specific items of contention brought to the court in the 2005 filing.

In 2010, there was also a dispute around Isla Calero, and the effects of Nicaraguan dredging of the river in that area.

On 1 June 2007, Costa Rica broke diplomatic ties with Taiwan, switching recognition to the People&#x27;s Republic of China. Costa Rica was the first of the Central American nations to do so. President Óscar Arias Sánchez admitted the action was a response to economic exigency. In response, the PRC built a new, $100 million, state-of-the-art football stadium in Parque la Sabana, in the province of San José. Approximately 600 Chinese engineers and laborers took part in this project, and it was inaugurated in March 2011, with a match between the national teams of Costa Rica and China.

Costa Rica finished a term on the United Nations Security Council, having been elected for a nonrenewable, two-year term in the 2007 election. Its term expired on 31 December 2009; this was Costa Rica&#x27;s third time on the Security Council. Elayne Whyte Gómez is the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica to the UN Office at Geneva (2017) and President of the United Nations Conference to Negotiate a Legally Binding Instrument to Prohibit Nuclear Weapons.

Costa Rica is the 58th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

=== Pacifism ===
On 1 December 1948, Costa Rica abolished its military force. In 1949, the abolition of the military was introduced in Article 12 of the Costa Rican Constitution. The budget previously dedicated to the military is now dedicated to providing health care services and education. According to &quot;Deutsche Welle&quot;, &quot;Costa Rica is known for its stable democracy, progressive social policies, such as free, compulsory public education, high social well-being, and emphasis on environmental protection.&quot; For law enforcement, Costa Rica has the Public Force of Costa Rica police agency.

In 2017, Costa Rica signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

=== Leadership in World governance initiatives ===
Costa Rica has been one of the signatories of the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution. As a result, in 1968, for the first time in human history, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt the Constitution for the Federation of Earth. Francisco Orlich Bolmarcich, then president of Costa Rica signed the agreement to convene a World Constituent Assembly along with former presidents José Figueres Ferrer and Otilio Ulate Blanco.

=== Environmentalism ===
In 2021, Costa Rica, alongside Denmark, launched the &quot;Beyond Oil and Gas Alliance&quot; (BOGA) to stop the use of fossil fuels. The BOGA campaign was presented in the COP26 Climate Summit, where Sweden joined as a core member, while New Zealand and Portugal joined as associate members.

== Demographics ==
The 2022 census counted a total population of 5,044,197 people. In 2022, the census also recorded ethnic or racial identity for all groups separately for the first time in more than ninety-five years since the 1927 census. Options included Indigenous, Black or Afro-descendant, Mulatto, Chinese, Mestizo, white and other on section IV: question 7.
In 2011 data for the following groups were: 83.6% whites or mestizos, 6.7% mulattoes, 2.4% Native American, 1.1% black or Afro-Caribbean; the census showed 1.1% as Other, 2.9% (141,304 people) as None, and 2.2% (107,196 people) as unspecified.

In 2011, there were over 104,000 Native American or indigenous inhabitants, representing 2.4% of the population. Most of them live in secluded reservations, distributed among eight ethnic groups: Quitirrisí (in the Central Valley), Matambú or Chorotega (Guanacaste), Maleku (northern Alajuela), Bribri (southern Atlantic), Cabécar (Cordillera de Talamanca), Ngäbe (southern Costa Rica, along the Panamá border), Boruca (southern Costa Rica) and (southern Costa Rica).

The population includes European Costa Ricans (of European ancestry), primarily of Spanish descent, with significant numbers of Italian, German, English, Dutch, French, Irish, Portuguese, and Polish families, as well a sizable Jewish community. The majority of the Afro-Costa Ricans are Creole English-speaking descendants of 19th century black Jamaican immigrant workers.

The 2011 census classified 83.6% of the population as white or Mestizo; the latter are persons of combined European and Amerindian descent. The Mulatto segment (mix of white and black) represented 6.7% and Indigenous people made up 2.4% of the population. Native and European mixed-blood populations are far less than in other Latin American countries. Exceptions are Guanacaste, where almost half the population is visibly mestizo, a legacy of the more pervasive unions between Spanish colonists and Chorotega Amerindians through several generations, and Limón, where the vast majority of the Afro-Costa Rican community lives.

Costa Rica hosts many refugees, mainly from Colombia and Nicaragua. As a result of that and illegal immigration, an estimated 10–15% (400,000–600,000) of the Costa Rican population is made up of Nicaraguans. Some Nicaraguans migrate for seasonal work opportunities and then return to their country. Costa Rica took in many refugees from a range of other Latin American countries fleeing civil wars and dictatorships during the 1970s and 1980s, notably from Chile and Argentina, as well as people from El Salvador who fled from guerrillas and government death squads.

According to the World Bank, in 2010 about 489,200 immigrants lived in the country, many from Nicaragua, Panama, El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala, and Belize, while 125,306 Costa Ricans live abroad in the United States, Panama, Nicaragua, Spain, Mexico, Canada, Germany, Venezuela, Dominican Republic, and Ecuador. The number of migrants declined in later years but in 2015, there were some 420,000 immigrants in Costa Rica and the number of asylum seekers (mostly from Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua) rose to more than 110,000, a fivefold increase from 2012. In 2016, the country was called a &quot;magnet&quot; for migrants from South and Central America and other countries who were hoping to reach the U.S.

=== Largest cantons ===

=== Religion ===


Most Costa Ricans identify with a Christian religion, with Catholicism being the one with the largest number of members and also the official state religion according to the 1949 Constitution, which at the same time guarantees freedom of religion. Costa Rica is the only modern state in the Americas which currently has Catholicism as its state religion; other countries with state religions (Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican, Orthodox) are in Europe: Liechtenstein, Monaco, the Vatican City, Malta, United Kingdom, Denmark, Iceland, and Greece.

The Latinobarómetro survey of 2017 found that 57% of the population identify themselves as Roman Catholics, 25% are Evangelical Protestants, 15% report that they do not have a religion, and 2% declare that they belong to another religion. This survey indicated a decline in the share of Catholics and rise in the share of Protestants and irreligious. A University of Costa Rica survey of 2018 showed similar rates; 52% Catholics, 22% Protestants, 17% irreligious, and 3% other. The rate of secularism is high by Latin American standards.

Due to small, but continuous, immigration from Asia and the Middle East, other religions have grown. The most popular is Buddhism, with about 100,000 practitioners (over 2% of the population). Most Buddhists are members of the Han Chinese community of about 40,000 with some new local converts. There is also a small Muslim community of about 500 families or 0.001% of the population.

The Sinagoga Shaarei Zion synagogue is near La Sabana Metropolitan Park in San José. Several homes in the neighborhood east of the park display the Star of David and other Jewish symbols.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints claims more than 35,000 members, and has a temple in San José that served as a regional worship center for Costa Rica. However, they represent less than 1% of the population.

=== Languages ===

The primary language spoken in Costa Rica is Spanish, which features characteristics distinct to the country, a form of Central American Spanish. Costa Rica is a linguistically diverse country and home to at least five living local indigenous languages spoken by the descendants of pre-Columbian peoples: Maléku, Cabécar, Bribri, Guaymí, and Buglere.

Of native languages still spoken, primarily in indigenous reservations, the most numerically important are the Bribri, Maléku, Cabécar and Ngäbere languages; some of these have several thousand speakers in Costa Rica while others have a few hundred. Some languages, such as Teribe and Boruca, have fewer than a thousand speakers. The Buglere language and the closely related Guaymí are spoken by some in southeast Puntarenas.

A Creole-English language, Jamaican &quot;patois&quot; (also known as Mekatelyu), is an English-based Creole language spoken by the Afro-Carib immigrants who have settled primarily in Limón Province along the Caribbean coast.

About 10.7% of Costa Rica&#x27;s adult population (18 or older) also speaks English, 0.7% French, and 0.3% speaks Portuguese or German as a second language.

== Culture ==
Costa Rica was the point where the Mesoamerican and South American native cultures met. The northwest of the country, the Nicoya peninsula, was the southernmost point of Nahuatl cultural influence when the Spanish conquerors (conquistadores) came in the 16th century. The central and southern portions of the country had Chibcha influences. The Atlantic coast, meanwhile, was populated with African workers during the 17th and 18th centuries.

As a result of the immigration of Spaniards, their 16th-century Spanish culture and its evolution marked everyday life and culture until today, with the Spanish language and the Catholic religion as primary influences.

The Department of Culture, Youth, and Sports is in charge of the promotion and coordination of cultural life. The work of the department is divided into the Direction of Culture, Visual Arts, Scenic Arts, Music, Patrimony, and the System of Libraries. Permanent programs, such as the National Symphony Orchestra of Costa Rica and the Youth Symphony Orchestra, are conjunctions of two areas of work: Culture and Youth.

Dance-oriented genres, such as &quot;soca&quot;, &quot;salsa&quot;, &quot;bachata&quot;, &quot;merengue&quot;, &quot;cumbia&quot; and Costa Rican swing, are enjoyed increasingly by older rather than younger people. The guitar is popular, especially as an accompaniment to folk dances; however, the marimba was made the national instrument.

In November 2017, &quot;National Geographic&quot; magazine named Costa Rica as the happiest country in the world, and the country routinely ranks high in various happiness metrics. The article included this summary: &quot;Costa Ricans enjoy the pleasure of living daily life to the fullest in a place that mitigates stress and maximizes joy&quot;. It is not surprising then that one of the most recognizable phrases among &quot;Ticos&quot; is &quot;Pura Vida&quot;, pure life in a literal translation. It reflects the inhabitant&#x27;s philosophy of life, denoting a simple life, free of stress, a positive, relaxed feeling. The expression is used in various contexts in conversation. Often, people walking down the streets, or buying food at shops say hello by saying &quot;Pura Vida&quot;. It can be phrased as a question or as an acknowledgment of one&#x27;s presence. A recommended response to &quot;How are you?&quot; would be &quot;&quot;Pura Vida&quot;.&quot; In that usage, it might be translated as &quot;awesome&quot;, indicating that all is very well. When used as a question, the connotation would be &quot;everything is going well?&quot; or &quot;how are you?&quot;.

Costa Rica rates 12th on the 2017 Happy Planet Index in the World Happiness Report by the UN; however, the country is said to be the happiest in Latin America. Reasons include the high level of social services, the caring nature of its inhabitants, long life expectancy and relatively low corruption.

=== Cuisine ===
Costa Rican cuisine is a blend of Native American, Spanish, African, and many other cuisines origins. Dishes such as the very traditional tamale and many others made of corn are the most representative of its indigenous inhabitants, and similar to other neighboring Mesoamerican countries. Spaniards brought many new ingredients to the country from other lands, especially spices and domestic animals. Later in the 19th century, the African flavor lent its presence with influence from other Caribbean mixed flavors. This is how Costa Rican cuisine today is very varied, with every new ethnic group who had recently become part of the country&#x27;s population influencing the country&#x27;s cuisine.

=== Sports ===

Costa Rica entered the Summer Olympics for the first time in 1936. The sisters Silvia and Claudia Poll have won all four of the country&#x27;s Olympic Medals for swimming; one Gold, one Silver, and two Bronze.

Football is the most popular sport in Costa Rica. The national team has played in five FIFA World Cup tournaments and reached the quarter-finals for the first time in 2014. Its best performance in the regional CONCACAF Gold Cup was runner-up in 2002. Paulo Wanchope, a forward who played for three clubs in England&#x27;s Premier League in the late 1990s and early 2000s, is credited with enhancing foreign recognition of Costa Rican football. Costa Rica, along with Panama, was granted the hosting rights of 2020 FIFA U-20 Women&#x27;s World Cup, which was postponed until 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On 17 November 2020, FIFA announced that the event would be held in Costa Rica in 2022.

As of late 2021, Costa Rica&#x27;s women&#x27;s national volleyball team has been the top team in Central America&#x27;s AFECAVOL (Asociación de Federaciones CentroAmericanas de Voleibol) zone. Costa Rica featured a women&#x27;s national team in beach volleyball that competed at the 2018–2020 NORCECA Beach Volleyball Continental Cup.

== Education ==
The literacy rate in Costa Rica is approximately 97 percent and English is widely spoken primarily due to Costa Rica&#x27;s tourism industry. When the army was abolished in 1949, it was said that the &quot;army would be replaced with an army of teachers&quot;. Universal public education is guaranteed in the constitution; primary education is obligatory, and both preschool and secondary school are free. Students who finish 11th grade receive a Costa Rican Bachillerato Diploma accredited by the Costa Rican Ministry of Education.

There are both state and private universities. The state-funded University of Costa Rica has been awarded the title &quot;Meritorious Institution of Costa Rican Education and Culture&quot; and hosts around 25,000 students who study at numerous campuses established around the country.

A 2016 report by the U.S. government report identifies the current challenges facing the education system, including the high dropout rate among secondary school students. The country needs even more workers who are fluent in English and languages such as Portuguese, Mandarin, and French. It would also benefit from more graduates in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs, according to the report. Costa Rica was ranked 70th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

== Health ==

According to the UNDP, in 2010, the life expectancy at birth for Costa Ricans was 79.3 years. The Nicoya Peninsula is considered one of the Blue Zones in the world, where people commonly live active lives past the age of 100 years. The New Economics Foundation (NEF) ranked Costa Rica first in its 2009 Happy Planet Index, and once again in 2012. The index measures the health and happiness they produce per unit of environmental input. According to NEF, Costa Rica&#x27;s lead is due to its very high life expectancy which is second highest in the Americas, and higher than the United States. The country also experienced well-being higher than many richer nations and a per capita ecological footprint one-third the size of the United States&#x27;.

In 2002, there were 0.58 new general practitioner (medical) consultations 0.33 new specialist consultations per capita, and a hospital admission rate of 8.1%. Preventive health care is also successful. In 2002, 96% of Costa Rican women used some form of contraception, and antenatal care services were provided to 87% of all pregnant women. All children under one have access to well-baby clinics, and the immunization coverage rate in 2020 was above 95% for all antigens. Costa Rica has a very low malaria incidence of 48 per 100,000 in 2000 and no reported cases of measles in 2002. The perinatal mortality rate dropped from 12.0 per 1000 in 1972 to 5.4 per 1000 in 2001.

Costa Rica has been cited as Central America&#x27;s great health success story. Its healthcare system is ranked higher than that of the United States, despite Costa Rica&#x27;s much lower GDP. Before 1940, government hospitals and charities provided most health care. But since the 1941 creation of the Social Insurance Administration (&quot;Caja Costarricense de Seguro Social&quot; – CCSS), Costa Rica has provided universal health care to its wage-earning residents, with coverage extended to dependants over time. In 1973, the CCSS took over administration of all 29 of the country&#x27;s public hospitals and all health care, also launching a Rural Health Program (&quot;Programa de Salud Rural&quot;) for primary care in rural areas, later extended to primary care services nationwide. In 1993, laws were passed to enable elected health boards that represented health consumers, social insurance representatives, employers, and social organizations. By 2000, social health insurance coverage was available to 82% of the Costa Rican population. Each health committee manages an area equivalent to one of the 83 administrative cantons of Costa Rica. There is limited use of private, for-profit services (around 14.4% of the national total health expenditure). About 7% of GDP is allocated to the health sector, and over 70% is government-funded.

Primary health care facilities in Costa Rica include health clinics, with a general practitioner, nurse, clerk, pharmacist, and a primary health technician. In 2008, there were five specialty national hospitals, three general national hospitals, seven regional hospitals, 13 peripheral hospitals, and 10 major clinics serving as referral centers for primary care clinics, which also deliver biopsychosocial services, family and community medical services, and promotion and prevention programs. Patients can choose private health care to avoid waiting lists.

Costa Rica is among the Latin American countries that have become popular destinations for medical tourism. In 2006, Costa Rica received 150,000 foreigners that came for medical treatment. Costa Rica is particularly attractive to Americans due to geographic proximity, high quality of medical services, and lower medical costs.

In the 2024 Global Hunger Index, Costa Rica is one of 22 countries with a GHI score of less than 5.

== See also ==

* Index of Costa Rica-related articles
* Outline of Costa Rica
* Camino de Costa Rica (trail across the country from the Atlantic to the Pacific coast)

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Blake, Beatrice. &quot;The New Key to Costa Rica&quot; (Berkeley: Ulysses Press, 2009).
* Chase, Cida S. &quot;Costa Rican Americans&quot;. &quot;Gale Encyclopedia of Multicultural America,&quot; edited by Thomas Riggs, (3rd ed., vol. 1, Gale, 2014), pp. 543–551. online
* Edelman, Marc. &quot;Peasants Against Globalization: Rural Social Movements in Costa Rica&quot;. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999.
* Huhn, Sebastian: &quot;Contested Cornerstones of Nonviolent National Self-Perception in Costa Rica: A Historical Approach&quot;, 2009.
* Keller, Marius; Niestroy, Ingeborg; García Schmidt, Armando; Esche, Andreas. &quot;Costa Rica: Pioneering Sustainability&quot;. Excerpt (pp. 81–102) from Bertelsmann Stiftung (ed.). &quot;Winning Strategies for a Sustainable Future&quot;. Gütersloh, Germany: Verlag Bertelsmann Stiftung, 2013.
* Lara, Sylvia Lara, Tom Barry, and Peter Simonson. &quot;Inside Costa Rica: The Essential Guide to Its Politics, Economy, Society and Environment&quot;. London: Latin America Bureau, 1995.
* Lehoucq, Fabrice E. and Ivan Molina. &quot;Stuffing the Ballot Box: Fraud, Electoral Reform, and Democratization in Costa Rica&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
* Lehoucq, Fabrice E. &quot;Policymaking, Parties, and Institutions in Democratic Costa Rica&quot;, 2006.
* Longley, Kyle. &quot;Sparrow and the Hawk: Costa Rica and the United States during the Rise of José Figueres&quot;. (University of Alabama Press, 1997).
* Mount, Graeme S. &quot;Costa Rica and the Cold War, 1948–1990&quot;. &quot;Canadian Journal of History&quot; 50.2 (2015): 290–316.
* Palmer, Steven and Iván Molina. &quot;The Costa Rica Reader: History, Culture, Politics&quot;. Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2004.
* Sandoval, Carlos. &quot;Threatening Others: Nicaraguans and the Formation of National Identities in Costa Rica&quot;. Athens: Ohio University Press, 2004.
* Wilson, Bruce M. &quot;Costa Rica: Politics, Economics, and Democracy: Politics, Economics, and Democracy.&quot; Boulder, London: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1998.

== External links ==

* Costa Rica. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Costa Rica at &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Street Art of San Jose by danscape 
* Costa Rica profile from the BBC News
* Key Development Forecasts for Costa Rica from International Futures
; Government and administration
* Official website of the government of Costa Rica 
;Trade
* World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Costa Rica</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="0" end="10" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="68" end="90" title="Costa Rica" label="Republic of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="139" end="152" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="165" end="174" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="193" end="206" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="225" end="231" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="301" end="316" title="Maritime boundary" label="maritime border"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="322" end="329" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q215081" start="346" end="358" title="Cocos Island" label="Cocos Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="488" end="496" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="572" end="587" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="593" end="614" title="Presidential system" label="presidential republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231522" start="650" end="664" title="Constitution of Costa Rica" label="constitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="980" end="990" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="1071" end="1087" title="Free-trade zone" label="Free Trade Zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557752" start="1178" end="1196" title="Indigenous peoples of Costa Rica" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="1217" end="1229" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="1331" end="1351" title="First Mexican Empire" label="First Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q190025" start="1383" end="1418" title="Federal Republic of Central America" label="Federal Republic of Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434218" start="1494" end="1515" title="Costa Rican Civil War" label="Costa Rican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333698" start="1540" end="1558" title="Public Force of Costa Rica" label="abolished its army"/>
<link wikidata="Q667685" start="1605" end="1636" title="List of countries without armed forces" label="nations without a standing army"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="1695" end="1718" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="1812" end="1848" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917873" start="1887" end="1904" title="Human development (economics)" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="2076" end="2097" title="Democracy Index" label="democratic governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q612956" start="2139" end="2160" title="Happy Planet Index" label="sustainable wellbeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="2213" end="2232" title="Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417780" start="2295" end="2315" title="Freedom in the World" label="Freedom in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090395" start="2371" end="2393" title="World Happiness Report" label="World Happiness Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="2529" end="2546" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622008" start="2581" end="2598" title="Intermediate Area" label="Intermediate Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="2629" end="2641" title="Mesoamerican" label="Mesoamerican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="2646" end="2652" title="Andean" label="Andean"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="2696" end="2709" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204368" start="2760" end="2781" title="Isthmo-Colombian Area" label="Isthmo-Colombian Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="2905" end="2920" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="2950" end="2953" title="Before Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625953" start="2961" end="2977" title="Turrialba (district)" label="Turrialba Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485378" start="2995" end="3009" title="Clovis culture" label="Clovis culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="3042" end="3055" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q183319" start="3244" end="3250" title="tubers" label="tubers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3424" end="3431" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="3540" end="3547" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="3989" end="4005" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="colonial society"/>
<link wikidata="Q913374" start="4100" end="4106" title="Bribri people" label="Bribri"/>
<link wikidata="Q59000417" start="4111" end="4117" title="Boruca people" label="Boruca"/>
<link wikidata="Q957600" start="4164" end="4187" title="Cordillera de Talamanca" label="Cordillera de Talamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="4252" end="4258" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="4395" end="4415" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q928747" start="4605" end="4624" title="Gil González Dávila" label="Gil González Dávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077243" start="4872" end="4902" title="Captaincy General of Guatemala" label="Captaincy General of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="4926" end="4950" title="New Spain" label="Viceroyalty of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="5017" end="5031" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="5097" end="5106" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="5136" end="5148" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8965" start="5224" end="5250" title="Viceroyalty of New Granada" label="Viceroyalty of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="5257" end="5265" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="5898" end="5911" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spanish Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="6275" end="6282" title="mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="6489" end="6504" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="6619" end="6646" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421412" start="6842" end="6870" title="Spanish Constitution of 1812" label="Spanish Constitution of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="6904" end="6913" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q208151" start="6983" end="6987" title="León, Nicaragua" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="7486" end="7496" title="plebiscite" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291051" start="8250" end="8260" title="Santa Cruz (canton), Costa Rica" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757609" start="8523" end="8539" title="Rivas, Nicaragua" label="Rivas, Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q30617" start="8699" end="8706" title="Cartago, Costa Rica" label="Cartago"/>
<link wikidata="Q502192" start="8711" end="8725" title="Heredia Province" label="Heredia cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695562" start="8750" end="8757" title="Central America under Mexican rule" label="joining"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="8762" end="8776" title="First Mexican Empire" label="Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="8828" end="8836" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q37104" start="8841" end="8849" title="Alajuela" label="Alajuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q16573164" start="8995" end="9013" title="Battle of Ochomogo" label="Battle of Ochomogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q108913634" start="9040" end="9048" title="Ochomogo" label="Ochomogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879771" start="9065" end="9079" title="Costa Rican Central Valley" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q30617" start="9164" end="9171" title="Cartago, Costa Rica" label="Cartago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="9219" end="9227" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q190025" start="9253" end="9288" title="Federal Republic of Central America" label="Federal Republic of Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555" start="9447" end="9461" title="Guatemala City" label="Guatemala City"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="9931" end="9937" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q739651" start="9939" end="9947" title="Chiriquí province" label="Chiriquí"/>
<link wikidata="Q690026" start="10080" end="10090" title="Guanacaste Province" label="Guanacaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="10152" end="10158" title="Coffee" label="Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="10231" end="10238" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="10240" end="10245" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="10251" end="10256" title="cacao bean" label="cacao"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="10270" end="10276" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190777" start="10613" end="10619" title="Bullock cart" label="oxcart"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="10627" end="10634" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687" start="10643" end="10653" title="Puntarenas" label="Puntarenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q594946" start="10966" end="10980" title="Minor C. Keith" label="Minor C. Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987684" start="11022" end="11031" title="Western Caribbean Zone" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q30620" start="11040" end="11045" title="Limón" label="Limón"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="11193" end="11200" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="11573" end="11579" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771942" start="11746" end="11766" title="United Fruit Company" label="United Fruit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103212" start="12123" end="12149" title="trade unions in Costa Rica" label="trade unions in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q887715" start="12534" end="12558" title="Federico Tinoco Granados" label="Federico Tinoco Granados"/>
<link wikidata="Q65966960" start="12655" end="12675" title="Dictatorship of the Tinoco Brothers" label="Tinoco&amp;#x27;s regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q311126" start="12815" end="12835" title="José Figueres Ferrer" label="José Figueres Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434218" start="12843" end="12857" title="Costa Rican Civil War" label="armed uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q886923" start="12914" end="12943" title="Rafael Ángel Calderón Guardia" label="Rafael Ángel Calderón Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145952" start="12995" end="13014" title="Otilio Ulate Blanco" label="Otilio Ulate Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434218" start="13064" end="13085" title="Costa Rican Civil War" label="Costa Rican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333698" start="13203" end="13225" title="military of Costa Rica" label="abolished the military"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174918" start="13564" end="13571" title="Costa Rican general election, 1953" label="in 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q109529669" start="13654" end="13661" title="Costa Rican general election, 2022" label="in 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="13809" end="13822" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="13895" end="13904" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="13922" end="13928" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q252362" start="13980" end="13994" title="Cerro Chirripó" label="Cerro Chirripó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672472" start="14043" end="14056" title="Irazú Volcano" label="Irazú Volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q31938" start="14084" end="14095" title="Lake Arenal" label="Lake Arenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="14238" end="14254" title="tropical climate" label="tropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445387" start="14649" end="14674" title="Wildlife of Costa Rica" label="the greatest biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="14685" end="14698" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q869074" start="14724" end="14747" title="Corcovado National Park" label="Corcovado National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667323" start="14826" end="14834" title="big cats" label="big cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745367" start="14839" end="14845" title="tapirs" label="tapirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567953" start="14959" end="14994" title="List of Costa Rican monkey species" label="all four Costa Rican monkey species"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790216" start="15027" end="15048" title="white-headed capuchin" label="white-headed capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070483" start="15054" end="15068" title="mantled howler" label="mantled howler"/>
<link wikidata="Q388032" start="15085" end="15114" title="Geoffroy&amp;#x27;s spider monkey" label="Geoffroy&amp;#x27;s spider monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150922" start="15124" end="15156" title="Central American squirrel monkey" label="Central American squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="15224" end="15230" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="15312" end="15325" title="Deforestation" label="Deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q379217" start="15408" end="15418" title="La Amistad International Park" label="La Amistad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244192" start="15423" end="15431" title="Chirripó National Park" label="Chirripó"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354949" start="15459" end="15465" title="Costa Rican páramo" label="páramo"/>
<link wikidata="Q754992" start="15575" end="15592" title="white-nosed coati" label="white-nosed coati"/>
<link wikidata="Q187305" start="15598" end="15610" title="sooty thrush" label="sooty thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439146" start="15621" end="15635" title="Rogiera amoena" label="Rogiera amoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="15908" end="15940" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="16372" end="16376" title="debt" label="debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="16381" end="16395" title="budget deficit" label="budget deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q115806568" start="16983" end="16996" title="indirect jobs" label="indirect jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q815818" start="18329" end="18342" title="reforestation" label="reforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="18669" end="18694" title="net zero carbon emissions" label="net zero carbon emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="19319" end="19329" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="20098" end="20108" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="20376" end="20386" title="cash crops" label="cash crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140952" start="20463" end="20480" title="Coffee production in Costa Rica" label="Coffee production"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065360" start="20980" end="21015" title="Payment for ecosystem services" label="payments for environmental services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746959" start="21124" end="21146" title="agrochemical" label="agricultural chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="21265" end="21279" title="carbon neutral" label="carbon neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q22893878" start="21353" end="21370" title="Renewable energy in Costa Rica" label="renewable sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="21749" end="21762" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q901921" start="21854" end="21869" title="carbon fixation" label="carbon fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302554" start="22950" end="22959" title="Tamarindo, Costa Rica" label="Tamarindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841335" start="22971" end="22977" title="Arenal, Costa Rica" label="Arenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387526" start="22996" end="23003" title="Liberia, Costa Rica" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708765" start="23015" end="23057" title="Daniel Oduber Quirós International Airport" label="Daniel Oduber Quirós International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="23081" end="23089" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q555940" start="23135" end="23172" title="Juan Santamaría International Airport" label="Juan Santamaría International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q317617" start="23276" end="23292" title="Foreign exchange reserves" label="foreign exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="23566" end="23576" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q97167335" start="23688" end="23708" title="Camino de Costa Rica" label="Camino de Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835951" start="23824" end="23864" title="Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report" label="Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="24297" end="24310" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="24364" end="24380" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="24850" end="24864" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="24873" end="24904" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547804" start="24910" end="24946" title="Inter-American Court of Human Rights" label="Inter-American Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q392774" start="24955" end="24989" title="United Nations University of Peace" label="United Nations University of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="25088" end="25100" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q691050" start="25128" end="25152" title="Community of Democracies" label="Community of Democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="25328" end="25356" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892316" start="25368" end="25396" title="Bilateral Immunity Agreement" label="Bilateral Immunity Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="25419" end="25441" title="United States military" label="United States military"/>
<link wikidata="Q838958" start="25460" end="25470" title="Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court" label="Article 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="25506" end="25552" title="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie" label="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="25595" end="25607" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="25617" end="25621" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q365359" start="25663" end="25676" title="Mario Echandi" label="Mario Echandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49344" start="25805" end="25824" title="Óscar Arias" label="Óscar Arias Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="26271" end="26280" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174950" start="26290" end="26304" title="Costa Rica – Nicaragua San Juan River border dispute" label="San Juan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841179" start="26380" end="26400" title="Freedom of navigation" label="rights of navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="26436" end="26466" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801210" start="26550" end="26569" title="artisanal fishing" label="subsistence fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172533" start="27166" end="27183" title="flag of Nicaragua" label="flag of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27360" end="27386" title="Costa Rica – Nicaragua San Juan River border dispute#2010 Isla Calero dispute" label="dispute around Isla Calero"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="27418" end="27426" title="dredging" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="27509" end="27515" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49344" start="27656" end="27675" title="Óscar Arias Sánchez" label="Óscar Arias Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="27798" end="27806" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522000" start="27807" end="27834" title="Estadio Nacional de Costa Rica (2011)" label="stadium in Parque la Sabana"/>
<link wikidata="Q194387" start="28022" end="28032" title="Costa Rica national football team" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q130582" start="28037" end="28042" title="China national football team" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="28079" end="28110" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856148" start="28173" end="28186" title="United Nations Security Council election, 2007" label="2007 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="28588" end="28606" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087321" start="28744" end="28754" title="Article 12 of the Constitution of Costa Rica" label="Article 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231522" start="28762" end="28786" title="Costa Rican Constitution" label="Costa Rican Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="28921" end="28935" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333698" start="29179" end="29205" title="Public Force of Costa Rica" label="Public Force of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="29256" end="29300" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q120735527" start="29453" end="29471" title="world constitution" label="world constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q120401897" start="29534" end="29560" title="World Constituent Assembly" label="World Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q120735527" start="29593" end="29633" title="Constitution for the Federation of Earth" label="Constitution for the Federation of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q887589" start="29635" end="29662" title="Francisco Orlich Bolmarcich" label="Francisco Orlich Bolmarcich"/>
<link wikidata="Q311126" start="29783" end="29803" title="José Figueres Ferrer" label="José Figueres Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q145952" start="29808" end="29827" title="Otilio Ulate Blanco" label="Otilio Ulate Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q68580968" start="30027" end="30032" title="COP26" label="COP26"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30171" end="30182" title="2022 Costa Rica census" label="2022 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="30463" end="30470" title="Mestizo" label="Mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="30575" end="30582" title="mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="30590" end="30597" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="30606" end="30621" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690173" start="30637" end="30651" title="Afro-Costa Rican" label="Afro-Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q21515164" start="30956" end="30966" title="Quitirrisí" label="Quitirrisí"/>
<link wikidata="Q56542" start="31003" end="31012" title="Chorotega people" label="Chorotega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162771" start="31027" end="31033" title="Maleku people" label="Maleku"/>
<link wikidata="Q913374" start="31055" end="31061" title="Bribri people" label="Bribri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738560" start="31083" end="31090" title="Cabécar people" label="Cabécar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283203" start="31118" end="31123" title="Ngäbe" label="Ngäbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q59000417" start="31172" end="31178" title="Boruca people" label="Boruca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465669" start="31253" end="31274" title="European Costa Ricans" label="European Costa Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="31312" end="31319" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q31989" start="31516" end="31530" title="Creole English" label="Creole English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127469" start="31574" end="31582" title="Jamaicans" label="Jamaican"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="31666" end="31673" title="Mestizo" label="Mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="31747" end="31754" title="Mulatto" label="Mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q690026" start="31971" end="31981" title="Guanacaste Province" label="Guanacaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q30620" start="32159" end="32164" title="Limón" label="Limón"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="32276" end="32284" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="32289" end="32298" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="32689" end="32694" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="32699" end="32708" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="32733" end="32744" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="32759" end="32769" title="guerrillas" label="guerrillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438715" start="32785" end="32796" title="death squad" label="death squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="32817" end="32827" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="33082" end="33100" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="33106" end="33113" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="33631" end="33642" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="33714" end="33728" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="33799" end="33818" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="33863" end="33871" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="34020" end="34033" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="34035" end="34041" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="34047" end="34059" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="34061" end="34066" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="34068" end="34082" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="34084" end="34091" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="34093" end="34100" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="34106" end="34112" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="34206" end="34221" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="34231" end="34242" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="34243" end="34254" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="34277" end="34299" title="Nonreligious" label="do not have a religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="34775" end="34783" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="34881" end="34892" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081885" start="34971" end="34977" title="Islam in Costa Rica" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438120" start="35084" end="35111" title="La Sabana Metropolitan Park" label="La Sabana Metropolitan Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="35115" end="35123" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="35188" end="35201" title="Star of David" label="Star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="35229" end="35276" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846757" start="35320" end="35338" title="San José Costa Rica Temple" label="temple in San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174904" start="35557" end="35580" title="Costa Rican Spanish" label="distinct to the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q28400" start="35935" end="35941" title="Bribri language" label="Bribri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915782" start="35943" end="35949" title="Maléku language" label="Maléku"/>
<link wikidata="Q27878" start="35951" end="35958" title="Cabécar language" label="Cabécar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915581" start="35963" end="35979" title="Ngäbere language" label="Ngäbere language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36533" start="36098" end="36104" title="Teribe language" label="Teribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946773" start="36109" end="36115" title="Boruca language" label="Boruca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368506" start="36158" end="36165" title="Buglere" label="Buglere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915581" start="36199" end="36205" title="Guaymí language" label="Guaymí"/>
<link wikidata="Q31989" start="36253" end="36267" title="English-based creole language" label="Creole-English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35939" start="36278" end="36305" title="Jamaican Patois" label="Jamaican &amp;quot;patois&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091534" start="36321" end="36330" title="Limonese Creole" label="Mekatelyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="36592" end="36602" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="36685" end="36697" title="Mesoamerican" label="Mesoamerican"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="36820" end="36827" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="36876" end="36890" title="conquistadores" label="conquistadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q828578" start="36971" end="36978" title="Chibcha" label="Chibcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051735" start="37770" end="37774" title="Soca music" label="soca"/>
<link wikidata="Q208239" start="37788" end="37793" title="Salsa music" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40461" start="37807" end="37814" title="Bachata (music)" label="bachata"/>
<link wikidata="Q282131" start="37828" end="37836" title="Merengue music" label="merengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q107740285" start="37850" end="37856" title="cumbia" label="cumbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="38098" end="38117" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q612956" start="39289" end="39307" title="Happy Planet Index" label="Happy Planet Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="39607" end="39622" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147853" start="39711" end="39717" title="Tamal (dish)" label="tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="40314" end="40329" title="Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q453106" start="40370" end="40376" title="Silvia Poll" label="Silvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q233560" start="40381" end="40393" title="Claudia Poll" label="Claudia Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q636830" start="40434" end="40448" title="Olympic Medals" label="Olympic Medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="40502" end="40510" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q194387" start="40556" end="40569" title="Costa Rica national football team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="40589" end="40603" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="40669" end="40673" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q189327" start="40712" end="40729" title="CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="CONCACAF Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q264003" start="40747" end="40751" title="2002 CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q211126" start="40753" end="40767" title="Paulo Wanchope" label="Paulo Wanchope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="40824" end="40838" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="40969" end="40975" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q719523" start="41016" end="41048" title="FIFA U-20 Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="FIFA U-20 Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="41093" end="41110" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="41133" end="41137" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136308" start="41218" end="41273" title="Costa Rica&amp;#x27;s women&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="Costa Rica&amp;#x27;s women&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="41299" end="41314" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543" start="41447" end="41463" title="beach volleyball" label="beach volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q74121007" start="41485" end="41535" title="2018–2020 NORCECA Beach Volleyball Continental Cup" label="2018–2020 NORCECA Beach Volleyball Continental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="41825" end="41841" title="public education" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305486" start="42152" end="42176" title="University of Costa Rica" label="University of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="42835" end="42858" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="42900" end="42904" title="UNDP" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="42919" end="42934" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415043" start="42981" end="42997" title="Nicoya Peninsula" label="Nicoya Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299670" start="43023" end="43032" title="Blue Zone" label="Blue Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129907" start="43119" end="43143" title="New Economics Foundation" label="New Economics Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q612956" start="43186" end="43204" title="Happy Planet Index" label="Happy Planet Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="43385" end="43400" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="43428" end="43440" title="the Americas" label="the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="43566" end="43586" title="ecological footprint" label="ecological footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308829" start="43908" end="43922" title="antenatal care" label="antenatal care"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="44134" end="44141" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="44203" end="44210" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="44727" end="44748" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500773" start="45737" end="45757" title="general practitioner" label="general practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q757232" start="46312" end="46327" title="medical tourism" label="medical tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018025" start="46669" end="46705" title="Index of Costa Rica-related articles" label="Index of Costa Rica-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112238" start="46708" end="46729" title="Outline of Costa Rica" label="Outline of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q97167335" start="46732" end="46752" title="Camino de Costa Rica" label="Camino de Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="48993" end="49011" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="49019" end="49046" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="49166" end="49174" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="49223" end="49244" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5552" wikidata="Q1516374" url="?curid=5552" title="History of Costa Rica">
<text>The first indigenous peoples of Costa Rica were hunters and gatherers, and when the Spanish conquerors arrived, Costa Rica was divided in two distinct cultural areas due to its geographical location in the Intermediate Area, between Mesoamerican and the Andean cultures, with influences of both cultures.

Christopher Columbus first dropped anchor in Costa Rica in 1503 at Isla Uvita. His forces overcame the indigenous people. He incorporated the territory into the Captaincy General of Guatemala as a province of New Spain in 1524. For the next 300 years, Costa Rica was a colony of Spain.
As a result, Costa Rica&#x27;s culture has been greatly influenced by the culture of Spain. During this period, Costa Rica remained sparsely developed and impoverished.

Following the Mexican War of Independence (1810–1821), Costa Rica became part of the First Mexican Empire in 1821. In 1823, Costa Rica joined the Federal Republic of Central America, but degrading relations with the other states caused it to secede in 1838. But following its independence, its economy struggled due to a lack of connections with European suppliers. In 1856, Costa Rica, along with several other Central American countries, joined the Filibuster War to prevent William Walker from mounting a take-over of the Nicaraguan government.

After 1869, Costa Rica established a democratic government.

After the Costa Rican Civil War in 1948, the government drafted a new constitution, guaranteeing universal suffrage and the dismantling of the military. Today, Costa Rica is a democracy that relies on technology and eco-tourism for its economy. Although poverty has declined since the turn of the 21st century, economic problems still exist. Costa Rica is facing problems of underemployment, foreign and internal debt, and a trade deficiency.

== Hunter-gatherers ==
The oldest evidence of human occupation in Costa Rica is associated with the arrival of groups of hunter-gatherers about 10,000 to 19,000 years BC, with ancient archaeological evidence (stone tool making) located in the Turrialba Valley, at sites called Guardiria and Florence, with matching quarry and workshop areas with presence of type clovis spearheads and South American inspired arrows. All this suggests the possibility that in this area two different cultures coexisted.

The people of this era were nomadic. They were organized in family-based bands of about 20 to 30 members. Their diet consisted of megafauna, such as giant armadillos and sloths, mastodons, etc. These became extinct about 8,000 years before the modern era. The first settlers had to adapt to hunting smaller animals and develop appropriate strategies to adjust to the new condition

==Pre-Columbian Costa Rica==
In Pre-Columbian times, the native peoples in what is now Costa Rica were divided in two cultural areas due to its geographical location in the Intermediate Area, between the Mesoamerican and the Andean cultural regions.

The northwest of the country, the Nicoya Peninsula, was the southernmost point of Mesoamerican cultural influence when the Spanish conquerors came in the sixteenth century. The Nicoya culture was the largest &quot;cacicazgo&quot; on the Pacific coast of Costa Rica. The central and southern portions of the country belonged to the Isthmo-Colombian cultural area with strong Muisca influences, as these were part of territories occupied predominantly by speakers of the Chibchan languages. The Diquis culture flourished from 700 CE to 1530 CE and were well known for their crafts in metal and stonework.

The indigenous people have influenced modern Costa Rican culture to a relatively small degree. In the years soon after European encounter, many of the people died due to infectious diseases, such as measles and smallpox, which were endemic among the Europeans but to which they had no immunity.

==Spanish colonization==

The colonial period began when Christopher Columbus reached the eastern coast of Costa Rica on his fourth voyage on September 18, 1502. Numerous subsequent Spanish expeditions followed, eventually leading to the first Spanish colony in Costa Rica, , founded in 1524.

During most of the colonial period, Costa Rica was the southernmost province of the Captaincy General of Guatemala, which was nominally part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain (i.e., Mexico). In practice it operated as a largely autonomous entity within the Spanish Empire. Costa Rica&#x27;s distance from the capital in Guatemala, its legal prohibition under Spanish law against trading with its southern neighbors in Panama, then part of the Viceroyalty of New Granada (i.e., Colombia), and the lack of resources such as gold and silver, resulted in Costa Rica attracting few inhabitants. It was a poor, isolated, and sparsely inhabited region within the Spanish Empire. A Spanish governor in 1719 described Costa Rica as &quot;the poorest and most miserable Spanish colony in all America.&quot;

Many historians say that the area suffered a lack of indigenous population available for forced labor, which meant that most of the Costa Rican settlers had to work their own land. This prevented the establishment of large &quot;haciendas&quot;. For all these reasons Costa Rica was by and large unappreciated and overlooked by the Spanish Crown and left to develop on its own. The small landowners&#x27; relative poverty, the lack of a large indigenous labor force, the population&#x27;s ethnic and linguistic homogeneity, and Costa Rica&#x27;s isolation from the Spanish colonial centers in Mexico and the Andes, all contributed to the development of an autonomous and individualistic agrarian society. Even the Governor had to farm his own crops and tend to his own garden due to his poverty. The failure to build a colonial society based on indigenous and slave labor led to a peasant economy in the 1700s.

During the time of conquest, as many as twenty distinct indigenous societies, numbering in the hundreds of thousands and speaking many different languages, inhabited the area. The Spanish conquest of Costa Rica lasted more than half a century after it started 1510. The genocidal enslavement of the indigenous societies of Nicoya on the Pacific North coast was the conquest&#x27;s first stage. Its second phase began with fruitless attempts to consolidate a Spanish settlement on the country&#x27;s Caribbean side. In the process, Spaniards reduced the indigenous population to the point of extinction through disease, war, reprisals, relocation and brutal exploitation. The Native American population stood at about 120,000 in 1569 and had fallen to 10,000 by 1611.
&#x27;

==Independence from Spain==

In the early 19th century, Napoleon&#x27;s occupation of Spain led to the outbreak of revolts all across Spanish America. In New Spain, all of the fighting by those seeking independence was done in the center of that area from 1810 to 1821, what today is central Mexico. Once the Viceroy was defeated in the capital city—today Mexico City—in 1821, the news of independence was sent to all the territories of New Spain, including the Intendencies of the former Captaincy General of Guatemala. Costa Rica joined the other Central American Intendancies in a joint declaration of independence from Spain, the 1821 Act of Independence.

On October 13, 1821, the documents arrived at Cartago, and an emergency meeting was called upon by Governor . There were many ideas on what to do upon gaining independence, such as joining Mexico, joining Guatemala or Nueva Granada (today Colombia). A group was declared (Junta de Legados), which created the temporary while, &quot;the clouds clear up&quot; (&quot;Mientras se aclaraban los nublados del día&quot;), was a famous phrase of the events of the day.

Independence from Spain was acknowledged and ratified on October 29, 1821, by the colonial authorities. It was then ratified in the cities of San José on November 1, 1821, at Cartago on November 3, 1821, at Heredia on November 11, 1821, and Alajuela on November 25, 1821.

After the declaration of independence, the New Spain parliament intended to establish a commonwealth whereby the King of Spain, Ferdinand VII, would also be Emperor of New Spain, but in which both countries were to be governed by separate laws and with their own legislative offices. Should the king refuse the position, the law provided for a member of the House of Bourbon to accede to the New Spain throne. Ferdinand VII did not recognize the colony&#x27;s independence and said that Spain would not allow any other European prince to take the throne of New Spain.

By request of Parliament, the president of the regency, Agustín de Iturbide, was proclaimed emperor of New Spain, which was renamed Mexico. The Mexican Empire was the official name given to this monarchical regime from 1821 to 1823. The territory of the Mexican Empire included the continental intendancies and provinces of New Spain proper (including those of the former Captaincy General of Guatemala) (See: Central America under Mexican rule).
On 5 April 1823 the Battle of Ochomogo was fought between imperialist forces from Cartago led by Joaquín de Oreamuno who wanted to join the Mexican Empire and republican forces led by Gregorio José Ramírez who preferred to remain independent. The Republicans won and the capital was moved from Cartago to San José. 

As early as then, Costa Ricans already had overseas impact since Costa Ricans were one of the Latin American nationalities that had soldiers and officers in the Philippines who supported their Emperor, Andrés Novales in his failed revolt against Spain.

==Central America==
In 1823, a revolution in Mexico ousted Emperor Agustín de Iturbide. A new Mexican congress voted to allow the Central American Intendancies to decide their own fate. That year, the United Provinces of Central America was formed of the five Central American Intendancies under General Manuel José Arce. The Intendancies took the new name of States. The United Provinces federation, not strongly united to begin with, rapidly disintegrated under the pressures of intra-provincial rivalries.

Following its secession from the Federal Republic of Central America in 1838, Costa Rica had no regular trade routes established to export their coffee to European markets. Lack of infrastructure caused problems in transportation: the coffee-growing areas were mainly in the Central Valley and had access only to the port of Puntarenas on the Pacific coast. Before the Panama Canal opened, ships from Europe had to sail around Cape Horn in order to get to the Pacific Coast. In 1843, the country established a trade route to Europe with the help of William Le Lacheur, a Guernsey merchant and shipowner.

In 1856, William Walker, an American filibuster, began incursions into Central America. After landing in Nicaragua, he proclaimed himself as president of Nicaragua and re-instated slavery, which had been abolished. He intended to expand into Costa Rica and after he entered that territory, the country declared war against his forces. Led by Commander in Chief of the Army of Costa Rica, President Juan Rafael Mora Porras, the filibusters were defeated and forced out of the country. Costa Rican forces followed the filibusters into Rivas, Nicaragua, where in a final battle, William Walker and his forces were finally pushed back. In this final battle, Juan Santamaría, a drummer boy from Alajuela, lost his life torching the filibusters&#x27; stronghold. He is today remembered as a national hero.

==Republic==
An era of peaceful democracy in Costa Rica began in 1869 with elections. Costa Rica has avoided much of the violence that has plagued Central America. Since the late nineteenth century, only two brief periods of violence have marred its republican development. In 1917–19, Federico Tinoco Granados ruled as a dictator.

In 1948, José Figueres Ferrer led an armed uprising in the wake of a disputed presidential election. 
&quot;With more than 2,000 dead, the 44-day Costa Rican Civil War resulting from this uprising was the bloodiest event in twentieth-century Costa Rican history.&quot; The victorious junta drafted a constitution guaranteeing free elections with universal suffrage and the abolition of the military. Figueres became a national hero, winning the first election under the new constitution in 1953. Since then Costa Rica has been one of the few democracies to operate without a standing army. The nation has held 17 successive presidential elections, all peaceful, the latest being in 2022. In May 2022, Costa Rica&#x27;s new president Rodrigo Chaves, right-wing former finance minister, was sworn in for a four-year presidential term. He had won the election runoff against former president Jose María Figueres.

Costa Rica&#x27;s economy went under a transformation in 1978. The country went from being &quot;an economic development success story&quot; to entering a severe socio-economic crisis. Costa Rica relied on the exportation of bananas and coffee. In 1978, coffee prices dropped, and its revenues declined. In 1979, the price of oil, a main imported item, increased sharply and rapidly, plunging the country into crisis. In order to help improve the economy, President Rodrigo Carazo continued to borrow money internationally. This led the country into further debt.

Once a largely agricultural country, Costa Rica has transformed to relying on technology industry and services, and eco-tourism. Costa Rica&#x27;s major source of export income is technology-based. Microsoft, Motorola, Intel and other technology-related firms have established operations in Costa Rica. Local companies create and export software as well as other computer-related products. Tourism is growing at an accelerated pace, and many believe that income from this tourism may soon become the major contributor to the nation&#x27;s GDP. Traditional agriculture, particularly coffee and bananas, continues to be an important part of Costa Rica&#x27;s exports.

==See also==

*José Antonio Lacayo de Briones y Palacios
*List of presidents of Costa Rica
*Politics of Costa Rica

General:
*History of Central America
*Spanish colonization of the Americas

==References==
==Further reading==
* Booth, John A. &quot;Costa Rica: quest for democracy&quot; (Routledge, 2018).
* Gudmundson, Lowell. &quot;Black into white in nineteenth century Spanish America: Afro‐American assimilation in Argentina and Costa Rica.&quot; &quot;Slavery and Abolition&quot; 5.1 (1984): 34–49.
* Gudmundson, Lowell. &quot;Costa Rica before coffee: Society and economy on the eve of the export boom&quot; (LSU Press, 1999).
* Hall, Carolyn, Héctor Pérez Brignoli, and John V. Cotter. &quot;Historical Atlas of Central America&quot; (U of Oklahoma Press, 2003).
* Johanson, Erik N., Sally P. Horn, and Chad S. Lane. &quot;Pre-Columbian agriculture, fire, and Spanish contact: a 4200-year record from Laguna Los Mangos, Costa Rica.&quot; &quot;The Holocene&quot; 29.11 (2019): 1743–1757.
* Jones, Geoffrey, and Andrew Spadafora. &quot;Creating Ecotourism in Costa Rica, 1970–2000.&quot; &quot;Enterprise &amp; Society&quot; 18.1 (2017): 146–183.
* Longley, Kyle. &quot;Sparrow and the Hawk: Costa Rica and the United States during the Rise of José Figueres&quot; (University of Alabama Press, 1997).
* Mount, Graeme S. &quot;Costa Rica and the Cold War, 1948–1990.&quot; &quot;Canadian Journal of History&quot; 50.2 (2015): 290–316.
* Olien, Michael D. &quot;Black and part-Black populations in colonial Costa Rica: Ethnohistorical resources and problems.&quot; &quot;Ethnohistory&quot; (1980): 13-29 online.
* Palmer, Steven and Iván Molina. &quot;The Costa Rica Reader: History, Culture, Politics&quot; Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2004.
* Putnam, Lara. &quot;The company they kept: migrants and the politics of gender in Caribbean Costa Rica, 1870-1960&quot; (Univ of North Carolina Press, 2002).
* Sandoval, Carlos. &quot;Threatening Others: Nicaraguans and the Formation of National Identities in Costa Rica&quot; (Ohio University Press, 2004).
* Shin, Gi-Wook, and Gary Hytrek. &quot;Social conflict and regime formation: A comparative study of South Korea and Costa Rica.&quot; &quot;International sociology&quot; 17.4 (2002): 459–480 online.
* Wilson, Bruce M. &quot;Costa Rica: Politics, Economics, and Democracy: Politics, Economics and Democracy.&quot; (Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1998).
===Older books===

==External links==
*History of the Republic of Costa Rica from &quot;Costa Rica Handbook&quot; by Christopher Baker
*Costa Rican Archaeology
*Brief History of Costa rica.com
*Early History of Costa Rica 
*Democracy in Costa Rica
*Costa Rica Civil War
*Costa Rica History, Map, Flag, Climate, Population, &amp; Facts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3557752" start="10" end="42" title="indigenous peoples of Costa Rica" label="indigenous peoples of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="48" end="69" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunters and gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="84" end="91" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="92" end="102" title="conquistadores" label="conquerors"/>
<link wikidata="Q518261" start="151" end="164" title="cultural area" label="cultural area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622008" start="206" end="223" title="Intermediate Area" label="Intermediate Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="233" end="244" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="254" end="269" title="Inca Empire" label="Andean cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="306" end="326" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328844" start="373" end="383" title="Isla Uvita" label="Isla Uvita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557752" start="409" end="426" title="indigenous peoples of Costa Rica" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077243" start="467" end="497" title="Captaincy General of Guatemala" label="Captaincy General of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="515" end="524" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="776" end="803" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="847" end="867" title="First Mexican Empire" label="First Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q190025" start="908" end="943" title="Federal Republic of Central America" label="Federal Republic of Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027839" start="1213" end="1227" title="Filibuster War" label="Filibuster War"/>
<link wikidata="Q196401" start="1239" end="1253" title="William Walker (filibuster)" label="William Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434218" start="1382" end="1403" title="Costa Rican Civil War" label="Costa Rican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="1442" end="1454" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="1573" end="1583" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="1588" end="1599" title="eco-tourism" label="eco-tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="1626" end="1633" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931244" start="1747" end="1762" title="underemployment" label="underemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="1882" end="1892" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="1983" end="1985" title="Anno Domini" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088700" start="2025" end="2042" title="lithic technology" label="stone tool making"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625953" start="2059" end="2075" title="Turrialba, Costa Rica" label="Turrialba Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485378" start="2179" end="2196" title="Clovis culture" label="clovis spearheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="2225" end="2230" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="2450" end="2459" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840543" start="2475" end="2484" title="armadillo" label="armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274076" start="2490" end="2495" title="sloth" label="sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="2498" end="2507" title="mastodons" label="mastodons"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="2734" end="2747" title="Pre-Columbian" label="Pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557752" start="2759" end="2773" title="indigenous peoples of Costa Rica" label="native peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="2789" end="2799" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q518261" start="2820" end="2833" title="cultural area" label="cultural area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622008" start="2875" end="2892" title="Intermediate Area" label="Intermediate Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="2906" end="2918" title="Mesoamerican" label="Mesoamerican"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="2927" end="2933" title="Inca Empire" label="Andean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415043" start="2987" end="3003" title="Nicoya Peninsula" label="Nicoya Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="3076" end="3083" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="3084" end="3094" title="conquistadores" label="conquerors"/>
<link wikidata="Q16624774" start="3130" end="3144" title="Nicoya culture" label="Nicoya culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="3167" end="3176" title="Cacique" label="cacicazgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204368" start="3284" end="3314" title="Isthmo-Colombian Area" label="Isthmo-Colombian cultural area"/>
<link wikidata="Q828578" start="3327" end="3333" title="Muisca" label="Muisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q520478" start="3422" end="3440" title="Chibchan languages" label="Chibchan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280144" start="3446" end="3452" title="Diquis" label="Diquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="3727" end="3746" title="infectious diseases" label="infectious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="3756" end="3763" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="3768" end="3776" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="3910" end="3930" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5793320" start="3978" end="3991" title="Fourth voyage of Columbus" label="fourth voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077243" start="4231" end="4261" title="Captaincy General of Guatemala" label="Captaincy General of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="4295" end="4319" title="New Spain" label="Viceroyalty of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="4327" end="4333" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="4402" end="4416" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="4465" end="4474" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="4563" end="4569" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8965" start="4588" end="4614" title="Viceroyalty of New Granada" label="Viceroyalty of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="4622" end="4630" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="4667" end="4671" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="4676" end="4682" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="5032" end="5044" title="Encomienda" label="forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q917730" start="5172" end="5180" title="hacienda" label="hacienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="5275" end="5288" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spanish Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="6686" end="6694" title="Napoleon I" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="6986" end="6997" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077243" start="7119" end="7149" title="Captaincy General of Guatemala" label="Captaincy General of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656897" start="7264" end="7288" title="Act of Independence of Central America" label="1821 Act of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q30617" start="7337" end="7344" title="Cartago, Costa Rica" label="Cartago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="7896" end="7904" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q502181" start="7929" end="7936" title="Cartago Province" label="Cartago"/>
<link wikidata="Q502192" start="7961" end="7968" title="Heredia Province" label="Heredia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37104" start="7995" end="8003" title="Alajuela" label="Alajuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="8155" end="8168" title="Ferdinand VII of Spain" label="Ferdinand VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="8385" end="8401" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q133808" start="8652" end="8671" title="Agustín de Iturbide" label="Agustín de Iturbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="8740" end="8754" title="First Mexican Empire" label="Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695562" start="9006" end="9040" title="Central America under Mexican rule" label="Central America under Mexican rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q16573164" start="9063" end="9081" title="Battle of Ochomogo" label="Battle of Ochomogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455841" start="9140" end="9159" title="Joaquín de Oreamuno" label="Joaquín de Oreamuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246103" start="9227" end="9248" title="Gregorio José Ramírez" label="Gregorio José Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756123" start="9562" end="9576" title="Andrés Novales" label="Andrés Novales"/>
<link wikidata="Q133808" start="9681" end="9700" title="Agustín de Iturbide" label="Agustín de Iturbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190025" start="9815" end="9850" title="United Provinces of Central America" label="United Provinces of Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433911" start="9918" end="9934" title="Manuel José Arce" label="Manuel José Arce"/>
<link wikidata="Q190025" start="10157" end="10192" title="Federal Republic of Central America" label="Federal Republic of Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="10228" end="10239" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="10269" end="10275" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="10305" end="10319" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687" start="10449" end="10459" title="Puntarenas" label="Puntarenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="10493" end="10505" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078" start="10551" end="10560" title="Cape Horn" label="Cape Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569048" start="10673" end="10691" title="William Le Lacheur" label="William Le Lacheur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="10695" end="10703" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q196401" start="10738" end="10752" title="William Walker (filibuster)" label="William Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073738" start="10766" end="10776" title="Filibuster (military)" label="filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="10834" end="10843" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="10909" end="10916" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027839" start="11040" end="11043" title="Campaign of 1856–1857" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q880785" start="11127" end="11150" title="Juan Rafael Mora Porras" label="Juan Rafael Mora Porras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757609" start="11262" end="11278" title="Rivas, Nicaragua" label="Rivas, Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q630673" start="11383" end="11398" title="Juan Santamaría" label="Juan Santamaría"/>
<link wikidata="Q37104" start="11419" end="11427" title="Alajuela" label="Alajuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="11677" end="11692" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q21002917" start="11807" end="11814" title="1917 Costa Rican coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1917–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q887715" start="11816" end="11840" title="Federico Tinoco Granados" label="Federico Tinoco Granados"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="11852" end="11860" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q311126" start="11872" end="11892" title="José Figueres Ferrer" label="José Figueres Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434218" start="12009" end="12030" title="Costa Rican Civil War" label="Costa Rican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424534" start="12147" end="12152" title="Military junta" label="junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q109529669" start="12525" end="12549" title="2022 Costa Rican general election" label="the latest being in 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q98017689" start="12596" end="12610" title="Rodrigo Chaves Robles" label="Rodrigo Chaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q109529669" start="12711" end="12719" title="2022 Costa Rican general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q82593" start="12752" end="12771" title="José María Figueres" label="Jose María Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="12999" end="13005" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q318298" start="13240" end="13254" title="Rodrigo Carazo Odio" label="Rodrigo Carazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="13332" end="13336" title="National debt" label="debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="13455" end="13466" title="eco-tourism" label="eco-tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="13502" end="13508" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="13676" end="13684" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291453" start="14021" end="14062" title="José Antonio Lacayo de Briones y Palacios" label="José Antonio Lacayo de Briones y Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q504727" start="14064" end="14096" title="List of presidents of Costa Rica" label="List of presidents of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154139" start="14098" end="14120" title="Politics of Costa Rica" label="Politics of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202140" start="14132" end="14158" title="History of Central America" label="History of Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="14160" end="14196" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish colonization of the Americas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5553" wikidata="Q738314" url="?curid=5553" title="Geography of Costa Rica">
<text>[[Costa Rica]] is located on the Central American Isthmus, surrounding the point 10° north of the equator and 84° west of the prime meridian. It has 212 km of Caribbean Sea coastline and 1,016 on the North Pacific Ocean.

The area is 51,100 km2 of which 40 km2 is water. It is slightly smaller than Bosnia and Herzegovina.

== Geology ==

Costa Rica is located on the Caribbean Plate. It borders the Cocos Plate in the Pacific Ocean which is being subducted beneath it. This forms the volcanoes in Costa Rica, also known as the Central America Volcanic Arc.

The Caribbean Plate began its eastward migration during the Late Cretaceous. During the Late Paleocene, a local sea-level low-stand assisted by the continental uplift of the western margin of South America, resulted in a land bridge over which several groups of mammals apparently took part in an interchange.

Many earthquakes in Costa Rica have occurred.

==Political and human geography==

Costa Rica shares a border with Nicaragua to the north, and a 348-km border with Panama to the south.

Costa Rica claims an exclusive economic zone of with and a territorial sea of .

Land use: Arable land: 4.8%. Permanent crops: 6.66%. Other: 88.54%.

Administrative divisions of Costa Rica include 7 provinces, 82 cantons, and 478 districts. There are also 24 indigenous territories.

==Physical geography==

=== Islands ===
There are about 79 islands of Costa Rica, the most remote being Cocos Island and the largest being Isla Calero.

===Mountain ranges===
The nation&#x27;s coastal plain is separated by the Cordillera Central and the Cordillera de Talamanca, which form the spine of the country and separate the Pacific and Caribbean drainage divides.

The Cordillera de Guanacaste is in the north near the border with Nicaragua and forms part of the Continental Divide of the Americas.

Much of the Cordillera de Talamanca is included in the La Amistad International Park, which is shared between Costa Rica and Panama. It contains the country&#x27;s highest peaks: the Cerro Chirripó and the Cerro Kamuk. Much of the region is covered by the Talamancan montane forests. It also includes the Cerros de Escazú which borders the Costa Rican Central Valley to the south.

=== Hydrology ===

Interrogate land covers 1,031 km2.

Rivers of Costa Rica all drain into the Caribbean or the Pacific.

=== Extreme points ===
Cocos Island is the southwestern extreme of the country. Otherwise to the north it&#x27;s Peñas Blancas, to the south and east one of manyPanama border, and to the west the Santa Elena Peninsula.

The lowest point is sea level, and the tallest is Colero Chillido: at 3810 m which is the biggest.

== Climate ==
The climate is tropical. Hot season (December to April); rainy season (May to November); cooler in highlands.

Because Costa Rica is located between 8 and 12 degrees north of the Equator, the climate is tropical year round. However, the country has many microclimates depending on elevation, rainfall, topography, and by the geography of each particular region.

Costa Rica&#x27;s seasons are defined by how much rain falls during a particular period. The year can be split into two periods, the dry season known to the residents as summer (), and the rainy season, known locally as winter (). The &quot;summer&quot; or dry season goes from December to April, and &quot;winter&quot; or rainy season goes from May to November, which almost coincides with the Atlantic hurricane season, and during this time, it rains constantly in some regions.

The location receiving the most rain is the Caribbean slopes of the Cordillera Central mountains, with an annual rainfall of over . Humidity is also higher on the Caribbean side than on the Pacific side. The mean annual temperature on the coastal lowlands is around , in the main populated areas of the Cordillera Central, and below on the summits of the highest mountains.


== Flora and fauna ==

Costa Rica is a biodiversity hotspot. While the country has only about 0.03% of the world&#x27;s landmass, it contains 5% of the world&#x27;s biodiversity. It is home to about 12,119 species of plants, of which 950 are endemic. There are 117 native trees and more than 1,400 types of orchids; a third of them can be found in the Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve. Almost a half of the country&#x27;s land is covered by forests, though only 3.5% is covered by primary forests. Deforestation in Costa Rica has been reduced from some of the worst rates in the world from 1973 to 1989, to almost zero by 2005.

The diversity of wildlife in Costa Rica is very high; there are 441 species of amphibians and reptiles, 838 species of birds, 232 species of mammals and 181 species of fresh water fish. Costa Rica has high levels of endemism; 81 species of amphibians and reptiles, 17 species of birds and 7 species of mammals are endemic to the country. However, many species are endangered. According to the World Conservation Monitoring Centre, 209 species of birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians and plants are endangered. Some of the country&#x27;s most endangered species are the harpy eagle, the giant anteater, the golden toad and the jaguar. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) reports the golden toad as extinct.

Over 25% of Costa Rica&#x27;s national territory is protected by the National System of Conservation Areas (SINAC), which oversees all of the country&#x27;s protected areas. There 29 national parks of Costa Rica many conservation areas of Costa Rica. Together protected areas comprise over one-fourth of Costa Rican territory. 9.3% of the country is protected under IUCN categories I-V. Around 25% of the country&#x27;s land area is in protected national parks and protected areas, the largest percentage of protected areas in the world (developing world average 13%, developed world average 8%).

Tortuguero National Park is home to monkeys, sloths, birds, and a variety of reptiles.

The Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve is home to about 2,000 plant species, including numerous orchids. Over 400 types of birds and more than 100 species of mammals can be found there.

Over 840 species of birds have been identified in Costa Rica. As is the case in much of Central America, the avian species in Costa Rica are a mix of North and South American species. The country&#x27;s abundant fruit trees, many of which bear fruit year round, are hugely important to the birds, some of whom survive on diets that consist only of one or two types of fruit. Some of the country&#x27;s most notable avian species include the resplendent quetzal, scarlet macaw, three-wattled bellbird, bare-necked umbrellabird, and the keel-billed toucan. The Instituto Nacional de Biodiversidad is allowed to collect royalties on any biological discoveries of medical importance. Costa Rica is a center of biological diversity for reptiles and amphibians, including the world&#x27;s fastest running lizard, the spiny-tailed iguana (&quot;Ctenosaura similis&quot;).

==Natural resources==

Hydropower is produced from Lake Arenal, the largest lake in Costa Rica. Total renewable water resources is 112.4 km3.

Freshwater withdrawal is 5.77 km3/year (15%/9%/77%), or per capita: 1,582 m3/year. Agriculture is the largest water user demanding around 53% of total supplies while the sector contributes 6.5% to the Costa Rica GDP. Both total and per capita water usage is very high in comparison to other Central American countries but when measured against available freshwater sources, Costa Rica uses only 5% of its available supply.

Increasing urbanization will put pressure on water resources management in Costa Rica.

== Gallery ==
==See also==
*List of earthquakes in Costa Rica
*List of Faults in Costa Rica
*Costa Rica is party to the following treaties: Convention on Biological Diversity, Convention on Environmental Modification, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Montreal Protocol, Ramsar Convention, International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, Desertification Convention, Endangered Species Convention, Basel Convention, Convention on the Law of the Sea, Convention on Marine Dumping, and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. It has signed but not ratified the Convention on Marine Life Conservation and the Kyoto Protocol.

==References==
==External links==

*Map of the Republic of Costa Rica from 1891
*Costa Rica - another historic map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q738314" start="0" end="14" title="Geography of Costa Rica" label="[[Costa Rica]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="33" end="57" title="Central American Isthmus" label="Central American Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="98" end="105" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="126" end="140" title="prime meridian" label="prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="159" end="172" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="200" end="219" title="Pacific Ocean" label="North Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="299" end="321" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q673071" start="368" end="383" title="Caribbean Plate" label="Caribbean Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q386615" start="400" end="411" title="Cocos Plate" label="Cocos Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="419" end="432" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="448" end="457" title="Subduction" label="subducted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864707" start="485" end="508" title="List of volcanoes in Costa Rica" label="volcanoes in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020072" start="528" end="556" title="Central America Volcanic Arc" label="Central America Volcanic Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="619" end="634" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q508587" start="647" end="661" title="Late Paleocene" label="Late Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617636" start="875" end="900" title="List of earthquakes in Costa Rica" label="earthquakes in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="984" end="993" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="1033" end="1039" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="1076" end="1099" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="1114" end="1129" title="Territorial waters" label="territorial sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917124" start="1205" end="1243" title="Administrative divisions of Costa Rica" label="Administrative divisions of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075520" start="1254" end="1263" title="provinces of Costa Rica" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q953822" start="1268" end="1275" title="cantons of Costa Rica" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292572" start="1285" end="1294" title="List of districts of Costa Rica" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557745" start="1314" end="1336" title="Indigenous territories of Costa Rica" label="indigenous territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437793" start="1398" end="1419" title="List of islands of Costa Rica" label="islands of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q215081" start="1443" end="1455" title="Cocos Island" label="Cocos Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674027" start="1478" end="1489" title="Isla Calero" label="Isla Calero"/>
<link wikidata="Q428530" start="1566" end="1584" title="Cordillera Central (Costa Rica)" label="Cordillera Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q957600" start="1593" end="1616" title="Cordillera de Talamanca" label="Cordillera de Talamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q152005" start="1693" end="1708" title="drainage divide" label="drainage divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693409" start="1716" end="1740" title="Cordillera de Guanacaste" label="Cordillera de Guanacaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="1778" end="1787" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="1810" end="1844" title="Continental Divide of the Americas" label="Continental Divide of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q957600" start="1859" end="1882" title="Cordillera de Talamanca" label="Cordillera de Talamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q379217" start="1902" end="1931" title="La Amistad International Park" label="La Amistad International Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q252362" start="2030" end="2044" title="Cerro Chirripó" label="Cerro Chirripó"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064934" start="2053" end="2064" title="Cerro Kamuk" label="Cerro Kamuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336097" start="2103" end="2129" title="Talamancan montane forests" label="Talamancan montane forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065029" start="2152" end="2168" title="Cerros de Escazú" label="Cerros de Escazú"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879771" start="2187" end="2213" title="Costa Rican Central Valley" label="Costa Rican Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249236" start="2284" end="2304" title="List of rivers of Costa Rica" label="Rivers of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2621" end="2636" title="Colero Chillido" label="Colero Chillido"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="2864" end="2871" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="2888" end="2896" title="Tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="2939" end="2951" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q756721" start="3443" end="3468" title="Atlantic hurricane season" label="Atlantic hurricane season"/>
<link wikidata="Q428530" start="3598" end="3616" title="Cordillera Central (Costa Rica)" label="Cordillera Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q864294" start="3945" end="3965" title="biodiversity hotspot" label="biodiversity hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="4071" end="4083" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="4123" end="4128" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="4148" end="4155" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="4213" end="4219" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q864538" start="4258" end="4289" title="Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve" label="Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251681" start="4403" end="4430" title="Deforestation in Costa Rica" label="Deforestation in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445387" start="4551" end="4573" title="Wildlife of Costa Rica" label="wildlife in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="4613" end="4622" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="4628" end="4635" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="4653" end="4657" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="4675" end="4681" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="4750" end="4758" title="endemism" label="endemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="4898" end="4908" title="endangered" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q590861" start="4927" end="4963" title="World Conservation Monitoring Centre" label="World Conservation Monitoring Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q53745" start="5103" end="5114" title="harpy eagle" label="harpy eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203033" start="5120" end="5134" title="giant anteater" label="giant anteater"/>
<link wikidata="Q320632" start="5140" end="5151" title="golden toad" label="golden toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35694" start="5160" end="5166" title="jaguar" label="jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="5172" end="5218" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304817" start="5332" end="5369" title="National System of Conservation Areas" label="National System of Conservation Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304817" start="5401" end="5435" title="List of Conservation Areas of Costa Rica" label="the country&amp;#x27;s protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684144" start="5446" end="5474" title="List of national parks of Costa Rica" label="national parks of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q602120" start="5861" end="5885" title="Tortuguero National Park" label="Tortuguero National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q864538" start="5953" end="5984" title="Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve" label="Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q459267" start="6574" end="6593" title="resplendent quetzal" label="resplendent quetzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q243761" start="6595" end="6608" title="scarlet macaw" label="scarlet macaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060452" start="6610" end="6632" title="three-wattled bellbird" label="three-wattled bellbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q671212" start="6634" end="6658" title="bare-necked umbrellabird" label="bare-necked umbrellabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q47501" start="6668" end="6686" title="keel-billed toucan" label="keel-billed toucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001178" start="6692" end="6727" title="Instituto Nacional de Biodiversidad" label="Instituto Nacional de Biodiversidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="6877" end="6887" title="amphibians" label="amphibians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132759" start="6971" end="6989" title="Ctenosaura similis" label="Ctenosaura similis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="7022" end="7032" title="Hydropower" label="Hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q31938" start="7050" end="7061" title="Lake Arenal" label="Lake Arenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973710" start="7611" end="7651" title="water resources management in Costa Rica" label="water resources management in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617636" start="7682" end="7715" title="List of earthquakes in Costa Rica" label="List of earthquakes in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619292" start="7717" end="7745" title="List of Faults in Costa Rica" label="List of Faults in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="7794" end="7828" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Convention on Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q488546" start="7830" end="7870" title="Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques" label="Convention on Environmental Modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="7872" end="7925" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="7931" end="7948" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="7950" end="7967" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667878" start="7969" end="8023" title="International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling" label="International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q331520" start="8025" end="8051" title="United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification" label="Desertification Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="8053" end="8082" title="Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna" label="Endangered Species Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q775865" start="8084" end="8100" title="Basel Convention" label="Basel Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="8102" end="8134" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156234" start="8136" end="8164" title="Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and Other Matter" label="Convention on Marine Dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="8174" end="8211" title="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty" label="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166287" start="8248" end="8286" title="Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources of the High Seas" label="Convention on Marine Life Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="8295" end="8309" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5554" wikidata="Q2465669" url="?curid=5554" title="Demographics of Costa Rica">
<text>This is a demographic article about Costa Rica&#x27;s population, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population.

According to the United Nations, Costa Rica had an estimated population of people as of 2021. White and Mestizos make up 83.4% of the population, 7% are black people (including mixed race), 2.4% Amerindians, 0.2% Chinese and 7% other/none.

In 2010, just under 3% of the population was of African descent. These are called Afro-Costa Ricans or West Indians and are English-speaking descendants of 19th-century black Jamaican immigrant workers. Another 1% is composed of those of Chinese origin, and less than 1% are West Asian, mainly of Lebanese descent but also Palestinians. The 2011 Census provided the following data: whites and mestizos make up 83.4% of the population, 7% are black people (including mixed race), 2.4% Amerindians, 0.2% Chinese, and 7% other/none.

There is also a community of North American retirees from the United States and Canada, followed by relatively large numbers of European Union expatriates (chiefly Scandinavians and from Germany) come to retire as well, and Australians. Immigration to Costa Rica made up 9% of the population in 2012. This included permanent settlers as well as migrants who were hoping to reach the U.S. In 2015, there were some 420,000 immigrants in Costa Rica and the number of asylum seekers (mainly from Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua) rose to more than 110,000. An estimated 10% of the Costa Rican population in 2014 was made up of Nicaraguans.

The indigenous population today numbers about 60,000 (just over 1% of the population), with some Miskito and Garifuna (a population of mixed African and Carib Amerindian descent) living in the coastal regions.

Costa Rica&#x27;s emigration is the smallest in the Caribbean Basin and is among the smallest in the Americas. By 2015 about just 133,185 (2.77%) of the country&#x27;s people live in another country as immigrants. The main destination countries are the United States (85,924), Nicaragua (10,772), Panama (7,760), Canada (5,039), Spain (3,339), Mexico (2,464), Germany (1,891), Italy (1,508), Guatemala (1,162) and Venezuela (1,127).

==Population size and structure==


In , Costa Rica had a population of . The population is increasing at a rate of 1.5% per year. According to current trends, the population will increase to 9,158,000 in about 46 years. The population density is 94 people per square km, the third highest in Central America.

Approximately 20% lived in rural areas and 80% in urban areas. The rate of urbanization estimated for the period 2005–2015 is 2.74% per annum, one of the highest among developing countries. About 75% of the population live in the upper lands (above 500 meters), where the temperature is cooler and milder.

The 2011 census counted a population of 4.3 million people distributed among the following groups: 83.6% whites or Mestizos, 6.7% black mixed race, 2.4% Native American, 1.1% Black or Afro-Caribbean; the census showed 1.1% as Other, 2.9% (141,304 people) as None, and 2.2% (107,196 people) as unspecified.

In 2011, there were over 104,000 Native American or indigenous inhabitants, representing 2.4% of the population. Most of them lived in secluded reservations, distributed among eight ethnic groups: Quitirrisí (in the Central Valley), Matambú or Chorotega (Guanacaste), Maleku (northern Alajuela), Bribri (southern Atlantic), Cabécar (Cordillera de Talamanca), Guaymí (southern Costa Rica, along the Panamá border), Boruca (southern Costa Rica) and Térraba (southern Costa Rica).

Costa Ricans of European origin are primarily of Spanish descent, with significant numbers of Italian, German, English, Dutch, French, Irish, Portuguese, and Polish families, as well as a sizable Jewish community. The majority of the Afro-Costa Ricans are Creole English-speaking descendants of 19th century black Jamaican immigrant workers.
The 2011 census classified 83.6% of the population as white or Mestizo; the latter have combined European and Native American descent. The Mulatto segment (mix of white and black) represented 6.7%, and Indigenous people made up 2.4% of the population. Native and European mixed blood populations are far less than in other Latin American countries. Exceptions are the Guanacaste province, where almost half the population is visibly mestizo, a legacy of the more pervasive unions between Spanish colonists and Chorotega Amerindians through several generations, and Limón, where the vast majority of the Afro-Costa Rican community lives.

=== Structure of the population ===



==Vital statistics==

(c) = Census results.

===Current vital statistics ===


===Life expectancy at birth===

Source: &quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;

==Ethnic groups==

According to census data the vast majority of the population identifies itself as white or mestizo. The indigenous Amerindian population only constitutes 2.4% of the population in 2011, but has gone up from only 0.3% in 1950. About 7% has African roots. 

===European Costa Ricans===
European Costa Ricans are people from Costa Rica whose ancestry lies within the continent of Europe, most notably Spain. According to DNA studies, around 75% of the population have some level of European ancestry.

Percentages of the Costa Rican population by race are known as the national census, which includes the question of ethnicity in its form. As of 2012, 65.80% of Costa Ricans identify themselves as white/castizo and 17.80% as mestizo, giving around over 80% of the Caucasian population. This, however, is based on self-identification and not on scientific studies. According to the PLoS &quot;Genetics Geographic Patterns of Genome Admixture in Latin American Mestizos&quot; study of 2012, Costa Ricans have 73% of European ancestry, 25% Amerindian, and 2% African. According to CIA Factbook, Costa Rica has a white or mestizo population of 83.6%.

Cristopher Columbus and his crew were the first Europeans ever to set foot on what is now Costa Rica, having arrived at Uvita Island (modern-day Limón province) in 1502 on Columbus&#x27;s last trip. Costa Rica was part of the Spanish Empire and colonized by Spaniards mostly Castilians, Basque and Sephardic Jews.

After independence, large migrations of wealthy Americans, Germans, French and British businessmen came to the country encouraged by the government and followed by their families and employees (many of them technicians and professionals), thus creating colonies and mixing with the population, especially the high and middle classes.

Later, smaller migrations of Italians, Spaniards (mostly Catalans) and Arabs (mostly Lebanese and Syrians) took place. These migrants arrived fleeing economic crisis in their home countries, setting in large, more closed colonies. Polish migrants, mostly Ashkenazi Jews who fled anti-Semitism and Nazi persecution in Europe, also arrived in large numbers.

In 1901, the president Ascensión Esquivel Ibarra closed the country to all non-white immigrants. All Black, Chinese, Arab, Turkish or Gypsy migration to the country was banned. After the beginning of the Spanish Civil War, a large influx of Republican refugees settled in the country, mostly Castilians, Galicians, and Asturians, as well as later Chilean, Mexican and Colombian migrants who would arrive escaping from war or dictatorships, as Costa Rica is the longest running democracy in Latin America.

==Languages==

Nearly all Costa Ricans speak Spanish, but many know English. Indigenous Costa Ricans also speak their own language, such as the case of the Ngobes.

==Religion==


According to the World Factbook, the main faiths are Roman Catholic (76.3%), Evangelical (13.7%), Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses (1.3%), other Protestant (0.7%), other (4.8%), and none (3.2%).

The most recent nationwide survey of religion in Costa Rica, conducted in 2007 by the University of Costa Rica, found that 70.5 percent of the population identify themselves as Roman Catholics (with 44.9 percent practicing, 25.6 percent nonpracticing), 13.8 percent are Evangelical Protestants, 11.3 percent report that they do not have a religion, and 4.3 percent declare that they belong to another religion.

Apart from the dominant Catholic religion, several other religious groups exist in the country. Methodist, Lutheran, Episcopal, Baptist, and other Protestant groups have significant membership. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) claims more than 35,000 members and has a temple in San José that served as a regional worship center for Costa Rica, Panama, Nicaragua, and Honduras.

Although they represent less than 1 percent of the population, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses have a strong presence on the Caribbean coast. Seventh-day Adventists operate a university that attracts students from throughout the Caribbean Basin. The Unification Church maintains its continental headquarters for Latin America in San José.

Non-Christian religious groups, including followers of Judaism, Islam, Taoism, Hare Krishna, Paganism, Wicca, Scientology, Tenrikyo, and the Baháʼí Faith, claim membership throughout the country, with the majority of worshipers residing in the Central Valley (the area of the capital). While there is no general correlation between religion and ethnicity, indigenous peoples are more likely to practice animism than other religions.

Article 75 of the Costa Rican Constitution states that the &quot;Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion is the official religion of the Republic.&quot; That same article provides for freedom of religion. The government respects this right. The US government found no reports of societal abuses or discrimination based on religious belief or practice in 2007.

==Migration==

===Emigration===

Costa Rican emigration is among the smallest in the Caribbean Basin. About 3% of the country&#x27;s population lives in another country as immigrants. The main destination countries are the United States, Spain, Mexico, and other Central American countries. In 2005, 127,061 Costa Ricans lived in another country as immigrants. Remittance s were $513,000,000 in 2006, which represented 2.3% of the national GDP.

===Immigration===
Costa Rica&#x27;s immigration is among the largest in the Caribbean Basin. According to the 2011 census, 385,899 residents were born abroad. The vast majority were born in Nicaragua (287,766). Other countries of origin were Colombia (20,514), United States (16,898), Spain (16,482) and Panama (11,250). Outward remittances were $246,000,000 in 2006.

===Migrants===
According to the World Bank, about 489,200 migrants lived in the country in 2010; mainly from Nicaragua, Panama, El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala, and Belize, while 125,306 Costa Ricans live abroad in the United States, Panama, Nicaragua, Spain, Mexico, Canada, Germany, Venezuela, Dominican Republic, and Ecuador. The number of migrants declined in later years but in 2015, there were some 420,000 immigrants in Costa Rica and the number of asylum seekers (mainly from Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua) rose to more than 110,000, a fivefold increase from 2012. In 2016, the country was called a &quot;magnet&quot; for migrants from South and Central America and other countries who were hoping to reach the U.S.

==See also==
*Ethnic groups in Central America

==References==

==External links==
*UNICEF Information about Costa Rica&#x27;s Demographics 
*INEC. National Institute of Statistics and Census </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="36" end="46" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="76" end="94" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="96" end="105" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="244" end="258" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="380" end="392" title="black people" label="black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="422" end="433" title="Amerindians" label="Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690173" start="550" end="566" title="Afro-Costa Rican" label="Afro-Costa Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q15949440" start="571" end="582" title="West Indian" label="West Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="643" end="650" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="765" end="773" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="910" end="922" title="black people" label="black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="952" end="963" title="Amerindians" label="Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1127" end="1141" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16578811" start="1236" end="1261" title="Immigration to Costa Rica" label="Immigration to Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="1636" end="1645" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q332976" start="1747" end="1754" title="Miskito people" label="Miskito"/>
<link wikidata="Q863927" start="1759" end="1767" title="Garifuna people" label="Garifuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="1803" end="1808" title="Island Caribs" label="Carib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755298" start="1913" end="1928" title="Caribbean Basin" label="Caribbean Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="1962" end="1970" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2114" end="2127" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="2138" end="2147" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="2158" end="2164" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2174" end="2180" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2190" end="2195" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="2205" end="2211" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2221" end="2228" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2238" end="2243" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="2253" end="2262" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="2275" end="2284" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="2542" end="2565" title="List of countries by population density" label="94 people per square km"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="2774" end="2794" title="developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174856" start="2917" end="2928" title="Costa Rica 2011 Census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="3028" end="3035" title="Mestizo" label="Mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="3066" end="3081" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690173" start="3097" end="3111" title="Afro-Costa Rican" label="Afro-Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q56542" start="3464" end="3473" title="Chorotega people" label="Chorotega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162771" start="3488" end="3494" title="Maleku people" label="Maleku"/>
<link wikidata="Q913374" start="3516" end="3522" title="Bribri people" label="Bribri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283203" start="3579" end="3585" title="Guaymí" label="Guaymí"/>
<link wikidata="Q59000417" start="3634" end="3640" title="Boruca people" label="Boruca"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="3748" end="3755" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q31989" start="3955" end="3969" title="Creole English" label="Creole English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127469" start="4013" end="4021" title="Jamaicans" label="Jamaican"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="4104" end="4111" title="Mestizo" label="Mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="4180" end="4187" title="Mulatto" label="Mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q690026" start="4409" end="4419" title="Guanacaste Province" label="Guanacaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q30620" start="4606" end="4611" title="Limón" label="Limón"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="5221" end="5231" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="5276" end="5282" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="5297" end="5302" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q233358" start="5778" end="5782" title="PLoS" label="PLoS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="5975" end="5987" title="CIA Factbook" label="CIA Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="6045" end="6064" title="Cristopher Columbus" label="Cristopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328844" start="6165" end="6177" title="Uvita Island" label="Uvita Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q642644" start="6190" end="6204" title="Limón province" label="Limón province"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="6271" end="6285" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573855" start="6320" end="6330" title="Castilians" label="Castilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="6332" end="6338" title="Basque people" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="6343" end="6357" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656897" start="6366" end="6378" title="Independence of Central America" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="6408" end="6417" title="Citizenship of the United States" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="6419" end="6426" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="6428" end="6434" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="6439" end="6446" title="British people" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198247" start="6669" end="6673" title="High Class" label="high"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="6678" end="6690" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="6724" end="6732" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="6752" end="6760" title="Catalans" label="Catalans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="6766" end="6771" title="Arab peoples" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606511" start="6780" end="6788" title="Lebanese people" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q878607" start="6793" end="6800" title="Syrians" label="Syrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q28671976" start="6926" end="6941" title="Polish diaspora" label="Polish migrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="6950" end="6964" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="6974" end="6987" title="anti-Semitism" label="anti-Semitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="6992" end="7018" title="Nazism" label="Nazi persecution in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q721799" start="7075" end="7100" title="Ascensión Esquivel Ibarra" label="Ascensión Esquivel Ibarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="7160" end="7167" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="7169" end="7173" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="7175" end="7182" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="7186" end="7191" title="Gypsy" label="Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="7256" end="7273" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="7293" end="7312" title="Spanish Republican" label="Republican refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573855" start="7344" end="7354" title="Castilians" label="Castilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q752526" start="7356" end="7365" title="Galicians" label="Galicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573453" start="7371" end="7380" title="Asturians" label="Asturians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276073" start="7399" end="7406" title="Chilean people" label="Chilean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209676" start="7408" end="7415" title="Mexican people" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997267" start="7420" end="7429" title="Colombian People" label="Colombian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="7542" end="7555" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="7676" end="7688" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="own language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="7755" end="7769" title="World Factbook" label="World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="7963" end="7971" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="7975" end="7985" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305486" start="8012" end="8036" title="University of Costa Rica" label="University of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8103" end="8118" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="8196" end="8207" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="8251" end="8273" title="Nonreligious" label="do not have a religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="8434" end="8443" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="8445" end="8453" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="8455" end="8464" title="Anglicanism" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="8466" end="8473" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="8532" end="8579" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846757" start="8645" end="8653" title="San José Costa Rica Temple" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="8808" end="8832" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="8988" end="9006" title="Unification Church" label="Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="9133" end="9140" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="9142" end="9147" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="9149" end="9155" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190193" start="9157" end="9169" title="International Society for Krishna Consciousness" label="Hare Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="9171" end="9179" title="Paganism" label="Paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="9181" end="9186" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="9188" end="9199" title="Scientology" label="Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q737323" start="9201" end="9209" title="Tenrikyo" label="Tenrikyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="9219" end="9231" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="9481" end="9488" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="9696" end="9715" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755298" start="9958" end="9973" title="Caribbean Basin" label="Caribbean Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="10234" end="10244" title="Remittance" label="Remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="10509" end="10518" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="10561" end="10569" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10580" end="10593" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="10604" end="10609" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="10623" end="10629" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="10720" end="10730" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="10985" end="11003" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="11009" end="11016" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404229" start="11445" end="11477" title="Ethnic groups in Central America" label="Ethnic groups in Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152854" start="11579" end="11622" title="Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos de Costa Rica" label="National Institute of Statistics and Census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5555" wikidata="Q1154139" url="?curid=5555" title="Politics of Costa Rica">
<text>The politics of Costa Rica take place in a framework of a presidential, representative democratic republic, with a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the president and their cabinet, and the President of Costa Rica is both the head of state and head of government. Legislative power is vested in the Legislative Assembly. The president and 57 Legislative Assembly deputies are elected for four-year terms. The judiciary operates independently from the executive and the legislature, but is involved in the political process. Costa Rica has a strong system of constitutional checks and balances. Voting is compulsory &quot;de jure&quot;, but this is not enforced.

The position of governor in the seven provinces was abolished in 1998. There are no provincial legislatures. In 2009, the state monopolies on insurance and telecommunications were opened to private-sector competition. Certain other state agencies enjoy considerable operational independence and autonomy; they include the electrical power company (Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad), the nationalized commercial banks (which are open to competition from private banks), and the social security agency (Caja Costarricense del Seguro Social). Costa Rica has no military but maintains a domestic police force and a Special Forces Unit as part of the Ministry of the President.

 According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Costa Rica was in 2023 the most electoral democratic country in Latin America.

== Recent history ==
The 1986 presidential election was won by Óscar Arias of the PLN. During his tenure he experienced some criticism from within his own party for abandoning its traditional social democratic teachings and promoting a neoliberal economic model. He received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1987 for his efforts to end civil wars then raging in several Central American countries.

In the February 1998 national election, PUSC candidate Miguel Ángel Rodríguez won the presidency over PLN nominee José Miguel Corrales Bolaños. President Rodriguez assumed office May 8, 1998. The PUSC also obtained 27 seats in the 57-member Legislative Assembly, for a plurality, while the PLN got 23 and five minor parties won seven. Social Christian in philosophy, the PUSC generally favors neoliberalism, conservative fiscal policies, and government reform. President Rodriguez pledged to reduce the country&#x27;s large internal debt, privatize state-owned utilities, attract additional foreign investment, eliminate social welfare programs, and promote the creation of jobs with decent salaries.

The reforms he tried to promote found opposition from several parties, including his own, and he asserted several times the country was &quot;ungovernable&quot;. In particular, an attempt by the Legislative Assembly to approve a law that opened up the electricity and telecommunication markets (controlled by a monopoly of the Costa Rican Institute of Electricity - ICE) to market competition, known as the &quot;Combo&quot; law, was met with strong social opposition. The Combo law was supported by both major parties at the time (PLN and PUSC) as well as by President Rodriguez, but the first of three required legislative votes to approve it provoked the largest protest demonstrations the country had seen since 1970. The government quickly resolved to shelve the initiative. President Rodríguez&#x27;s approval would reach an all-time low, and he was indicted by the Attorney General after leaving office on corruption charges.

In September 2000 the Constitutional Court rejected an argument by former president Arias that a 1969 constitutional amendment banning presidential reelection be rescinded. Arias thus remained barred from a second term as president; however, in April 2003–by which time two of the four judges who had voted against the change in 2000 had been replaced–the Court reconsidered the issue and, with the only dissenters being the two anti-reelection judges remaining from 2000, declared the 1969 amendment null and thus opened the way to reelection for former presidents–which in practice meant Arias.

In the 2002 national election, a new party founded by former PLN Congressman and government Minister Ottón Solís captured 26% of the vote, forcing a runoff election for the first time in the country&#x27;s history. Abel Pacheco was elected president, under a national unity platform, but continuing most of the neoliberal and conservative policies of Miguel Ángel Rodríguez. This election was also important because new parties won several seats in Congress, more than ever. The PUSC obtained 19 seats, PLN 17 seats, PAC 14 seats, PML 6 seats and PRC one seat.

During 2004, several high-profile corruption scandals shattered the foundations of PUSC. Two former presidents from the party, Miguel Ángel Rodríguez and Rafael Ángel Calderón, were arrested on corruption charges and are currently waiting for the investigation to end and trial to begin. Also involved in scandals has been José María Figueres, former president from PLN and former head of the World Economic Forum.

The 2006 national election was expected to be a landslide for former president (1986–1990) and PLN&#x27;s candidate Óscar Arias, but it turned out to be the closest in modern history. Although polls just a week before the election gave Arias a comfortable lead of at least 12% (and up to 20%), preliminary election results gave him only a 0.4% lead over rival Ottón Solís and prompted a manual recount of all ballots. After a month-long recount and several appeals from different parties, Arias was declared the official winner with 40.9% of the votes against 39.8% for Solís.

When Óscar Arias returned to office, the political debate shifted to the ratification of the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA). Main supporters of the approval included the President&#x27;s PLN, which established a coalition with PUSC and ML in Congress to approve the implementation laws in Congress, as well as different business chambers. The main opposition to CAFTA came from PAC, labor unions, environmental organizations and public universities. In April 2007, former PLN Presidential candidate and CAFTA opponent José Miguel Corrales Bolaños won a legal battle at the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, which authorized him to gather over 100,000 signatures to send CAFTA to a referendum and let the people decide the fate of the controversial agreement. As the February 28, 2008 deadline to approve or reject CAFTA loomed, Arias decided to call for the referendum himself, and it took take place on October 7, 2007. CAFTA was approved with 51.5% of voters supporting it, although the election faced criticism due to international, including US, involvement.

The Costa Rican general election, 2010 was won by Laura Chinchilla of centrist National Liberation Party, who had been vice-president in the previous Arias administration. In May 2010, she was sworn in as the first female President of Costa Rica.

In 2014, Luis Guillermo Solís, PAC&#x27;s presidential candidate campaigning on a platform of economic reform and anti-corruption, surprised political observers by winning 30.95% of votes in the first round, while PLN candidate Johnny Araya gained the second most votes with 29.95%. Broad Front&#x27;s José María Villalta Florez-Estrada won 17% of the votes. On March 6, 2014, Araya announced that he would abandon his presidential campaign after polls showed him far behind Luis Guillermo Solís. Elections were held on April 6, 2014, as required by election law, and Solís won with 77.81% of the votes. According to the BBC, the success of Solís and Villalta is another example of anti-neoliberal politics in Latin America.

In April 2018, Carlos Alvarado won the presidential election. He became the new President of Costa Rica, succeeding President Guillermo Solís. Both Solis and Alvarado represented centre-left Citizens&#x27; Action Party.

In May 2022, Costa Rica&#x27;s new president Rodrigo Chaves, right-wing former finance minister, was sworn in for a four-year presidential term. He had won the election runoff against former president Jose María Figueres.

== Branches of government ==

=== Executive branch ===

Executive responsibilities are vested in a president, who is elected to a term of four years directly by the voters, not by the National Assembly as it would be in a parliamentary system. There also are two vice presidents and the president&#x27;s cabinet composed of his ministers. A constitutional amendment approved in 1969 limits presidents and deputies to one term, although a deputy may run again for an Assembly seat after sitting out a term. The prohibition was officially recognized as unconstitutional in April 2004, allowing Óscar Arias to run for president a second time in the 2006 Costa Rican presidential elections, which he won with approximately a 1% margin.

The President of Costa Rica has limited powers, particularly in comparison to other Latin American Presidents. For example, he cannot veto the legislative budget, and thus Congress is sovereign over the year&#x27;s single most important piece of legislation. On the other hand, he can appoint anyone to his cabinet without approval from Congress. This provides the single most important power versus Congress that any Costa Rican President has.
|President
|Rodrigo Chaves Robles
|Social Democratic Progress Party
|8 May 2022
| 1st Vice President
| Stephan Brunner
| Social Democratic Progress Party
| 8 May 2022
| 2nd Vice Presidents
| Mary Munive
| Social Democratic Progress Party
| 8 May 2022

==== Ministries ====
* Ministry of the Presidency
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship
* Ministry of Finance
* Ministry of Public Security
* Ministry of Justice and Peace
* Ministry of Public Education
* Ministry of Public Works and Transports
* Ministry of Economy, Industry and Commerce
* Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
* Ministry of Health
* Ministry of Labour and Social Security
* Ministry of Culture and Youth
* Ministry of National Planning and Economical Policy
* Ministry of Environment and Energy
* Ministry of Housing and Human Settlements
* Ministry of Foreign Trade
* Ministry of Science, Technology and Telecommunications
* Ministry of Communication

=== Legislative branch ===


Legislative powers are held by the Legislative Assembly. Legislators, called deputies, are elected to non-consecutive four-year terms by popular, direct vote, using proportional representation in each of the country&#x27;s seven provinces. As a result, there are nine separate political parties serving in the Legislative Assembly, with National Liberation Party holding 18 seats, the Citizens&#x27; Action Party holding 13, and Broad Front and the Social Christian Unity Party each holding 8. Other parties hold the remaining seats.
|Legislative Assembly President
|Rodrigo Arias Sánchez
|National Liberation Party
|8 May 2022

=== Judicial branch ===
The main arm of the judiciary is the Supreme Court of Justice. Twenty-two magistrates are selected for the CSJ for 8-year terms by the Legislative Assembly, and lower courts. Sala IV, also known as the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court, reviews legislation, executive actions, and certain writs for constitutionality. Courts below the Sala IV deal with issues involving legal and criminal disputes. Additionally, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE for its Spanish initials) is an independent branch of the CSJ, responsible for democratic elections. While the judiciary is independent of the politically elected executive and legislative branches, it is often responsible for resolving political and legal conflicts.

=== Institutional oversight ===
A Comptroller General, Procurator General, and an Ombudsman oversee the government and operate autonomously. These institutions have the right to scrutinize, investigate and prosecute government contracts. In addition, they may impose procedural requirements on most political and governmental agencies. The actions of politicians and political parties are frequently researched by these institutions.

== Elections ==
On the national level, the president, two vice-presidents and a legislature are elected for a four-year term. The Legislative Assembly has 57 members, elected by proportional representation in each of the country&#x27;s seven provinces.

The electoral process is supervised by an independent Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE for its Spanish initials). The TSE is a commission of three principal magistrates and six alternates selected by the Supreme Court of Justice of Costa Rica. All elections are conducted by a secret ballot at local polling stations. Voting is mandatory for registered citizens under Article 93 of the Constitution of Costa Rica, but this is not enforced.

On election days, political parties often organize caravans and marches to get supporters to polling stations. In many areas, voting takes on a festive atmosphere with supporters of each party wearing traditional colors and decorating their cars, houses, and livestock with colored ribbons. Because the day of elections is a national holiday, most people have the day off.

== Political parties ==

Currently, there are nine active political parties with representation in the Legislative Assembly of Costa Rica. An additional twelve parties ran, but did not receive enough votes to earn a seat in the assembly, making the total number of active parties in Costa Rica twenty-one. Starting in the 2000s, disagreement about many of the neo-liberal policies promoted by the dominant PLN caused the traditional party system of alliances among a few parties to fracture. Although still a stable country, the shift toward many political parties and away from PUSC and PLN is a recent development. Various elected positions within the country, such as mayors and city council members, are held by many different national and local political parties.

== Strength of institutions ==
Institutional strength is a critical factor in politics since it defines the ability of political institutions to enforce rules, settle conflicts, and sustain stability in society. Weak institutions can lead to instability, violence, and authoritarianism, while solid institutions are associated with more durable and sufficient democracies. This is especially applicable in countries with fragile institutional frameworks, where strengthening institutions is essential for advancing democracy and stability. Elements such as economic development, a record of state-building, and external actors can contribute to institutional strength; understanding these factors is essential for enabling effective governance. Therefore, lawmakers and scholars must pay close watch to institutional strength when analyzing and formulating political strategies to advance stable and effective democracies that serve the interests of their citizens.

=== Rule of law ===
The rule of law refers to the idea that all individuals and institutions, including the state, are subject to the same rules and limitations. In Costa Rica, the rule of law is generally considered robust, with a separate judiciary branch, effective law enforcement, and low indices of corruption. However, there are also concerns about the efficiency of the justice system and the slow pace of legal proceedings, which can sometimes hinder the effective enforcement of the law.

=== Democratic institutions ===
Costa Rica is famous for its stable and well-functioning democracy, with periodic, accessible, and honest elections, a competitive party system, and a robust civil society. The country has a presidential system of government, with a unicameral legislature and a multi-party system. Nevertheless, there are also some obstacles to the country&#x27;s democratic institutions, such as a lack of transparency and accountability in government and a high concentration of power among a small class of political elites.

=== Public services ===
Costa Rica&#x27;s government provides many public services, including health care, education, and social welfare programs. The &quot;Caja de Seguro Social&quot; in Costa Rica maneuvered through the COVID-19 Pandemic with extreme precaution, providing one of the best responses by public healthcare systems. Their public health care system attests to strong political institutions and its 70% of its citizens entirely depend on the services. These services are generally well-funded and accessible to the general public. However, there are also concerns about the quality and productivity of these services and the sustainability of the country&#x27;s public spending.

== See also ==

* Foreign relations of Costa Rica

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154139" start="4" end="26" title="Politics of Costa Rica" label="politics of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="58" end="70" title="presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="72" end="97" title="Representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="98" end="106" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="115" end="133" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="135" end="150" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q27977064" start="208" end="231" title="President of Costa Rica" label="President of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="244" end="257" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="262" end="280" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="282" end="299" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386962" start="317" end="337" title="Legislative Assembly of Costa Rica" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="427" end="436" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="542" end="552" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="639" end="646" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="719" end="727" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="809" end="819" title="monopoly" label="monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431114" start="1003" end="1027" title="Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad" label="electrical power company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174896" start="1161" end="1187" title="Caja Costarricense del Seguro Social" label="the social security agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333698" start="1228" end="1254" title="Military of Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica has no military"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="1380" end="1403" title="V-Dem Democracy indices" label="V-Dem Democracy indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q124053938" start="1436" end="1481" title="Democracy in Latin America and the Caribbean" label="electoral democratic country in Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49344" start="1547" end="1558" title="Óscar Arias" label="Óscar Arias"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="1720" end="1730" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="1763" end="1780" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q562577" start="1930" end="1952" title="Miguel Ángel Rodríguez" label="Miguel Ángel Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5784678" start="1989" end="2017" title="José Miguel Corrales Bolaños" label="José Miguel Corrales Bolaños"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915683" start="2399" end="2412" title="internal debt" label="internal debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q117815844" start="3490" end="3508" title="Corruption in Costa Rica" label="corruption charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q653008" start="4210" end="4221" title="Ottón Solís" label="Ottón Solís"/>
<link wikidata="Q217794" start="4324" end="4336" title="Abel Pacheco" label="Abel Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="Q562577" start="4460" end="4482" title="Miguel Ángel Rodríguez" label="Miguel Ángel Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q887712" start="4825" end="4846" title="Rafael Ángel Calderón Fournier" label="Rafael Ángel Calderón"/>
<link wikidata="Q82593" start="4994" end="5013" title="José María Figueres" label="José María Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="5064" end="5084" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49344" start="5203" end="5214" title="Óscar Arias" label="Óscar Arias"/>
<link wikidata="Q653008" start="5447" end="5458" title="Ottón Solís" label="Ottón Solís"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155342" start="5758" end="5795" title="Central American Free Trade Agreement" label="Central American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103212" start="6063" end="6075" title="Trade unions in Costa Rica" label="labor unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5784678" start="6198" end="6226" title="José Miguel Corrales Bolaños" label="José Miguel Corrales Bolaños"/>
<link wikidata="Q82406" start="6742" end="6776" title="Costa Rican general election, 2010" label="Costa Rican general election, 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q57321" start="6788" end="6804" title="Laura Chinchilla" label="Laura Chinchilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q82591" start="6817" end="6842" title="National Liberation Party (Costa Rica)" label="National Liberation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983599" start="6995" end="7015" title="Luis Guillermo Solís" label="Luis Guillermo Solís"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357469" start="7214" end="7226" title="Johnny Araya" label="Johnny Araya"/>
<link wikidata="Q403054" start="7269" end="7280" title="Broad Front (Costa Rica)" label="Broad Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943676" start="7288" end="7322" title="José María Villalta Florez-Estrada" label="José María Villalta Florez-Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q26996246" start="7727" end="7742" title="Carlos Alvarado Quesada" label="Carlos Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033977" start="7903" end="7930" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; Action Party (Costa Rica)" label="Citizens&amp;#x27; Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q98017689" start="7978" end="7992" title="Rodrigo Chaves Robles" label="Rodrigo Chaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q109529669" start="8093" end="8101" title="2022 Costa Rican general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q82593" start="8134" end="8153" title="José María Figueres" label="Jose María Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q504727" start="8255" end="8264" title="List of Presidents of Costa Rica" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q49344" start="8748" end="8759" title="Óscar Arias" label="Óscar Arias"/>
<link wikidata="Q218581" start="8802" end="8841" title="Costa Rica presidential elections, 2006" label="2006 Costa Rican presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q27977064" start="9335" end="9344" title="President of Costa Rica" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q98017689" start="9346" end="9367" title="Rodrigo Chaves Robles" label="Rodrigo Chaves Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q109717771" start="9369" end="9401" title="Social Democratic Progress Party" label="Social Democratic Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925043" start="9416" end="9434" title="Vice President of Costa Rica" label="1st Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q111677386" start="9437" end="9452" title="Stephan Brunner" label="Stephan Brunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q109717771" start="9455" end="9487" title="Social Democratic Progress Party" label="Social Democratic Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925043" start="9503" end="9522" title="Vice President of Costa Rica" label="2nd Vice Presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q111524163" start="9525" end="9536" title="Mary Munive" label="Mary Munive"/>
<link wikidata="Q109717771" start="9539" end="9571" title="Social Democratic Progress Party" label="Social Democratic Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q52244184" start="9609" end="9635" title="Ministry of the Presidency (Costa Rica)" label="Ministry of the Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144287" start="9638" end="9677" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship (Costa Rica)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q28501091" start="9680" end="9699" title="Ministry of Finance (Costa Rica)" label="Ministry of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866896" start="10070" end="10104" title="Ministry of Environment and Energy (Costa Rica)" label="Ministry of Environment and Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28501094" start="10151" end="10176" title="Ministry of Foreign Trade (Costa Rica)" label="Ministry of Foreign Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29049291" start="10179" end="10233" title="Ministry of Science, Technology and Telecommunications" label="Ministry of Science, Technology and Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386962" start="10327" end="10347" title="Legislative Assembly of Costa Rica" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="10438" end="10449" title="direct vote" label="direct vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="10457" end="10484" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82591" start="10629" end="10654" title="National Liberation Party (Costa Rica)" label="National Liberation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033977" start="10677" end="10704" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; Action Party (Costa Rica)" label="Citizens&amp;#x27; Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q403054" start="10721" end="10732" title="Broad Front (Costa Rica)" label="Broad Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056879" start="10741" end="10769" title="Social Christian Unity Party" label="Social Christian Unity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386962" start="10827" end="10857" title="Legislative Assembly of Costa Rica" label="Legislative Assembly President"/>
<link wikidata="Q6110636" start="10859" end="10880" title="Rodrigo Arias Sánchez" label="Rodrigo Arias Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q82591" start="10882" end="10907" title="National Liberation Party (Costa Rica)" label="National Liberation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644938" start="10982" end="11006" title="Supreme Court of Justice of Costa Rica" label="Supreme Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001059" start="11244" end="11248" title="writ" label="writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q673633" start="11707" end="11726" title="Comptroller" label="Comptroller General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247538" start="11728" end="11746" title="Procurator General (disambiguation)" label="Procurator General"/>
<link wikidata="Q169180" start="11755" end="11764" title="Ombudsman" label="Ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q27977064" start="12151" end="12160" title="President of Costa Rica" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q42178" start="12166" end="12181" title="vice-presidents" label="vice-presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="12188" end="12199" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386962" start="12238" end="12258" title="Legislative Assembly of Costa Rica" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="12286" end="12313" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644938" start="12565" end="12603" title="Supreme Court of Justice of Costa Rica" label="Supreme Court of Justice of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231522" start="12747" end="12773" title="Constitution of Costa Rica" label="Constitution of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386962" start="13279" end="13313" title="Legislative Assembly of Costa Rica" label="Legislative Assembly of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468468" start="16668" end="16699" title="Foreign relations of Costa Rica" label="Foreign relations of Costa Rica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5556" wikidata="Q2477593" url="?curid=5556" title="Economy of Costa Rica">
<text>The economy of [[Costa Rica]] has been very stable for some years now,
with continuing growth in the GDP (Gross Domestic Product) and moderate inflation, though with a high unemployment rate: 11.49% in 2019. Costa Rica&#x27;s economy emerged from recession in 1997 and has shown strong aggregate growth since then. The estimated GDP for 2023 is US$90 billion, up significantly from the US$52.6 billion in 2015 while the estimated 2024 per capita (purchasing power parity) is US$28,558.

Inflation remained around 4% to 5% per annum for several years up to 2015 but then dropped to 0.7% in 2016; it was expected to rise to a still moderate 2.8% by the end of 2017 In 2017, Costa Rica had the highest standards of living in Central America in spite of the high poverty level. The poverty level dropped by 1.2% in 2017 to 20.5%, thanks to reducing inflation and benefits offered by the government. The estimated unemployment level in 2017 was 8.1%, roughly the same as in 2016.

The country has evolved from an economy that once depended solely on agriculture, to one that is more diverse, based on tourism, electronics and medical components exports, medical manufacturing and IT services. Corporate services for foreign companies employ some 3% of the workforce. Of the GDP, 5.5% is generated by agriculture, 18.6% by industry and 75.9% by services (2016). Agriculture employs 12.9% of the labor force, industry 18.57%, services 69.02% (2016) Many foreign companies operate in the various Free-trade zones. In 2015, exports totalled US$12.6 billion while imports totalled US$15 billion for a trade deficit of US$2.39 billion.

The growing debt and budget deficit are the country&#x27;s primary concerns. By August 2017, Costa Rica was having difficulty paying its obligations and the President promised dramatic changes to handle the &quot;liquidity crisis&quot;. Other challenges face Costa Rica in its attempts to increase the economy by foreign investment. They include a poor infrastructure and a need to improve public sector efficiency.

==Public debt and deficit==
One of the country&#x27;s major concerns is the level of the public debt, especially as a percentage of the GDP (Gross Domestic Product), increasing from 29.8% in 2011 to 40.8% in 2015 and to 45% in 2016. The total debt in 2015 was $22.648 billion, up by nearly $3 billion from 2014. On a per capita basis, the debt was $4,711 per person. Costa Rica had a formal line of credit with the World Bank valued at US$947 million in April 2014, of which US$645 million had been accessed and US$600 million remained outstanding.

In a June 2017 report, the International Monetary Fund stated that annual growth was just over 4% with moderate inflation. The report added that &quot;financial system appears sound, and credit growth continues to be consistent with healthy financial deepening and macroeconomic trends. The agency noted that the fiscal deficit remains high and public debt continues to rise rapidly despite the authorities’ deepened consolidation efforts in 2016. Recent advances in fiscal consolidation have been partly reversed and political consensus on a comprehensive fiscal package remains elusive&quot;.

The IMF also expressed concern about increasing deficits, public debt and the heavy dollarization of bank assets and liabilities, warning that in tighter-than-expected global financial conditions these aspects would &quot;seriously undermine investor confidence&quot;. The group also recommended taking steps to reduce pension benefits and increase the amount of contribution by the public and increasing the cost effectiveness of the education system.

The country&#x27;s credit rating was reduced by Moody&#x27;s Investors Service in early 2017 to Ba2 from Ba1, with a negative outlook on the rating. The agency particularly cited the &quot;rising government debt burden and persistently high fiscal deficit, which was 5.2% of GDP in 2016&quot;. Moody&#x27;s was also concerned about the &quot;lack of political consensus to implement measures to reduce the fiscal deficit [which] will result in further pressure on the government&#x27;s debt ratios&quot;. In late July 2017, the Central Bank estimated the budget deficit at 6.1 percent of the country&#x27;s GDP. A 2017 study by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development warned that reducing the foreign debt must be a very high priority for the government. Other fiscal reforms were also recommended to moderate the budget deficit.

In 2014, President Solís presented a budget with an increase in spending of 19% for 2015, an increase of 0.5% for 2016 and an increase of 12% for 2017. When the 2017 budget was finally proposed, it totaled US$15.9 billion. Debt payments account for one-third of that amount. Of greater concern is the fact that a full 46% of the budget will require financing, a step that will increase the debt owed to foreign entities. In late July 2017, the Central Bank estimated the budget deficit at 6.1 percent of the country&#x27;s GDP.

===Liquidity crisis===

In early August 2017, President Luis Guillermo Solís admitted that the country was facing a &quot;liquidity crisis&quot;, an inability to pay all of its obligations and to guarantee the essential services. To address this issue, he promised that a higher VAT and higher income tax rates were being considered by his government. Such steps are essential, Solís told the nation. &quot;Despite all the public calls and efforts we have made since the start of my administration to contain spending and increase revenues, there is still a gap that we must close with fresh resources,&quot; he said. The crisis was occurring in spite of the growth, low inflation and continued moderate interest rates, Solís concluded.
Solís explained that the Treasury will prioritize payments on the public debt first, then salaries, and then pensions. The subsequent priorities include transfers to institutions &quot;according to their social urgency.&quot; All other payments will be made only if funds are available.

==Other challenges==
A 2016 report by the U.S. government report identifies other challenges facing Costa Rica as it works to expand its economy by working with potential foreign investors:

* The ports, roads, water systems would benefit from major upgrading. Attempts by China to invest in upgrading such aspects were &quot;stalled by bureaucratic and legal concerns&quot;.
* The bureaucracy is &quot;often slow and cumbersome&quot;.
* The country needs even more workers who are fluent in English and languages such as Portuguese, Mandarin and French. It would also benefit from more graduates in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) programs.
* Some sectors are controlled by a state monopoly which excludes competition but in other respects, &quot;Costa Rican laws, regulations and practices are generally transparent and foster competition&quot;.
* The country has been slow in completing environmental impact assessments which have caused delays in projects being completed.
* Product registration is a slow process, although this may improve with digitization.
* In spite of government attempts at improving the enforcement of intellectual property laws, this aspect remains a concern.

==Natural resources==

Costa Rica&#x27;s rainfall, and its location in the Central American isthmus, which provides easy access to North and South American markets and direct ocean access to the European and Asian Continents. Costa Rica has two seasons, both of which have their own agricultural resources: the tropical wet and dry seasons. One-fourth of Costa Rica&#x27;s land is dedicated to national forests, often adjoining beaches, which has made the country a popular destination for affluent retirees and ecotourists.

A full 10.27% of the country is protected as national parks while an additional 17% is set aside for reserves, wildlife refuges and protected zones. Costa Rica has over 50 wildlife refuges, 32 major national parks, more than 12 forest reserves and a few biological reserves.

Because of ocean access, 23.7% of Costa Rica&#x27;s people fish and trade their catches to fish companies; this is viewed as &quot;small scale artisanal coastal&quot; fishing and is most common in the Gulf of Nicoya. Costa Rica also charges licensing fees for commercial fishing fleets that are taking tuna, sardines, banga mary, mahi-mahi, red tilapia, shrimp, red snapper, other snappers, shark, marlin and sailfish. In mid 2017, the country was planning to ban large-scale commercial fishing off the southern Pacific Coast in an area nearly a million acres in size. The bill in congress was intended to &quot;protect the extraordinary marine and coastal resources&quot; from &quot;indiscriminate and unsustainable commercial fishing.&quot;
Sport fishing in Costa Rica is an important part of the tourism industry; species include marlin, sailfish, dorado, tarpon, snook, rooster fish, wahoo, tuna, mackerel, snapper and rainbow bass.

In terms of the 2012 Environmental Performance Index ranking, Costa Rica is 5th in the world, and first among the Americas. The World Economic Forum&#x27;s 2017 Travel &amp; Tourism Competitiveness Report ranked Costa Rica as third of 136 countries based on natural resources, the number of World Heritage natural sites, protected areas and species as well as eco tourism.

==Tourism==
With a $1.92-billion-a-year tourism industry, Costa Rica was the most visited nation in the Central American region, with 2.42 million foreign visitors in 2013. By 2016, 2.6 million tourists visited Costa Rica. The Tourism Board estimates that this sector&#x27;s spending in the country represented over US$3.4 billion, or about 5.8% of the GDP. The World Travel &amp; Tourism Council&#x27;s estimates indicate a direct contribution to the 2016 GDP of 5.1% and 110,000 direct jobs in Costa Rica; the total number of jobs indirectly supported by tourism was 271,000.

Ecotourism is extremely popular with the many tourists visiting the extensive national parks and protected areas around the country. Costa Rica was a pioneer in this type of tourism and the country is recognized as one of the few with real ecotourism. Other important market segments are adventure, sun and beaches. Most of the tourists come from the U.S. and Canada (46%), and the EU (16%), the prime market travelers in the world, which translates into a relatively high expenditure per tourist of $1000 per trip.

In the 2008 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index (TTCI), Costa Rica reached the 44th place in the world ranking, being the first among Latin American countries, and second if the Caribbean is included. Just considering the subindex measuring human, cultural, and natural resources, Costa Rica ranks in the 24th place at a worldwide level, and 7th when considering just the natural resources criteria. The TTCI report also notes Costa Rica&#x27;s main weaknesses, ground transport infrastructure (ranked 113th), and safety and security (ranked 128th).
The online travel magazine Travelzoo rated Costa Rica as one of five “Wow Deal Destinations for 2012”. The magazine Travel Weekly named Costa Rica the best destination in Central and South America in 2011. In 2017, the country was nominated in the following categories in the World Travel Awards: Mexico &amp; Central America&#x27;s Leading Beach Destination, Mexico &amp; Central America&#x27;s Leading Destination and Mexico &amp; Central America&#x27;s Leading Tourist Board.

==Agriculture==
Costa Rica&#x27;s economy was historically based on agriculture, and this has had a large cultural impact through the years. Costa Rica&#x27;s main cash crop, historically and up to modern times, was Bananas. The coffee crop had been a major export, but decreased in value to the point where it added only 2.5% to the 2013 exports of the country.

Agriculture also plays an important part in the country&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP). It makes up about 6.5% of Costa Rica’s GDP, and employs 12.9% of the labor force (2016). By comparison, industry employs 18.57% of the labor force, and the service sector 69.02%.
Depending on location and altitude, many regions differ in agricultural crops and techniques. The main agricultural exports from the country include: bananas, pineapples (the second highest export, with over 50% share of the world market), other tropical fruits, coffee (much of it grown in the Valle Central or Meseta Central), sugar, rice, palm oil, vegetables, tropical fruits, ornamental plants, maize, and potatoes.

Livestock activity consists of cattle, pigs and horses, as well as poultry. Meat and dairy produce are leading exports according to one source, but both were not in the top 10 categories of 2013.

The combined export value of forest products and textiles in 2013 did not exceed that of either chemical products or plastics.

==Exports, jobs, and energy==
Mere decades ago, Costa Rica was known principally as a producer of bananas and coffee. Even though bananas, pineapple, sugar, coffee, lumber, wood products and beef are still important exports, in recent times medical instruments, electronics, pharmaceuticals, financial outsourcing, software development, and ecotourism are now the prime exports. High levels of education and fluency in English among its residents make the country an attractive investing location.

In 2015 the following were the major export products (US$): medical instruments ($2 billion), bananas ($1.24B), tropical fruits ($1.22B), integrated circuits ($841 million) and orthopedic appliances ($555M). The total exports in 2015 were US$12.6 billion, down from $18.9B in 2010; bananas and medical instruments were the two largest sectors. Total imports in 2015 were $15B, up from $13.8B in 2010; this resulted in a trade deficit.

Over the years, Costa Rica successfully attracted important investments by such companies as Intel Corporation, Procter &amp; Gamble, Abbott Laboratories and Baxter Healthcare. Manufacturing and industry&#x27;s contribution to GDP overtook agriculture over the course of the 1990s, led by foreign investment in Costa Rica&#x27;s Free Trade Zones (FTZ) where companies benefit from investment and tax incentives. Companies in such zones must export at least 50% of their services. Well over half of that type of investment has come from the U.S. According to the government, the zones supported over 82 thousand direct jobs and 43 thousand indirect jobs in 2015; direct employment grew 5% over 2014. The average wages in the FTZ increased by 7% and were 1.8 times greater than the average for private enterprise work in the rest of the country. Companies with facilities in the America Free Zone in Heredia, for example, include Dell, HP, Bayer, Bosch, DHL, IBM and Okay Industries.

In 2006 Intel&#x27;s microprocessor facility alone was responsible for 20% of Costa Rican exports and 4.9% of the country&#x27;s GDP. In 2014, Intel announced it would end manufacturing in Costa Rica and lay off 1,500 staff but agreed to maintain at least 1,200 employees. The facility continued as a test and design center with approximately 1,600 remaining staff. In 2017, Intel had 2000 employees in the country, and was operating a facility which assembles, tests and distributes processors and a Global Innovation Center, both in Heredia.

The fastest growing aspect of the economy is the provision of corporate services for foreign companies which in 2016 employed approximately 54,000 people in a country with a workforce under 342,000; that was up from 52,400 the previous year. For example, Amazon.com employs some 5,000 people. Many work in the free-trade areas such as Zona Franca America and earn roughly double the national average for service work. This sector generated US$4.6 billion in 2016, nearly as much as tourism.

In 2013, the total FDI stock in Costa Rica amounted to about 40 percent of GDP, of which investments from the United States accounted for 64 percent, followed by the United Kingdom and Spain with 6 percent each. Costa Rica&#x27;s outward foreign direct investment stock is small, at about 3 percent of
GDP as of 2011, and mainly concentrated in Central America (about 57 percent of the total outward direct investment stock).

Tourism is an important part of the economy, with the number of visitors increasing from 780,000 in 1996, to 1 million in 1999, and to 2.089 million foreign visitors in 2008, allowing the country to earn $2.144-billion in that year. By 2016, 2.6 million tourists visited Costa Rica, spending roughly US$3.4 billion. Tourism directly supported 110,000 jobs and indirectly supported 271,000 in 2016.

Costa Rica has not discovered sources of fossil fuels—apart from minor coal deposits—but its mountainous terrain and abundant rainfall have permitted the construction of a dozen hydroelectric power plants, making it self-sufficient in all energy needs, except for refined petroleum. In 2017, Costa Rica was considering the export of electricity to neighbouring countries. Mild climate and trade winds make neither heating nor cooling necessary, particularly in the highland cities and towns where some 90% of the population lives.
Renewable energy in Costa Rica is the norm. In 2016, 98.1 per cent of the country&#x27;s electricity came from green sources: hydro generating stations, geothermal plants, wind turbines, solar panels and biomass plants.

==Infrastructure==

Costa Rica&#x27;s infrastructure has suffered from a lack of maintenance and new investment. The country has an extensive road system of more than 30,000 kilometers, although much of it is in disrepair; this also applies to ports, railways and water delivery systems. According to a 2016 U.S. government report, investment from China which attempted to improve the infrastructure found the &quot;projects stalled by bureaucratic and legal concerns&quot;.

Most parts of the country are accessible by road. The main highland cities in the country&#x27;s Central Valley are connected by paved all-weather roads with the Atlantic and Pacific coasts and by the Pan American Highway with Nicaragua and Panama, the neighboring countries to the North and the South. Costa Rica&#x27;s ports are struggling to keep pace with growing trade. They have insufficient capacity, and their equipment is in poor condition. The railroad didn&#x27;t function for several years, until recent government effort to reactivate it for city transportation. An August 2016 OECD report provided this summary: &quot;The road network is extensive but of poor quality, railways are in disrepair and only slowly being reactivated after having been shut down in the 1990s, seaports quality and capacity are deficient. Internal transportation overly relies on private road vehicles as the public transport system, especially railways, is inadequate.&quot;

In a June 2017 interview, President Luis Guillermo Solís said that private sector investment would be required to solve the problems. &quot;Of course Costa Rica’s infrastructure deficit is a challenge that outlasts any one government and I hope that we have created the foundations for future administrations to continue building. I have just enacted a law to facilitate Public Private Partnerships, which are the ideal way to develop projects that are too large for the government to undertake. For example the new airport that we are building to serve the capital city will cost $2 billion, so it will need private-sector involvement. There is also the potential for a ‘dry canal’ linking sea ports on our Atlantic and Caribbean Coasts that could need up to $16 billion of investment.&quot;

The government hopes to bring foreign investment, technology, and management into the telecommunications and electrical power sectors, which are monopolies of the state. ICE (Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad) has the monopoly on telecommunications, internet and electricity services. Some limited competition is allowed. In 2011, two new private companies began offering cellular phone service and others offer voice communication over internet connections (VOIP) for overseas calls.

According to transparency.org, Costa Rica had a reputation as one of the most stable, prosperous, and among the least corrupt in Latin America in 2007. However, in fall 2004, three former Costa Rican presidents, José María Figueres, Miguel Angel Rodríguez, and Rafael Angel Calderon, were investigated on corruption charges related to the issuance of government contracts. After extensive legal proceedings Calderon and Rodriguez were sentenced; however, the inquiry on Figueres was dismissed and he was not charged.

More recently, Costa Rica reached 40th place in 2015, with a score of 55 on the Perception of Corruption scale; this is better than the global average. Countries with the lowest perceived corruption rated 90 on the scale. In late May 2017, the country
Costa Rica applied to become a member of the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention, to be effective in July 2017.

== Foreign trade ==
Costa Rica has sought to widen its economic and trade ties, both within and outside the region. Costa Rica signed a bilateral trade agreement with Mexico in 1994, which was later amended to cover a wider range of products. Costa Rica joined other Central American countries, plus the Dominican Republic, in establishing a Trade and Investment Council with the United States in March 1998, which later became the Dominican Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement. Costa Rica has bilateral free trade agreements with the following countries and blocs which took effect on (see date):
* Canada (November 1, 2002) 
* Caribbean Community (CARICOM)¨ (November 15, 2002)
* Chile (February 15, 2002)
* China (August 1, 2011).
* Colombia (September 2016)
* Dominican Republic (March 7, 2002)
* El Salvador Customs union, (1963, re-launched on October 29, 1993)
* European Free Trade Association (2013)
* European Union (October 1, 2013)
* Guatemala Customs union, (1963, re-launched on October 29, 1993)
* Honduras Customs union, (1963, re-launched on October 29, 1993)
* Mexico (January 1, 1995)
* Nicaragua Customs union, (1963, re-launched on October 29, 1993)
* Panama (July 31, 1973, renegotiated and expanded for January 1, 2009)
* Peru (June 1, 2013)
* United States (January 1, 2009, CAFTA-DR)
* Singapore (April 6, 2010)
* South Korea (March 18, 2019)

There are no significant trade barriers that would affect imports and the country has been lowering its tariffs in accordance with other Central American countries. Costa Rica also is a member of the Cairns Group, an organization of agricultural exporting countries that are seeking access to more markets to increase the exports of agricultural products. Opponents of free agricultural trade have sometimes attempted to block imports of products already grown in Costa Rica, including rice, potatoes, and onions. By 2015, Costa Rica&#x27;s agricultural exports totalled US$2.7 billion.

In 2015, the top export destinations for all types of products were the United States (US$4.29 billion), Guatemala ($587 million), the Netherlands ($537 million), Panama ($535 million) and Nicaragua ($496 million). The top import origins were the United States ($6.06 billion), China ($1.92 billion), Mexico ($1.14 billion), Japan ($410 million) and Guatemala ($409 million). The most significant products imported were Refined Petroleum (8.41% of the total imports) and Automobiles (4.68%). Total imports in 2015 were US$15 billion, somewhat higher than the total exports of a US$12.6 billion, for a negative trade balance of US$2.39 billion.

== Foreign Direct Investment ==
The Costa Rican government has and is “actively courting FDI” in order to help develop its economy. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is a form of investment that promotes development in key industries such as manufacturing, medicine, and tourism. FDI’s influence provides a very lucrative opportunity for foreign investors which is what continues to attract such large investments year over year.  Over time FDI inflows in Costa Rica have increased, Net FDI inflow averaged  forty four million dollars per year from 1970-1979 and just ten years later this value rose to four hundred and sixteen million dollars.  The 2022 data show that Costa Rica received $3 billion dollars in FDI which accounted for 4.45% of their total GDP.

Growth in FDI is linked to rising tourist arrivals with the numbers rising from 2.1 million in 2011 to 3.1 million in 2019. Facilitation of FDI growth is seen as an essential role of the Costa Rican government. Throughout 2019 and 2022, the government of Costa Rica was able to court investment for a total of 16 new FDI projects with one of the more notable projects being a luxury hotel named One and Only Papagayo.

== Statistics ==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2019 (with IMF staff stimtates in 2020–2025). Inflation below 5% is in green.


GDP:
US$61.5 billion (2017 estimate)

GDP real growth rate:
4.3% (2017 estimate)

GDP per capita:
purchasing power parity: $12,382 (2017 estimate)

GDP composition by sector:
&quot;agriculture:&quot; 5.5% (2016 estimate) Bananas, pineapples, coffee, beef, sugarcane, rice, corn, dairy products, vegetables, timber, fruits and ornamental plants.
&quot;industry:&quot;
18.6% (2016 estimate) Electronic components, food processing, textiles and apparel, construction materials, cement, fertilizer.
&quot;services:&quot;
75.9% (2016 estimate) Hotels, restaurants, tourist services, banks, call centers and insurance.

Government bond ratings: (January 2017) Standard &amp; Poor&#x27;s: BB−; Moody&#x27;s: Ba2

Budget deficit: 6.1 percent of the GDP

Population below poverty line:
20.5% (2017)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
&quot;lowest 10%:&quot;
1.2%
&quot;highest 10%:&quot;
39.5% (2009 est.)

Inflation rate (consumer prices):
2.6% (2017 estimate)

Labor force:
2.295 million (2016) &quot;Note: 15 and older, excluding Nicaraguans living in the country&quot;
Labor force by occupation:
agriculture 12.9%, industry 18.57%, services 69.02% (2016)

Unemployment rate:
8.1% (2017 estimate)

Budget: US15.9 billion (2017 proposed) Note: 46% will require financing

Industries:
microprocessors, food processing, textiles and clothing, construction materials, fertilizer, plastic products

Industrial production growth rate:
4.3% (2013)

Electricity production:
9.473 billion kWh (2010)

Electricity production by source: 98.1% from &quot;green sources&quot; (2016)

Agriculture products:
bananas, pineapples, other tropical fruits, coffee, palm oil, sugar, corn, rice, beans, potatoes, beef, timber

Exports: US$12.6 billion (2015)

Major export commodities: Medical Instruments ($2B), Bananas ($1.24B), Tropical Fruits ($1.22B), Integrated Circuits ($841M) and Orthopedic Appliances ($555M).

Export partners (2016): United States ($4.29B), Guatemala ($587M), the Netherlands ($537M), Panama ($535M), Nicaragua ($496M)

Imports:
US $15.1 billion (2015)

Major import commodities: Refined Petroleum ($1.26B), Cars ($702M), Packaged Medicaments ($455M), Broadcasting Equipment ($374M) and Computers ($281M).

Origin of imports (2016): United States ($6.06B), China ($1.92B), Mexico ($1.14B), Japan ($410M) and Guatemala ($409M).

External debt:
US$26.2 billion (January 2016)

Economic aid – recipient:
$107.1 million (1995)

Currency:
1 Costa Rican colon (₡) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates:
Costa Rican colones (₡) per US$1 – 526.46 (March 27, 2015), US$1 – 600 (late May 2017), US$1 – 563 (end of July 2017), US$1 – 677 (May 2022) 
Fiscal year:
January 1 – December 31

==External links==

* Costa Rica Exports, Imports and Trade Balance World Bank
* Tariffs applied by Costa Rica as provided by ITC&#x27;s Access Map, an online database of customs tariffs and market requirements.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2477593" start="4" end="29" title="Economy of Costa Rica" label="economy of [[Costa Rica]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995667" start="44" end="50" title="economic stability" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1045" end="1056" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="1096" end="1103" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="1105" end="1116" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="1488" end="1503" title="Free-trade zone" label="Free-trade zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="2458" end="2468" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2620" end="2647" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159021" start="3691" end="3721" title="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service" label="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983599" start="5078" end="5098" title="Luis Guillermo Solís" label="Luis Guillermo Solís"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7329" end="7353" title="Central American isthmus" label="Central American isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="7766" end="7777" title="Ecotourism" label="ecotourists"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="8115" end="8119" title="fishing" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261772" start="9015" end="9046" title="Environmental Performance Index" label="Environmental Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="9408" end="9415" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q115806568" start="9901" end="9911" title="Indirect jobs" label="indirectly"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="9947" end="9957" title="Ecotourism" label="Ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="10025" end="10039" title="national parks" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="10044" end="10058" title="protected area" label="protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="10329" end="10331" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835951" start="10476" end="10516" title="Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report" label="Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="10603" end="10617" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486921" start="10647" end="10656" title="Anglophone Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836120" start="11046" end="11055" title="Travelzoo" label="Travelzoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="11663" end="11672" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="11715" end="11721" title="Banana" label="Banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="11926" end="11948" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="11982" end="11992" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440398" start="12025" end="12036" title="labor force" label="labor force"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="12285" end="12291" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="12294" end="12303" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="12398" end="12404" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="12464" end="12469" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="12471" end="12475" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="12487" end="12496" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q844144" start="12499" end="12513" title="tropical fruit" label="tropical fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="12516" end="12532" title="ornamental plant" label="ornamental plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="12535" end="12540" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="12546" end="12552" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="12980" end="12986" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="12992" end="12998" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="13021" end="13030" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="13032" end="13037" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="13047" end="13053" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="13055" end="13059" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="13144" end="13155" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="13157" end="13172" title="pharmaceuticals" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="13223" end="13233" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="13276" end="13285" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="13360" end="13369" title="investing" label="investing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12535449" start="13465" end="13472" title="billion" label="billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38526" start="13545" end="13552" title="million" label="million"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="13910" end="13927" title="Intel" label="Intel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="13929" end="13949" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q306764" start="13951" end="13970" title="Abbott Laboratories" label="Abbott Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="14808" end="14813" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="14929" end="14932" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="15600" end="15610" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="16264" end="16271" title="Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="16734" end="16738" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="16841" end="16860" title="hydroelectric power" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q22893878" start="17194" end="17224" title="Renewable energy in Costa Rica" label="Renewable energy in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q271839" start="18092" end="18112" title="Pan American Highway" label="Pan American Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="18118" end="18127" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="18132" end="18138" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="18212" end="18216" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="20158" end="20174" title="transparency.org" label="transparency.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="20263" end="20270" title="corruption" label="corrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q82593" start="20357" end="20376" title="José María Figueres" label="José María Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q562577" start="20378" end="20400" title="Miguel Angel Rodríguez" label="Miguel Angel Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q887712" start="20406" end="20427" title="Rafael Ángel Calderón Fournier" label="Rafael Angel Calderon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="20450" end="20460" title="Political corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155342" start="21453" end="21508" title="Dominican Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement" label="Dominican Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="21510" end="21520" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029558" start="21631" end="21637" title="Canada–Costa Rica Free Trade Agreement" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q205995" start="21660" end="21679" title="Caribbean Community" label="Caribbean Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="21713" end="21718" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="21741" end="21746" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="21767" end="21775" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="21795" end="21813" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="21832" end="21843" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="21901" end="21932" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="21942" end="21956" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="21977" end="21986" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="22044" end="22052" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="22110" end="22116" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="22137" end="22146" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="22204" end="22210" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="22276" end="22280" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="22298" end="22311" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="22342" end="22351" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="22370" end="22381" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025959" start="22600" end="22612" title="Cairns Group" label="Cairns Group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5558" wikidata="Q3997815" url="?curid=5558" title="Transport in Costa Rica">
<text>There are many modes of transport in Costa Rica but the country&#x27;s infrastructure has suffered from a lack of maintenance and new investment. There is an extensive road system of more than 30,000 kilometers, although much of it is in disrepair; this also applies to ports, railways and water delivery systems. According to a 2016 U.S. government report, investment from China that attempted to improve the infrastructure found the &quot;projects stalled by bureaucratic and legal concerns&quot;.

Most parts of the country are accessible by road. The main highland cities in the country&#x27;s Central Valley are connected by paved all-weather roads with the Atlantic and Pacific coasts and by the Pan American Highway with Nicaragua and Panama, the neighboring countries to the north and to the south Costa Rica&#x27;s ports are struggling to keep pace with growing trade. They have insufficient capacity, and their equipment is in poor condition. The railroad didn&#x27;t function for several years, until recent government effort to reactivate it for city transportation. An August 2016 OECD report provided this summary: &quot;The road network is extensive but of poor quality, railways are in disrepair and only slowly being reactivated after having been shut down in the 1990s. Seaports’ quality and capacity are deficient. Internal transportation overly relies on private road vehicles as the public transport system, especially railways, is inadequate.&quot;

==Railways==

*&quot;total:&quot; 
*&quot;narrow gauge:&quot; of gauge ( electrified)

==Road transportation==

The road system in Costa Rica is not as developed as it might be expected for such a country. However, there are some two-lane trunk roads with restricted access under development.

*&quot;Total:&quot; 
*&quot;Paved:&quot; 
*&quot;Unpaved:&quot; 

===National road network===
The Ministry of Public Works and Transport (MOPT), along with the National Road Council (Conavi), are the government organizations in charge of national road nomenclature and maintenance.

There are three levels in the national road network:

*Primary roads: These are trunk roads devised to connect important cities, most of the national roads are connected to the capital city, San José. There are 19 national primary roads, numbered between 1 and 39.
*Secondary roads: These are roads that connect different cities, or primary routes, directly. There are 129 national secondary roads, numbered between 100 and 257.
*Tertiary roads: These roads connect main cities to villages or residential areas, there are 175 national tertiary roads, numbered between 301 and 935.

==Waterways==
, seasonally navigable by small craft

==Pipelines==
* refined products 

==Ports and harbors==
In 2016, the government pledged ₡93 million ($166,000) for a new cruise ship terminal for Puerto Limón.

===Atlantic Ocean===
* Port of Moín, operated by JAPDEVA.
* Port of Limón, operated by JAPDEVA.
* Moín Container Terminal, operated by APM Terminals.

===Pacific Ocean===
* Golfito
* Puerto Quepos
* Puntarenas (cruise ships only)
* Caldera Port

==Merchant marine==
*&quot;total:&quot; 2 ships ( or over) /
*&quot;ships by type:&quot;
** passenger/cargo ships 2

==Airports==

&quot;Total&quot;: 161 

=== Airports - with paved runways ===
* &quot;total&quot;: 47 
* : 2
* : 2
* : 27
* under : 16

=== Airports - with unpaved runways ===
*&quot;total:&quot; 114 
*&quot;:&quot; 18
*&quot;under&quot; &quot;:&quot; 96

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3997815" start="24" end="47" title="Transport in Costa Rica" label="transport in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q271839" start="702" end="722" title="Pan American Highway" label="Pan American Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="728" end="737" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="742" end="748" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="806" end="816" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="824" end="828" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="1514" end="1526" title="narrow gauge" label="narrow gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838952" start="1864" end="1902" title="Ministry of Public Works and Transport (Costa Rica)" label="Ministry of Public Works and Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="2240" end="2248" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="2647" end="2653" title="season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666353" start="2658" end="2667" title="navigable" label="navigable"/>
<link wikidata="Q863970" start="2671" end="2682" title="River boat" label="small craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059843" start="2700" end="2716" title="Petroleum products" label="refined products"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794054" start="2869" end="2881" title="Port of Moín" label="Port of Moín"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231175" start="2906" end="2919" title="Port of Limón" label="Port of Limón"/>
<link wikidata="Q85786814" start="2944" end="2967" title="Moín Container Terminal" label="Moín Container Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653345" start="2981" end="2994" title="APM Terminals" label="APM Terminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q949409" start="3019" end="3026" title="Golfito" label="Golfito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776723" start="3029" end="3042" title="Puerto Quepos" label="Puerto Quepos"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687" start="3045" end="3055" title="Puntarenas" label="Puntarenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026433" start="3078" end="3090" title="Caldera Port" label="Caldera Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="3134" end="3138" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055880" start="3184" end="3205" title="Passenger ship" label="passenger/cargo ships"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5559" wikidata="Q2333698" url="?curid=5559" title="Public Force of Costa Rica">
<text>The Public Force of Costa Rica () is the national law enforcement agency of Costa Rica, whose duties include internal security and border control.

==History==
On 1 December 1948, the President of Costa Rica, José Figueres Ferrer, abolished the Costa Rican military after his victory in the Costa Rican Civil War.
In a ceremony at the national capital of San José, Figueres symbolically broke a wall with a mallet, symbolizing an end to the military&#x27;s existence. In 1949, the abolition of the Costa Rican military was introduced in Article 12 of the Constitution of Costa Rica. The budget previously dedicated to the military is now dedicated to security, education and culture. Costa Rica maintains Police Guard forces. The museum was placed in the as a symbol of commitment to culture. In 1986, President Oscar Arias Sánchez declared December 1 as the (Military abolition day) with Law #8115. Unlike its neighbors, Costa Rica has not endured a civil war since 1948. Costa Rica maintains small forces capable of law enforcement, but has no permanent standing army.

===Public Force of the Ministry of Public Security (1996)===
In 1996, the Ministry of Public Security established the or Public Force, a gendarmerie which reorganised and eliminated the Civil Guard, Rural Assistance Guard, and Frontier Guards as separate entities. They are now under the Ministry and operate on a geographic command basis performing ground security, law enforcement, counter-narcotics, border patrol, and tourism security functions. The Costa Rica Coast Guard also operates directly under the Ministry but is not a part of the Public Force proper.

Outside the Fuerza Pública, there is a small Special Forces Unit, the Unidad Especial de Intervencion (UEI) or Special Intervention Unit, an elite commando force which trains with special forces from around the world, but is not part of the main police forces. Instead, it is part of the Intelligence and Security Directorate (DIS) which reports directly to the Minister of the Presidency. About 70-member strong, it is organized along military lines, although officially it is a civilian police unit.

The motto of the Public Force is &quot;God, Fatherland, and Honour.&quot; Commissioner of Police Juan José Andrade Morales serves as its current Commissioner General.

==Ranks==
*Comisario de Policía/ Director general de la Fuerza Pública
*Comisionado de Policía
*Comandante de Policía
*Capitán de Policía
*Intendente
*Sub Intendente
*Sargento de Policía
*Inspector
*Agente 2
*Agente 1

==Equipment==

=== Small arms ===
==See also==
* List of countries without armed forces
* Special Intervention Unit (Costa Rica)

==References==
==External links==
* Fuerza Pública de Costa Rica.
* Ministerio de Seguridad Pública. 
* El Espíritu del 48: Abolición del Ejército A brief history of the abolition of the military in Costa Rica.
* Latin American Light Weapons National Inventories</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2333698" start="4" end="30" title="Public Force of Costa Rica" label="Public Force of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q732717" start="50" end="72" title="law enforcement agency" label="law enforcement agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="76" end="86" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047930" start="109" end="126" title="internal security" label="internal security"/>
<link wikidata="Q218719" start="131" end="145" title="border control" label="border control"/>
<link wikidata="Q27977064" start="184" end="207" title="President of Costa Rica" label="President of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q311126" start="209" end="229" title="José Figueres Ferrer" label="José Figueres Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434218" start="291" end="312" title="Costa Rican Civil War" label="Costa Rican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="355" end="363" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202271" start="407" end="413" title="mallet" label="mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087321" start="537" end="581" title="Article 12 of the Constitution of Costa Rica" label="Article 12 of the Constitution of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q49344" start="812" end="831" title="Oscar Arias Sánchez" label="Oscar Arias Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="951" end="960" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="1056" end="1069" title="standing army" label="standing army"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="1209" end="1220" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124482" start="1258" end="1269" title="Costa Rican Civil Guard" label="Civil Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526135" start="1429" end="1437" title="security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q44554" start="1439" end="1454" title="law enforcement" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q185517" start="1456" end="1473" title="counter-narcotics" label="counter-narcotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q138775" start="1475" end="1488" title="border patrol" label="border patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="1683" end="1697" title="Special Forces" label="Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q127424738" start="1708" end="1745" title="Special Intervention Unit (Costa Rica)" label="Unidad Especial de Intervencion (UEI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="1785" end="1793" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q16502" start="1849" end="1854" title="world" label="world"/>
<link wikidata="Q19349783" start="2286" end="2306" title="Commissioner General" label="Commissioner General"/>
<link wikidata="Q667685" start="2577" end="2615" title="List of countries without armed forces" label="List of countries without armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q127424738" start="2618" end="2656" title="Special Intervention Unit (Costa Rica)" label="Special Intervention Unit (Costa Rica)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5560" wikidata="Q5468468" url="?curid=5560" title="Foreign relations of Costa Rica">
<text>Costa Rica is an active member of the international community and, in 1983, claimed it was for neutrality. Due to certain powerful constituencies favoring its methods, it has a weight in world affairs far beyond its size. The country lobbied aggressively for the establishment of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and became the first nation to recognize the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Human Rights Court, based in San José.

The foreign affairs of the Republic of Costa Rica are a function of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship.

== History ==
Costa Rica gained election as president of the Group of 77 in the United Nations in 1995. That term ended in 1997 with the South-South Conference held in San Jose.

Costa Rica occupied a nonpermanent seat in the Security Council from 1997 to 1999 and exercised a leadership role in confronting crises in the Middle East and Africa, as well as in the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is currently a member of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. On 1 January 2008 Costa Rica started its third year term on the Security Council.

Costa Rica strongly backed efforts by the United States to implement UN Security Council Resolution 940, which led to the restoration of the democratically elected Government of Haiti in October 1994. Costa Rica was among the first to call for a postponement of the 22 May elections in Peru when international observer missions found electoral machinery not prepared for the vote count.

Costa Rica is also a member of the International Criminal Court, without a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the US-military (as covered under Article 98).

==Costa Rica&#x27;s relation to Central America==

In 1987, then President Óscar Arias authored a regional plan that served as the basis for the Esquipulas Peace Agreement and Arias was awarded the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize for his work. Arias also promoted change in the USSR-backed Nicaraguan government of the era. Costa Rica also hosted several rounds of negotiations between the Salvadoran Government and the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front, aiding El Salvador&#x27;s efforts to emerge from civil war and culminating in that country&#x27;s 1994 free and fair elections. Costa Rica has been a strong proponent of regional arms-limitation agreements. Former President Miguel Ángel Rodríguez recently proposed the abolition of all Central American militaries and the creation of a regional counternarcotics police force in their stead.

With the establishment of democratically elected governments in all Central American nations by the 1990s, Costa Rica turned its focus from regional conflicts to the pursuit of neoliberal policies on the isthmus. The influence of these policies, along with the US invasion of Panama, was instrumental in drawing Panama into the Central American model of neoliberalism. Costa Rica also participated in the multinational Partnership for Democracy and Development in Central America.

Regional political integration has not proven attractive to Costa Rica. The country debated its role in the Central American integration process under former President Calderon. Costa Rica has sought concrete economic ties with its Central American neighbors rather than the establishment of regional political institutions, and it chose not to join the Central American Parliament.

==Costa Rica in the UN==

Costa Rica has been an active member of the United Nations since its inception at the San Francisco Conference in 1945. Its first ambassador to the United Nations was Fernando Soto Harrison, the secretary of governance under President Picado.

Costa Rican Christiana Figueres was nominated for the post of UN secretary-general in July 2016.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries with which Costa Rica maintains diplomatic relations:
==Bilateral relations==
==See also==

* List of diplomatic missions in Costa Rica
* List of diplomatic missions of Costa Rica
* Visa requirements for Costa Rican citizens

==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="0" end="10" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="95" end="105" title="neutrality (international relations)" label="neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q656812" start="284" end="347" title="Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights" label="Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547804" start="413" end="446" title="Inter-American Human Rights Court" label="Inter-American Human Rights Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070" start="457" end="465" title="San José, Costa Rica" label="San José"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144287" start="540" end="579" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship (Costa Rica)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="643" end="654" title="Group of 77" label="Group of 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="662" end="676" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="808" end="824" title="United Nations Security Council" label="Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="904" end="915" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="920" end="926" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="953" end="993" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q685248" start="1027" end="1068" title="United Nations Commission on Human Rights" label="United Nations Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188052" start="1222" end="1256" title="UN Security Council Resolution 940" label="UN Security Council Resolution 940"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="1331" end="1336" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="1439" end="1443" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="1576" end="1604" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892316" start="1616" end="1644" title="Bilateral Immunity Agreement" label="Bilateral Immunity Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q838958" start="1697" end="1707" title="Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court" label="Article 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q49344" start="1786" end="1797" title="Óscar Arias" label="Óscar Arias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399259" start="1856" end="1882" title="Esquipulas Peace Agreement" label="Esquipulas Peace Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="1914" end="1931" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="2092" end="2113" title="El Salvador" label="Salvadoran Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q648924" start="2122" end="2163" title="Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front" label="Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q562577" start="2389" end="2411" title="Miguel Ángel Rodríguez" label="Miguel Ángel Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="2451" end="2466" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="2869" end="2875" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="2911" end="2924" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140764" start="2976" end="3036" title="Partnership for Democracy and Development in Central America" label="Partnership for Democracy and Development in Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q190023" start="3393" end="3420" title="Central American Parliament" label="Central American Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3493" end="3507" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q518828" start="3705" end="3724" title="Christiana Figueres" label="Christiana Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="3755" end="3775" title="UN secretary-general" label="UN secretary-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616307" start="3930" end="3971" title="List of diplomatic missions in Costa Rica" label="List of diplomatic missions in Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433599" start="3974" end="4015" title="List of diplomatic missions of Costa Rica" label="List of diplomatic missions of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935438" start="4018" end="4060" title="Visa requirements for Costa Rican citizens" label="Visa requirements for Costa Rican citizens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5561" wikidata="Q182557" url="?curid=5561" title="Computational linguistics">
<text>Computational linguistics is an interdisciplinary field concerned with the computational modelling of natural language, as well as the study of appropriate computational approaches to linguistic questions. In general, computational linguistics draws upon linguistics, computer science, artificial intelligence, mathematics, logic, philosophy, cognitive science, cognitive psychology, psycholinguistics, anthropology and neuroscience, among others.

==Origins==
The field overlapped with artificial intelligence since the efforts in the United States in the 1950s to use computers to automatically translate texts from foreign languages, particularly Russian scientific journals, into English. Since rule-based approaches were able to make arithmetic (systematic) calculations much faster and more accurately than humans, it was expected that lexicon, morphology, syntax and semantics can be learned using explicit rules, as well. After the failure of rule-based approaches, David Hays coined the term in order to distinguish the field from AI and co-founded both the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) and the International Committee on Computational Linguistics (ICCL) in the 1970s and 1980s. What started as an effort to translate between languages evolved into a much wider field of natural language processing.

==Annotated corpora==
In order to be able to meticulously study the English language, an annotated text corpus was much needed. The Penn Treebank was one of the most used corpora. It consisted of IBM computer manuals, transcribed telephone conversations, and other texts, together containing over 4.5 million words of American English, annotated using both part-of-speech tagging and syntactic bracketing.

Japanese sentence corpora were analyzed and a pattern of log-normality was found in relation to sentence length.

==Modeling language acquisition==
The fact that during language acquisition, children are largely only exposed to positive evidence, meaning that the only evidence for what is a correct form is provided, and no evidence for what is not correct, was a limitation for the models at the time because the now available deep learning models were not available in late 1980s.

It has been shown that languages can be learned with a combination of simple input presented incrementally as the child develops better memory and longer attention span, which explained the long period of language acquisition in human infants and children.

Robots have been used to test linguistic theories. Enabled to learn as children might, models were created based on an affordance model in which mappings between actions, perceptions, and effects were created and linked to spoken words. Crucially, these robots were able to acquire functioning word-to-meaning mappings without needing grammatical structure.

Using the Price equation and Pólya urn dynamics, researchers have created a system which not only predicts future linguistic evolution but also gives insight into the evolutionary history of modern-day languages.

==Chomsky&#x27;s theories==
Chomsky&#x27;s theories have influenced computational linguistics, particularly in understanding how infants learn complex grammatical structures, such as those described in Chomsky normal form. Attempts have been made to determine how an infant learns a &quot;non-normal grammar&quot; as theorized by Chomsky normal form. Research in this area combines structural approaches with computational models to analyze large linguistic corpora like the Penn Treebank, helping to uncover patterns in language acquisition.

==See also==
* Artificial intelligence in fiction
* Collostructional analysis
* Computational lexicology
* &quot;Computational Linguistics&quot; (journal)
* Computational models of language acquisition
* Computational semantics
* Computational semiotics
* Computer-assisted reviewing
* Dialog systems
* Glottochronology
* Grammar induction
* Human speechome project
* Internet linguistics
* Lexicostatistics
* Natural language processing
* Natural language user interface
* Quantitative linguistics
* Semantic relatedness
* Semantometrics
* Systemic functional linguistics
* Translation memory
* Universal Networking Language
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper (2009). &quot;Natural Language Processing with Python&quot;. O&#x27;Reilly Media. .
* Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin (2008). &quot;Speech and Language Processing&quot;, 2nd edition. Pearson Prentice Hall. .
* Mohamed Zakaria KURDI (2016). &quot;Natural Language Processing and Computational Linguistics: speech, morphology, and syntax&quot;, Volume 1. ISTE-Wiley. .
* Mohamed Zakaria KURDI (2017). &quot;Natural Language Processing and Computational Linguistics: semantics, discourse, and applications&quot;, Volume 2. ISTE-Wiley. .

==External links==
* Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL)
** ACL Anthology of research papers
** ACL Wiki for Computational Linguistics
* CICLing annual conferences on Computational Linguistics 
* Computational Linguistics – Applications workshop
* Language Technology World
* Resources for Text, Speech and Language Processing
* The Research Group in Computational Linguistics </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="0" end="25" title="Computational linguistics" label="Computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="32" end="49" title="Interdisciplinarity" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="75" end="98" title="computational modelling" label="computational modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="102" end="118" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="255" end="266" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="268" end="284" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="286" end="309" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="311" end="322" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="324" end="329" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="331" end="341" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="343" end="360" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="362" end="382" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179488" start="384" end="401" title="psycholinguistics" label="psycholinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="403" end="415" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="420" end="432" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="487" end="510" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="739" end="749" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="842" end="849" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="851" end="861" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="863" end="869" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="874" end="883" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652028" start="940" end="972" title="AI winter" label="failure of rule-based approaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233935" start="974" end="984" title="David G. Hays" label="David Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346375" start="1067" end="1114" title="Association for Computational Linguistics" label="Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087662" start="1123" end="1175" title="International Committee on Computational Linguistics" label="International Committee on Computational Linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="1299" end="1326" title="natural language processing" label="natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1397" end="1413" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q811525" start="1466" end="1474" title="Treebank" label="Treebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="1686" end="1700" title="part-of-speech" label="part-of-speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q826116" start="1793" end="1806" title="log-normality" label="log-normality"/>
<link wikidata="Q815859" start="1905" end="1925" title="language acquisition" label="language acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q197536" start="2165" end="2178" title="deep learning" label="deep learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q815859" start="2426" end="2446" title="language acquisition" label="language acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q531136" start="2598" end="2608" title="affordance" label="affordance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109459" start="2848" end="2862" title="Price equation" label="Price equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120628" start="2867" end="2876" title="Pólya urn" label="Pólya urn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076039" start="3254" end="3273" title="Chomsky normal form" label="Chomsky normal form"/>
<link wikidata="Q865083" start="3499" end="3517" title="Corpus linguistics" label="linguistic corpora"/>
<link wikidata="Q811525" start="3532" end="3540" title="Treebank" label="Treebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q25933185" start="3611" end="3645" title="Artificial intelligence in fiction" label="Artificial intelligence in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147586" start="3648" end="3673" title="Collostructional analysis" label="Collostructional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157330" start="3676" end="3700" title="Computational lexicology" label="Computational lexicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685360" start="3703" end="3750" title="Computational Linguistics (journal)" label="&amp;quot;Computational Linguistics&amp;quot; (journal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604399" start="3753" end="3797" title="Computational models of language acquisition" label="Computational models of language acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954981" start="3800" end="3823" title="Computational semantics" label="Computational semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157339" start="3826" end="3849" title="Computational semiotics" label="Computational semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424306" start="3852" end="3879" title="Computer-assisted reviewing" label="Computer-assisted reviewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270587" start="3882" end="3896" title="Dialog systems" label="Dialog systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q942552" start="3899" end="3915" title="Glottochronology" label="Glottochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593673" start="3918" end="3935" title="Grammar induction" label="Grammar induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420249" start="3938" end="3961" title="Human speechome project" label="Human speechome project"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056000" start="3964" end="3984" title="Internet linguistics" label="Internet linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q284290" start="3987" end="4003" title="Lexicostatistics" label="Lexicostatistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="4006" end="4033" title="Natural language processing" label="Natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816772" start="4036" end="4067" title="Natural language user interface" label="Natural language user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198157" start="4070" end="4094" title="Quantitative linguistics" label="Quantitative linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268914" start="4097" end="4117" title="Semantic relatedness" label="Semantic relatedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402487" start="4120" end="4134" title="Semantometrics" label="Semantometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663820" start="4137" end="4168" title="Systemic functional linguistics" label="Systemic functional linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333761" start="4171" end="4189" title="Translation memory" label="Translation memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063748" start="4192" end="4221" title="Universal Networking Language" label="Universal Networking Language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5565" wikidata="Q2088533" url="?curid=5565" title="Geography of Ivory Coast">
<text>[[Ivory Coast]] (Côte d&#x27;Ivoire) is a sub-Saharan nation in southern West Africa located at 8° N, 5° W. The country is approximately square in shape.

==Area and borders==
;Area
* Total: 
**&quot;Country rank in the world:&quot; 68th
* Land: 
* Water: 
;Area comparatives
* Australia comparative: approximately larger than Victoria
* Canada comparative: approximately half the size of Manitoba
* United Kingdom comparative: approximately larger than the United Kingdom
* United States comparative: slightly larger than New Mexico
* EU comparative: slightly larger than Poland
;Land borders
*Bordering countries:
** Liberia to the southwest for 
** Guinea to the northwest for 
** Mali to the north-northwest for 
** Burkina Faso to the north-northeast for 
** Ghana to the east for 
*Total: 
; Coastline
* on Gulf of Guinea

== Maritime claims ==
Ivory Coast makes maritime claims of as an exclusive economic zone, of territorial sea, and a continental shelf.

==Terrain and topography==
Ivory Coast&#x27;s terrain can generally be described as a large plateau rising gradually from sea level in the south to almost elevation in the north. The nation&#x27;s natural resources have made it a comparatively prosperous nation in the African economy. 
The southeastern region of Ivory Coast is marked by coastal inland lagoons that start at the Ghanaian border and stretch along the eastern half of the coast. The southern region, especially the southwest, is covered with dense tropical moist forest. The Eastern Guinean forests extend from the Sassandra River across the south-central and southeast portion of Ivory Coast and east into Ghana, while the Western Guinean lowland forests extend west from the Sassandra River into Liberia and southeastern Guinea. The mountains of Dix-Huit Montagnes region, in the west of the country near the border with Guinea and Liberia, are home to the Guinean montane forests.

The Guinean forest-savanna mosaic belt extends across the middle of the country from east to west, and is the transition zone between the coastal forests and the interior savannas. The forest-savanna mosaic interlaces forest, savanna and grassland habitats. Northern Ivory Coast is part of the West Sudanian Savanna ecoregion of the tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands biome. It is a zone of lateritic or sandy soils, with vegetation decreasing from south to north.

The terrain is mostly flat to undulating plain, with mountains in the northwest. The lowest elevation is at sea level on the coast. The highest elevation is Mount Nimba, at in the far west of the country along the border with Guinea and Liberia.

==Rivers==
The Cavalla River drains the western border area of the Ivory Coast and eastern Liberia. It forms the southern two-thirds of the border between Liberia and Ivory Coast.

The Sassandra River forms in the Guinea highlands and drains much of the western part of the Ivory Coast east of the Cavalla River.

The Bandama River is the longest river in the Ivory Coast, with a length of some , draining the east central part of the country. In 1973 the Kossou Dam was constructed at Kossou on the Bandama, creating Lake Kossou. The capital, Yamoussoukro, is located near the river south of the lake.

The Komoé River originates on the Sikasso Plateau of Burkina Faso, and briefly forms the border between Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast before entering Ivory Coast. It drains the northeastern and easternmost portions of the country before emptying into the eastern end of the Ébrié Lagoon and ultimately the Gulf of Guinea in the Atlantic Ocean. Its waters contribute to the Comoé National Park.

==Climate==
The climate of Ivory Coast is generally hot and humid. Most of the country has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen &quot;Aw&quot;), although the Upper Guinean forest region bordering Liberia has a tropical monsoon climate (&quot;Am&quot;). In the north, there are three seasons: warm and dry (November to March), hot and dry (March to May), and hot and wet (June to October), whilst in the south there are two rainy seasons between April and July, and between October and November, a longer dry season from December to February, and a shorter dry season in August. Temperatures average between and range from .

==Crops and natural resources==
Ivory Coast has a large timber industry due to its large forest coverage. The nation&#x27;s hardwood exports match those of Brazil. In recent years there has been much concern about the rapid rate of deforestation. Rainforests are being destroyed at a rate sometimes cited as the highest in the world. The only forest left completely untouched in Ivory Coast is Taï National Park (&quot;Parc National de Taï&quot;), a area in the country&#x27;s far southwest that is home to over 150 endemic species and many other endangered species such as the Pygmy hippopotamus and 11 species of monkeys.

Nine percent of the country is arable land. Ivory Coast is the world&#x27;s largest producer of cocoa, a major national cash crop. Other chief crops include coffee, bananas, and oil palms, which produce palm oil and kernels. Mineral resources include petroleum, natural gas, diamonds, manganese, iron, cobalt, bauxite, copper, gold, nickel, tantalum, silica sand, clay, palm oil. Hydropower is also generated.

==Natural hazards==

Natural hazards include the heavy surf and the lack of natural harbors on the coast; during the rainy season torrential flooding is a danger.

== Extreme points ==

Extreme points are the geographic points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location in the country.

* Northernmost point — the point at which the border with Mali enters the Bagoé River, Savanes District
*Southernmost point — Boubré, Bas-Sassandra District
* Easternmost point — unnamed location on the border with Ghana south-west of the town of Tambi, Zanzan District
* Westernmost point — unnamed location on the border with Liberia in the Nuon River west of Klobli, Montagnes District

==See also==
*Subdivisions of Ivory Coast

==References==
*&quot;This article uses information published in the World Almanac and Book of Facts (2006) as a reference.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2088533" start="0" end="15" title="Geography of Ivory Coast" label="[[Ivory Coast]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="42" end="53" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="73" end="84" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="327" end="335" title="Victoria (state)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="389" end="397" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="523" end="533" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="536" end="538" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="573" end="579" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="619" end="626" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="652" end="658" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="684" end="688" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="720" end="732" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="764" end="769" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="813" end="827" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="894" end="917" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="945" end="962" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q580864" start="1234" end="1249" title="Economy of Africa" label="African economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090194" start="1506" end="1529" title="Eastern Guinean forests" label="Eastern Guinean forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535828" start="1546" end="1561" title="Sassandra River" label="Sassandra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1638" end="1643" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092130" start="1655" end="1686" title="Western Guinean lowland forests" label="Western Guinean lowland forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="1729" end="1736" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q820486" start="1779" end="1797" title="Dix-Huit Montagnes" label="Dix-Huit Montagnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079226" start="1890" end="1913" title="Guinean montane forests" label="Guinean montane forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672617" start="1920" end="1949" title="Guinean forest-savanna mosaic" label="Guinean forest-savanna mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="2087" end="2094" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474468" start="2210" end="2231" title="West Sudanian Savanna" label="West Sudanian Savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290693" start="2249" end="2310" title="tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands" label="tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="2311" end="2316" title="biome" label="biome"/>
<link wikidata="Q622845" start="2334" end="2343" title="laterite" label="lateritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849129" start="2566" end="2577" title="Mount Nimba" label="Mount Nimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535828" start="2841" end="2856" title="Sassandra River" label="Sassandra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q789969" start="2974" end="2987" title="Bandama River" label="Bandama River"/>
<link wikidata="Q843524" start="3112" end="3122" title="Kossou Dam" label="Kossou Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199089" start="3142" end="3148" title="Kossou" label="Kossou"/>
<link wikidata="Q267679" start="3174" end="3185" title="Lake Kossou" label="Lake Kossou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768" start="3200" end="3212" title="Yamoussoukro" label="Yamoussoukro"/>
<link wikidata="Q615662" start="3264" end="3275" title="Komoé River" label="Komoé River"/>
<link wikidata="Q722827" start="3294" end="3301" title="Sikasso" label="Sikasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="3313" end="3325" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q273288" start="3533" end="3545" title="Ébrié Lagoon" label="Ébrié Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="3565" end="3579" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q501344" start="3632" end="3651" title="Comoé National Park" label="Comoé National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="3670" end="3677" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="3747" end="3771" title="tropical savanna climate" label="tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3773" end="3779" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="3862" end="3886" title="tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical monsoon climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="4333" end="4339" title="Lumber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="4401" end="4409" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="4433" end="4439" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="4509" end="4522" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="4524" end="4534" title="Rainforest" label="Rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q328577" start="4671" end="4688" title="Taï National Park" label="Taï National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="4793" end="4800" title="Endemic (ecology)" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="4824" end="4842" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q22110899" start="4855" end="4873" title="Pygmy hippopotamus" label="Pygmy hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367" start="4892" end="4898" title="monkey" label="monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="4933" end="4944" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="5022" end="5031" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="5059" end="5065" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="5067" end="5073" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q165403" start="5080" end="5089" title="Elaeis guineensis" label="oil palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="5105" end="5113" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="5127" end="5144" title="Mineral resources" label="Mineral resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="5153" end="5162" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="5164" end="5175" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="5177" end="5184" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="5187" end="5196" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="5198" end="5202" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="5204" end="5210" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="5212" end="5219" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="5221" end="5227" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="5229" end="5233" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="5235" end="5241" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="5243" end="5251" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="5253" end="5259" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="5266" end="5270" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="5272" end="5280" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="5282" end="5292" title="Hydropower" label="Hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="5334" end="5348" title="Natural hazard" label="Natural hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="5389" end="5403" title="natural harbor" label="natural harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="5683" end="5687" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770584" start="5699" end="5710" title="Bagoé River" label="Bagoé River"/>
<link wikidata="Q21002161" start="5712" end="5728" title="Savanes District" label="Savanes District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5751" end="5757" title="Boubré" label="Boubré"/>
<link wikidata="Q20980352" start="5759" end="5781" title="Bas-Sassandra District" label="Bas-Sassandra District"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="5840" end="5845" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514728" start="5872" end="5877" title="Tambi" label="Tambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003689" start="5879" end="5894" title="Zanzan District" label="Zanzan District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="5953" end="5960" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771055" start="5968" end="5978" title="Cestos River" label="Nuon River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5987" end="5993" title="Klobli" label="Klobli"/>
<link wikidata="Q20980366" start="5995" end="6013" title="Montagnes District" label="Montagnes District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679154" start="6029" end="6056" title="Subdivisions of Ivory Coast" label="Subdivisions of Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q730361" start="6127" end="6158" title="World Almanac" label="World Almanac and Book of Facts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5566" wikidata="Q2661724" url="?curid=5566" title="Demographics of Ivory Coast">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Ivory Coast include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

==Population==
According to the total population was in , compared to only 2 630 000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 40.9%, 55.3% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 3.8% was 65 years or older



==Vital statistics==
Registration of vital events in the Ivory Coast is not complete. The website Our World in Data prepared the following estimates based on statistics from the Population Department of the United Nations.

===Age distribution===





===Demographic and Health Surveys===
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):

Fertility data as of 2011-2012 (DHS Program):

==Ethnic groups==
 
Ivory Coast has more than 60 ethnic groups, usually classified into five principal divisions: Akan (east and center, including Lagoon peoples of the southeast), Krou (southwest), Southern Mandé (west), Northern Mandé (northwest), Sénoufo/Lobi (north center and northeast). The Baoulés, in the Akan division, probably comprise the largest single subgroup with 15%-20% of the population. They are based in the central region around Bouaké and Yamoussoukro. The Bétés in the Krou division, the Sénoufos in the north, and the Malinkés in the northwest and the cities are the next largest groups, with 10%-15% of the national population. Most of the principal divisions have a significant presence in neighboring countries.

==Migration==
===Immigration===
Of the more than 5 million non-Ivorian Africans living in Ivory Coast, one-third to one-half are from Burkina Faso; the rest are from Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Nigeria, Benin, Senegal, Liberia, and Mauritania.

Non-Africans in the country include French people, Lebanese people, Vietnamese people, Spaniards, Americans and Canadians.

===Emigration===
The table below shows the number of people born in Ivory Coast who have migrated to OECD countries only (the table only includes communities consisting of at least 1,000 members).
==Languages==
French is the official language, while there are 60 living indigenous languages spoken in Ivory Coast. The Dioula dialect of Bambara is the most widely spoken one. Other language groups include the Gur languages, the Kru languages (including the Bété languages, Dida, Nyabwa, Wè, and Western Krahn), the Kwa languages (including Akan, Anyin, and Baoulé), and the Senufo languages.

==Religion==

The economic development and relative prosperity of Ivory Coast fostered huge demographic shifts during the 20th century. &quot;In 1922, an estimated 100,000 out of 1.6 million (or 6 percent) of people in Côte d&#x27;Ivoire were Muslims. By contrast, at independence (in 1960), their share of the population had increased rapidly, and Muslims were moving southward to the cocoa-producing areas and the southern cities. By 1998, [...], Muslims constituted a majority in the north of the country, and approximately 38.6 percent of the total population. This was a significantly larger population than the next largest religious group, Christians, who constituted approximately 29.1 percent of the total.&quot; In earlier decades, this shift was mainly due to large-scale immigration from neighboring countries of the interior, that has been going on since colonial times and continued to be promoted during the Houphouet-Boigny era. Since the 1990s, the widening conversion gap between different religious groups has started to tilt the demographic balance in favor of Christians.According to the last census of 2021 Muslims make up 42.5% of population (42.9% in 2014) and Christians 39.8% (33.9% in 2014).

==See also==
*French people in Ivory Coast

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="42" end="53" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="62" end="80" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="82" end="91" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680080" start="548" end="565" title="Our World in Data" label="Our World in Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="657" end="671" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="886" end="897" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q415693" start="980" end="984" title="Akan (ethnic group)" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537493" start="1047" end="1051" title="Krou" label="Krou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407391" start="1074" end="1079" title="Mandé people" label="Mandé"/>
<link wikidata="Q961201" start="1124" end="1128" title="Lobi people" label="Lobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q271000" start="1316" end="1322" title="Bouaké" label="Bouaké"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768" start="1327" end="1339" title="Yamoussoukro" label="Yamoussoukro"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="1740" end="1752" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1772" end="1777" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="1779" end="1785" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="1787" end="1791" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="1793" end="1800" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="1802" end="1807" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="1809" end="1816" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="1818" end="1825" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="1831" end="1841" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="1880" end="1893" title="French people" label="French people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606511" start="1895" end="1910" title="Lebanese people" label="Lebanese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q216151" start="1912" end="1929" title="Vietnamese people" label="Vietnamese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="1931" end="1940" title="Spaniards" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="1942" end="1951" title="Americans" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="1956" end="1965" title="Canadians" label="Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="2069" end="2073" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2179" end="2185" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="2286" end="2300" title="Dioula language" label="Dioula dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="2304" end="2311" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q33536" start="2377" end="2390" title="Gur languages" label="Gur languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33535" start="2396" end="2409" title="Kru languages" label="Kru languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q32956" start="2425" end="2439" title="Bété languages" label="Bété languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q32685" start="2441" end="2445" title="Dida language" label="Dida"/>
<link wikidata="Q33664" start="2447" end="2453" title="Nyabwa language" label="Nyabwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36919" start="2455" end="2457" title="Wè language" label="Wè"/>
<link wikidata="Q265962" start="2463" end="2476" title="Western Krahn" label="Western Krahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q33430" start="2483" end="2496" title="Kwa languages" label="Kwa languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="2508" end="2512" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28395" start="2514" end="2519" title="Anyin language" label="Anyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35107" start="2525" end="2531" title="Baoulé language" label="Baoulé"/>
<link wikidata="Q33795" start="2542" end="2558" title="Senufo languages" label="Senufo languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528537" start="2579" end="2599" title="Economy of Ivory Coast" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q214407" start="3484" end="3500" title="Houphouet-Boigny" label="Houphouet-Boigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q22713759" start="3795" end="3823" title="French people in Ivory Coast" label="French people in Ivory Coast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5567" wikidata="Q1154409" url="?curid=5567" title="Politics of Ivory Coast">
<text>The politics of [[Ivory Coast]] takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Ivory Coast is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the President and the Government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament.

The capital since 1983 is Yamoussoukro; however, Abidjan remains the commercial center. Most countries maintain their embassies in Abidjan. A civil war was fought in Ivory Coast between 2002–2004 and a second civil war broke out in March 2011 following contested elections that saw president-elect Alassane Ouattara come into power in 2011 and reelected in 2015.
It is located in Africa.

==Civil war==
Troops, mostly hailing from the north of the country, mutinied in the early hours of 19 September 2002. They soon after launched attacks in many cities, including Abidjan. By lunchtime, they had control of the north of the country. Their principal claim relates to the definition of who is a citizen of Ivory Coast (and so who can stand for election as president), voting rights and their representation in government in Abidjan. The events in Abidjan shows that it is not a tribal issue, but a crisis of transition from a dictatorship to a democracy, with the clashes inherent in the definition of citizenship.
Forces involved in the conflict include:
* Government forces, the National Army (FANCI), also called &quot;loyalists&quot;, formed and equipped essentially since 2003
* The &quot;Young Patriots&quot;: nationalist groups aligned with President Laurent Gbagbo
* Mercenaries recruited by President Gbagbo:
** allegedly, Belarusians
** some former combatants of Liberia, including under-17 youths, forming the so-called &quot;Lima militia&quot; 
* &quot;New Forces&quot; (Forces Nouvelles, FN), ex-northern rebels, who hold 60% of the country; their political expression is the &quot;Mouvement patriotique de Côte d&#x27;Ivoire&quot;, or MPCI
* French forces: troops sent within the framework of Opération Licorne and under UN mandate (United Nations Operation in Côte d&#x27;Ivoire), 3000 men in February 2003 and 4600 in November 2004;
* Soldiers of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), &quot;White helmets&quot;, also under the UN.
==Executive branch==
|President
|Alassane Ouattara
|Rally of the Republicans
|4 December 2011
|Vice-President
|Tiémoko Meyliet Koné
|Independent
|19 April 2022
|Prime Minister
|position vacant

Ivory Coast&#x27;s 1959 constitution provides for strong presidency within the framework of a separation of powers. The executive is personified in the president, elected for a five-year term. The president is commander in chief of the armed forces, may negotiate and ratify certain treaties, and may submit a bill to a national referendum or to the National Assembly. According to the constitution, the President of the National Assembly assumes the presidency in the event of a vacancy, and he completes the remainder of the deceased president&#x27;s term. The cabinet is selected by and is responsible to the president. Changes are being proposed to some of these provisions, to extend term of office to 7 years, establish a senate, and make president of the senate interim successor to the president.

Laurent Gbagbo took power following a popular overthrow of the interim leader Gen. Robert Guéï who had claimed a dubious victory in presidential elections; Gen. Guéï himself had assumed power on 25 December 1999, following a military coup against the government of former President Henri Konan Bédié. Gbagbo was elected president in 2000 in an election boycotted by many oppositional forces. The president is elected by popular vote for a five-year term. The prime minister is appointed by the president. Alassane Ouattara is currently the president of Ivory Coast. He was reelected in the 2015 Ivorian presidential election.

After a new constitution was approved by referendum, it is expected President Alassane Ouattara would appoint a Vice-President before 2020.
The President and Vice-President will run on a joint ticket from 2020. They will be both elected for a five-year term, with only one possible reelection. The Vice-President will replace the President in case of death, resignation and any other vacancy.

In November 2020, Alassane Ouattara won third term in office in elections boycotted by the opposition. His opponents argued it was illegal for president Ouattara to run for a third term. 
==Legislative branch==
Parliament of Ivory Coast is a bicameral body composed by the National Assembly and the Senate of Ivory Coast. Prior to November 2016 and the future creation of the Senate, the Parliament of Ivory Coast was only composed of the National Assembly.
The National Assembly (&quot;Assemblée Nationale&quot;) has 255 members, elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies. It passes on legislation typically introduced by the president although it also can introduce legislation.
The Senate of Ivory Coast (&quot;Sénat&quot;) will have two-thirds of the senators indirectly elected and one-third appointed by the president-elect, elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies.
Ivory Coast is a one party dominant state with the Rally of the Republicans in power.

==Judicial branch==

The judicial system culminates in the Supreme Court of Ivory Coast. The High Court of Justice is competent to try government officials for major offenses. The Supreme Court or Court Supreme consists of four chambers: Judicial Chamber for criminal cases, Audit Chamber for financial cases, Constitutional Chamber for judicial review cases, and Administrative Chamber for civil cases; there is no legal limit to the number of members.

==Political parties and elections==
===Presidential elections===

===Parliamentary elections===


==Administrative divisions==

For administrative purposes, Ivory Coast is divided into 58 departments, each headed by a prefect appointed by the central government. There are 196 communes, each headed by an elected mayor, plus the city of Abidjan with ten mayors.

The 58 departments (&quot;départements&quot;, singular - &quot;département&quot;) are listed in the article Departments of Ivory Coast.

==International organization participation==
ACP, AfDB, AU, ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt (signatory), ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, ITUC, MONUC, NAM, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WADB (regional), WAEMU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

==References==
==External links and references==
* CIA World Factbook 2003</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154409" start="4" end="31" title="Politics of Ivory Coast" label="politics of [[Ivory Coast]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="64" end="76" title="Presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="77" end="102" title="Representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="103" end="111" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878210" start="125" end="149" title="President of Ivory Coast" label="President of Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="158" end="171" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="176" end="194" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="205" end="223" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="225" end="240" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="291" end="308" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768" start="385" end="397" title="Yamoussoukro" label="Yamoussoukro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="408" end="415" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="1183" end="1190" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577116" start="1553" end="1567" title="Congrès Panafricain des Jeunes et des Patriotes" label="Young Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q179242" start="1617" end="1631" title="Laurent Gbagbo" label="Laurent Gbagbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="1634" end="1645" title="Mercenaries" label="Mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="1691" end="1698" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="1732" end="1739" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436666" start="1824" end="1834" title="Forces Nouvelles de Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="New Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q947391" start="2066" end="2083" title="Opération Licorne" label="Opération Licorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469663" start="2094" end="2104" title="UN Mandate" label="UN mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855454" start="2106" end="2152" title="United Nations Operation in Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="United Nations Operation in Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="2226" end="2267" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q878210" start="2346" end="2355" title="President of Ivory Coast" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q57413" start="2357" end="2374" title="Alassane Ouattara" label="Alassane Ouattara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669673" start="2376" end="2400" title="Rally of the Republicans" label="Rally of the Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27880670" start="2419" end="2433" title="Vice-President of Ivory Coast" label="Vice-President"/>
<link wikidata="Q19392607" start="2435" end="2455" title="Tiémoko Meyliet Koné" label="Tiémoko Meyliet Koné"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="2457" end="2468" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717151" start="2485" end="2499" title="List of heads of government of Ivory Coast" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="2518" end="2529" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="2612" end="2632" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q878210" start="2670" end="2679" title="President of Ivory Coast" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="2801" end="2809" title="treaty" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="2847" end="2857" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573929" start="2868" end="2885" title="National Assembly of Ivory Coast" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570643" start="3280" end="3286" title="senate" label="senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q357802" start="3407" end="3418" title="Robert Guéï" label="Robert Guéï"/>
<link wikidata="Q357779" start="3606" end="3623" title="Henri Konan Bédié" label="Henri Konan Bédié"/>
<link wikidata="Q57413" start="3829" end="3846" title="Alassane Ouattara" label="Alassane Ouattara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586618" start="3914" end="3948" title="Ivorian presidential election, 2015" label="2015 Ivorian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995135" start="3963" end="3975" title="Constitution of Ivory Coast" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q26971166" start="3992" end="4002" title="Ivorian constitutional referendum, 2016" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q57413" start="4029" end="4046" title="Alassane Ouattara" label="Alassane Ouattara"/>
<link wikidata="Q27880670" start="4063" end="4077" title="Vice-President of Ivory Coast" label="Vice-President"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407782" start="4085" end="4089" title="Ivorian presidential election, 2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q878210" start="4095" end="4104" title="President of Ivory Coast" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q27880670" start="4109" end="4123" title="Vice-President of Ivory Coast" label="Vice-President"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407782" start="4156" end="4160" title="Ivorian presidential election, 2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q27880670" start="4249" end="4263" title="Vice-President of Ivory Coast" label="Vice-President"/>
<link wikidata="Q878210" start="4281" end="4290" title="President of Ivory Coast" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407782" start="4409" end="4418" title="2020 Ivorian presidential election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881072" start="4556" end="4581" title="Parliament of Ivory Coast" label="Parliament of Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573929" start="4618" end="4635" title="National Assembly of Ivory Coast" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881014" start="4644" end="4665" title="Senate (Ivory Coast)" label="Senate of Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881072" start="4733" end="4758" title="Parliament of Ivory Coast" label="Parliament of Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573929" start="4784" end="4801" title="National Assembly of Ivory Coast" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573929" start="4807" end="4824" title="National Assembly of Ivory Coast" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="4920" end="4934" title="constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881014" start="5047" end="5068" title="Senate (Ivory Coast)" label="Senate of Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="5237" end="5251" title="constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="5270" end="5294" title="one party dominant state" label="one party dominant state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669673" start="5304" end="5328" title="Rally of the Republicans" label="Rally of the Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5399" end="5427" title="Supreme Court of Ivory Coast" label="Supreme Court of Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q643589" start="5983" end="5994" title="Department (subnational entity)" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q371909" start="6013" end="6020" title="prefect" label="prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="6072" end="6079" title="commune (subnational entity)" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="6132" end="6139" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q617807" start="6266" end="6292" title="Departments of Ivory Coast" label="Departments of Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="6340" end="6343" title="ACP (Lomé Convention)" label="ACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="6345" end="6349" title="African Development Bank" label="AfDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="6351" end="6353" title="African Union" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="6355" end="6358" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="ECA"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="6360" end="6366" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q945574" start="6368" end="6375" title="Conseil de l&amp;#x27;Entente" label="Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="6377" end="6380" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q191511" start="6382" end="6384" title="Franc zone" label="FZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589222" start="6386" end="6390" title="Group of 24" label="G-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="6392" end="6396" title="Group of 77" label="G-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="6398" end="6402" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="6404" end="6408" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="6410" end="6414" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="6416" end="6420" title="International Criminal Court" label="ICCt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="6434" end="6438" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="6440" end="6443" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41230" start="6445" end="6448" title="Islamic Development Bank" label="IDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="6450" end="6454" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="6456" end="6459" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="6461" end="6466" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="6468" end="6471" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="6473" end="6476" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="6478" end="6481" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="6483" end="6491" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="6493" end="6496" title="IOC" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="6498" end="6501" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="6503" end="6506" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="6508" end="6511" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071706" start="6513" end="6517" title="International Trade Union Confederation" label="ITUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501987" start="6519" end="6524" title="MONUC" label="MONUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="6526" end="6529" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="6531" end="6534" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="6536" end="6540" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6542" end="6544" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="6546" end="6552" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="6554" end="6560" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="6562" end="6567" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="UNHCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="6569" end="6574" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="6576" end="6579" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883427" start="6581" end="6585" title="West African Development Bank" label="WADB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929699" start="6598" end="6603" title="West African Economic and Monetary Union" label="WAEMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="6605" end="6608" title="World Customs Organization" label="WCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="6610" end="6614" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="WFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="6616" end="6619" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="6621" end="6625" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="6627" end="6630" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="6632" end="6636" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="6638" end="6642" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="6695" end="6713" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5570" wikidata="Q3997818" url="?curid=5570" title="Transport in Ivory Coast">
<text>Ivory Coast invested remarkably in its transport system. Transport Infrastructures are much more developed than they are other West African countries despite a crisis that restrained their maintenance and development. Since its independence in 1960, Ivory Coast put an emphasis on increasing and modernizing the transport network for human as well as for goods. Major infrastructures of diverse nature were built including railways, roads, waterways, and airports. In spite of the crisis, neighbor countries (Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger, and Guinea) still strongly depend on the Ivorian transport network for importing, exporting, and transiting their immigrants to Ivory Coast.

== Rail transport ==
The nation&#x27;s railway system is part of a 1 260 km long route that links the country to Burkina Faso and Niger. 1 156 km of railroad links Abidjan to Ouagadougou, capital of Burkina Faso. Built during colonial era by the firm Abidjan-Niger (RAN), this railroad freed several landlocked countries among which were ex-Upper-Volta (Burkina Faso), Niger, and Mali. This railroad, operated by Sitarail, plays a key role as regards to the carriage of the goods (livestock) and the transport of people between Ivory Coast and border countries: 1 million tons of goods have transited in 2006. In 2005, despite the negative impact the crisis had on the sector, benefits engendered by transporting the goods and people via RAN, are estimated respectively at 16 309 et3 837billionCFA.

As of 2004, the railway network consisted of a state-controlled 660 km section of a 1,146 km narrow gauge railroad that ran north from Abidjan through Bouaké and Ferkéssédougou to Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.

== Road transport ==

Ivory Coast road network spreads over 85 000 km consisting of 75 000 unpaved, 65 000 km, and 224 km highways. It provides national and international traffic with neighbor countries.

The Trans–West African Coastal Highway provides a paved link to Ghana, Togo, Benin and Nigeria, with paved highways to landlocked Mali and Burkina Faso feeding into the coastal highway. When construction of roads and bridges in Liberia and Sierra Leone is complete, the highway will link to another seven Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) nations to the west and north-west. At the national level, vehicles are estimated at 600 000, which includes 75% of used cars (second hand) due to the low purchasing power since the beginning of the economic crisis. 20 000 new cars are registered every year. Although maintenance and renovations works are being carried out since middle-2011, over 80% of the Ivorian network is older than 20 years and therefore damaged.

In addition, a significant traffic exists throughout Abidjan. This traffic is mainly composed of taxi, buses and mini-buses locally referred to as &quot;Gbaka.&quot;

The country counts with two 4-laned motorways, the first one running from Abidjan to Yamoussoukro for a length of 224 km., and the second joining Abidjan to Grand-Bassam, with a length of 30 km. Both are built with modern technologies and under international standards of security.

== Maritime transport ==

Landscape view of the Autonomous Port of Abidjan

Ivory Coast greatly contributed to developing maritime transport by building two ports on its seaside namely, autonomous port of Abidjan, sometimes referred to as &quot;lung of Ivorian economy&quot;, and the San-Pedro port. The total traffic in 2005, by adding importation to exportation, was 18 661 784 tons for autonomous port of Abidjan and 1 001 991 tons for San-Pedro. The autonomous port of Abidjan cover a 770 hectares area and shelters 60% of the country industries. It is the first tuna fishing port in Africa. It contains 36 conventional berths spread over six kilometers of quays providing a capacity of sixty commercial ships with multiple special docks, a container terminal as well as several specialized and industrial berths. The other major port, the San-Pedro port, operates since 1971 and has two quays covering 18,727 m2 area. Apart from those two major ports, there are also small ports at Sassandra, Aboisso, and Dabou.

== Air transport ==
Ivory Coast has three international airports located in Abidjan, Yamoussoukro, and Bouaké. Fourteen smaller cities also possess regional airports, the most important of which are Daloa, Korhogo, Man, Odiénné and San-pédro. Twenty-seven aerodromes exists and are operated by a public establishment, the Anam (National agency for civil aviation and meteorology), except the activities carried out by the Asecna (Agency for security of air freight in Africa and Madagascar).

Since the outbreak of the crisis, only five of these airports are available. These are Abidjan, San-Pédro, Yamoussoukro, Daloa, and Touba. Regarding the International Airport of Abidjan, official statistics from 2005, showed 14 257 commercial movements (departures and arrivals); 745 180 commercial passengers (arrivals, departures, and transit) and 12 552 tons of commercial fret. The Airport of Abidjan covers 90% of the air traffic of Côte d&#x27;Ivoire and generate 95% of the overall profits of the sector.

The airport of Abidjan is operated by a private company, Aeria, created in association with the Commerce Chamber of Marseilles. Its traffic mainly encompasses European aeronautical companies (Air France, Brussels Airlines) and some African firms (South African Airways, Kenya Airways, Air Sénégal International).

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3997818" start="0" end="11" title="Transport in Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997818" start="39" end="56" title="Transport in Ivory Coast" label="transport system."/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="1613" end="1620" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q271000" start="1629" end="1635" title="Bouaké" label="Bouaké"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855736" start="1640" end="1654" title="Ferkéssédougou" label="Ferkéssédougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="1658" end="1669" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="1671" end="1683" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157731" start="1895" end="1929" title="Trans–West African Coastal Highway" label="Trans–West African Coastal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1955" end="1960" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="1962" end="1966" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="1968" end="1973" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="1978" end="1985" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="2021" end="2025" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="2030" end="2042" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="2119" end="2126" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="2131" end="2143" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="2196" end="2237" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="2910" end="2917" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768" start="2921" end="2933" title="Yamoussoukro" label="Yamoussoukro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="2982" end="2989" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q582922" start="2993" end="3005" title="Grand-Bassam" label="Grand-Bassam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398423" start="3167" end="3193" title="Autonomous Port of Abidjan" label="Autonomous Port of Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398423" start="3305" end="3331" title="Autonomous Port of Abidjan" label="autonomous port of Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q586448" start="4106" end="4115" title="Sassandra" label="Sassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q521322" start="4117" end="4124" title="Aboisso" label="Aboisso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588249" start="4130" end="4135" title="Dabou" label="Dabou"/>
<link wikidata="Q223763" start="5391" end="5412" title="South African Airways" label="South African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q638900" start="5414" end="5427" title="Kenya Airways" label="Kenya Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q407817" start="5429" end="5454" title="Air Sénégal International" label="Air Sénégal International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5571" wikidata="Q897759" url="?curid=5571" title="Armed Forces of the Republic of Ivory Coast">
<text>The Armed Forces of Côte d&#x27;Ivoire (; &quot;FACI&quot;)
are the armed forces of Ivory Coast, first formed after the country&#x27;s independence in 1960.

==History==
The Ivorian military has its roots in the colonial armed forces of French West Africa, which were headquartered in Dakar, Senegal but possessed bases in several distinct military regions. Most Ivorian recruits who joined the colonial army were assigned to Senegalese units during this period, such as the Senegalese Tirailleurs. They served with distinction during both world wars, with 20,000 Ivorian soldiers fighting for the French during World War I and another 30,000 during World War II. In 1950, the French government began the process of setting up a specific defence force for the colony, consisting of four infantry companies and a light armoured unit.

The Ivory Coast became independent on 7 August 1960. In April 1961, the new government signed the Franco-Ivorian Technical Military Assistance Accord with France, which compelled the latter to assist with the formation of a new national military. It also authorised the continued presence of French troops based in Port-Bouët, and permitted the government to call on French military assistance in the event of external aggression or major internal unrest. By the end of 1962, the fledgling Ivorian armed forces had expanded rapidly into 5,000 soldiers attached to four battalions. Most of the initial recruits were drawn from the defunct colonial military establishment and had served in various French units, particularly the marine regiments. They were armed with old equipment donated by France, including two Max Holste Broussard monoplanes, a single Douglas DC-3 cargo aircraft, fifteen M8 Greyhound armoured cars, and even a SC-497-class submarine chaser. Conscription was instituted, although the large number of volunteers and low manpower requirements ensured it was only applied selectively. Some of the senior positions in the officer corps and Ministry of Defence continued to be held by French nationals.

Since the Ivory Coast could ill afford to divert funds from its economic development programmes into the armed forces, and was already dependent on France for its external defence, the military establishment remained quite modest from 1961 to 1974. Defence spending increased between 1974 and 1987, and the armed forces increased to 14,920 men. During this period, the air force and navy embarked on a significant modernisation campaign. An international merchant marine training academy was built in Abidjan and trained personnel from several Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) governments.

In 1997, a collapse in civil-military relations became evident when President Henri Konan Bédié dismissed popular general Robert Guéï on suspicion of disloyalty. Two years later, an army mutiny led by disgruntled recruits and junior officers escalated into a major coup d&#x27;état which ousted Bédié and installed Guéï in his place. Guéï subsequently stood for office during a subsequent presidential election, although he attempted to annul the election results when Laurent Gbagbo secured the popular vote. This triggered a civil revolt in Abidjan and two days of street battles between Gbagbo supporters and soldiers loyal to Guéï. Most of the armed forces remained neutral until the third day, when the army&#x27;s elite units and the gendarmerie announced they would recognise Gbagbo as president of the republic. Guéï conceded defeat, going into exile on 29 October 2000.

In September 2002, the Ivory Coast endured a second army mutiny, this time by 750 Muslim soldiers who seized Bouaké, citing religious discrimination and grievances against the predominantly Christian government. The mutineers later took control of most of the northern administrative regions, carrying out a brutal campaign of ethnic cleansing and plunging the country into civil war. For a number of years, troops dispatched by France, ECOWAS, and a United Nations Operation in Côte d&#x27;Ivoire (ONUCI) effort enforced a buffer zone between the south and the rebel-held north.

President Gbagbo repeatedly demanded France assist him in crushing the rebel forces. France maintained it would not take sides in the civil war, but allowed Ivorian military aircraft to cross the buffer zone and attack rebel positions. In November 2004, an Ivorian pilot targeted a French base during an air strike on Bouaké, killing nine French soldiers. The French retaliated by launching a follow-up operation to destroy the Ivorian Air Force.

In March 2011, a rebel coalition, the &quot;Forces Nouvelles de Côte d&#x27;Ivoire&quot;, launched a renewed offensive on the south with French support, sparking a second civil war. The Ivorian army was quickly overwhelmed, and Gbagbo deposed by the rebels. The &quot;Forces Nouvelles&quot; established a new national military, known as the Republican Forces of Ivory Coast (FRCI).

Integration problems arising from the incorporation of various rebel factions into the FRCI, as well as former Gbagbo loyalists, continue to persist. In 2014, some army units launched an abortive mutiny over wage disputes. The crisis ended when the Ivorian political leadership agreed to a new financial settlement with the FRCI. A second mutiny occurred on 7 January 2017, with troops in Bouaké demanding higher salaries and improved living conditions; this resulted in a second financial settlement.

==Army==
===Organization===
The Ivorian army had three infantry battalions, an armoured battalion, an artillery battery, and seven specialist companies in 1993. The effective strength of the army was about 3,000 troops for the first ten years of Ivorian independence, increasing to over 8,000 in the mid-1980s before declining steadily to about 5,500. It has always remained the largest branch of the armed forces.

In 1987, the army was responsible for the country&#x27;s five military regions, each of which was supervised by a colonel. The First Military Region controlled the concentration of forces in and around Abidjan, its principal units there being a rapid intervention battalion (airborne), an infantry battalion, an armored battalion, and an air defense artillery battalion. The Second Military Region was located in Daloa and comprised one infantry battalion. The Third Military Region was headquartered in Bouaké and was home to an artillery, an infantry, and an engineer battalion. The Fourth Military Region maintained only a Territorial Defense Company headquartered in Korhogo The Fifth Military Region was formerly known as the Western Operational Zone, a temporary command created to respond to the security threat caused by the First Liberian Civil War.

By 2010, the system of military regions had been abolished.

As of July 2011, General Soumaïla Bakayoko is the chief of staff of the army, and colonel-major Gervais Kouakou Kouassi is the Chief of the Gendarmerie.

As of October 2011, previously active units around Abidjan reportedly included the:
*1st Infantry Battalion – (1er Bataillon d&#x27;infanterie des forces armées terrestres ivoiriennes), at Akouédo (new camp)
*Armoured Battalion – (Battaillon Blinde), at Akouédo (new camp). The new camp at Akouedo had reportedly been almost completely destroyed. appears to be at 5&#x27; 21&quot; 7 N, 3&#x27; 26&quot; 30 W.
*1st Parachute Commando Battalion – 1er Bataillon des Commandos Parachutistes (1er BCP), old camp at Akouedo, on the route to the village Ébrié.

The 2nd Infantry Battalion appears to have been based at Daloa for some time. A 2003 change of command ushered in the 16th commander of the unit, and there are also reports from 2009 and 2011.

Reported special forces units include:
*Group des Forces Speciales (GFS)
*Fusiliers Commandos d Air (FUSCOA)
*Détachement d&#x27; Intervention Rapide
*Fusiliers Marins Commandos (FUMACO/ naval commandos)

===Current army equipment===

The Ivorian army has traditionally been equipped with French weapons, most of which were delivered in the 1980s under military grants from French government. During Laurent Ghagbo&#x27;s administration (2000–2011), large quantities of second-hand Soviet arms were acquired from Angola, Ukraine, and Belarus.
==Air Force==

After achieving independence from France in 1960, Ivory Coast maintained strong links with France through bilateral defence agreements. French training and operating techniques have been used since the establishment of the air force. The first aircraft were supplied in 1961 and included three Douglas C-47s and seven MH.1521 Broussard STOL utility aircraft. The first jet aircraft entered service in October 1980 which were six Alpha Jet CI light attack and advanced training aircraft; six more were ordered, but this was subsequently cancelled. However, another was purchased in 1983.

The 1979 air force had only transport and liaison aircraft. In 1987, the Library of Congress Country Study said that the Air Force&#x27;s official name, Ivoirian Air Transport and Liaison Group (&quot;Groupement Aérien de Transport et de Liaison&quot;—GATL), &quot;reflects an original mission focused more on logistics and transport rather than a combat force.&quot;

In 2004, following an air strikes on French peacekeepers by Ivorian forces, the French military destroyed all aircraft of the Air Force of Ivory Coast. President Gbagbo had previously ordered air strikes on Ivorian rebels as part of the civil war. On 6 November 2004, at least one Ivorian Sukhoi Su-25 bomber attacked a French peacekeeping position in the rebel town of Bouaké at 1 pm, killing nine French soldiers and wounding 31. An American development worker, reported to have been a missionary, was also killed. The Ivorian government claimed the attack on the French was unintentional, but the French insisted that the attack had been deliberate.

Several hours after the attack, French President Jacques Chirac ordered the destruction of the Ivorian air force and the seizure of Yamoussoukro airport. The French military performed an overland attack on the airport, destroying two Sukhoi Su-25 ground attack aircraft and three Mi-24 helicopter gunships. Two more military helicopters were destroyed during combat in the skies over Abidjan. France then flew in 300 troops and three Dassault Mirage F1 jet fighters based in nearby Gabon on standby.

Since then, the Air Force of Ivory Coast has been rebuilt. In 2007, Aviation Week &amp; Space Technology reported a total of six aircraft in service: one Antonov An-32 tactical transport, one Cessna 421 Golden Eagle utility aircraft, two Eurocopter SA 365 Dauphin helicopters, one Gulfstream IV VIP aircraft, and one Mil Mi-24 attack helicopter. It is unknown whether any of these aircraft were truly operational. In addition, Deagel.com reported two Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-23 attack aircraft.

===Aircraft===

==Navy==
Ivory Coast has a brown-water navy whose mission is coastal surveillance and security for the nation&#x27;s 340-mile coastline. The operational capability of the navy was severely degraded due to the diversion of resources to the army and air force during the civil wars, and it remains incapable of conducting operations beyond the general vicinity of Abidjan. In 2014 they received three coastal defence vessels, and place an order for 30 inflatable boats and 10 patrol craft in 2018 from the Raidco Marine shipbuilders

===Retired===
Early vessels were a second hand submarine chaser (SC 1337) from the United States, and three former French Navy boats (one patrol craft, with two fast attack boats).

==International forces==
A mutual defence accord signed with France in April 1961 provided for the stationing of French Armed Forces troops in Ivory Coast. The 43rd Marine Infantry Battalion of the French Army&#x27;s Troupes de Marine () was based in Port Bouet adjacent to the Abidjan Airport from 1979 and had more than 500 troops assigned until 2011, when it appears to have been disbanded. The French military also maintained a force as part of Opération Licorne.

From summer 2011, Operation Licorne, the French force, previously over 5,000 strong, was roughly 700, and consists of Licorne headquarters, Battalion Licorne (BATLIC), seemingly made up of elements of the 2nd Marine Infantry Regiment and the Régiment d&#x27;infanterie-chars de marine, and a helicopter detachment.

The French military left the country at the Ivorian&#x27;s request in 2025.

The United Nations has maintained the peacekeeping mission ONUCI in the country since 2004. On 28 February 2011 ONUCI consisted of 7,568 troops, 177 military observers, and numerous international civilians and Police; the mission had received helicopter and infantry reinforcement from UNMIL during the stand-off since the late 2010 elections which had been won by Alassane Ouattara.

==National Gendarmerie==
Since independence, the Ivory Coast has maintained a paramilitary gendarmerie force with a mandate to assist the police with law enforcement duties in the country&#x27;s rural districts. However, it may also be deployed alongside the army to quell internal unrest. For a number of decades, the size of the Ivorian National Gendarmerie remained consistent at around 4,000 to 5,000 personnel, supervised by a commandant. It underwent a massive expansion following the outbreak of the First Ivorian Civil War, increasing to about 12,000 personnel commanded by a major general. Gendarmes undergo training as cadets at a National Gendarmerie Academy.

The National Gendarmerie maintains an investigative branch, the &quot;Brigades de Recherches&quot;, which has been accused of various human rights abuses, including extrajudicial killings and unlawful detention.

==References==
===Works cited===

==Further reading==
*Cote d&#x27;Ivoire - Security Information
*&#x27;Old Rivalries stall Côte d&#x27;Ivoire army merger,&#x27; Jane&#x27;s Defence Weekly, 12 November 2008, p. 23 
*Arthur Boutellis, The Security Sector in Côte d&#x27;Ivoire: A Source of Conflict and a Key to Peace, International Peace Institute, Policy Papers – 26 May 2011
* 
*Aline Leboeuf, &quot;La réforme du secteur de sécurité à l&#x27;ivoirienne&quot;, March 2016 (French), accessible at La réforme du secteur de sécurité à l&#x27;ivoirienne
*Raphaël Outtara, &#x27;Côte d&#x27;Ivoire,&#x27; in Alan Bryden, Boubacar N&#x27;Diaye and &#x27;Funmi Olonisakin (Eds.), Challenges of Security Sector Governance in West Africa, Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces/Lit Verlag, June 2008, pp 75–92
*Raphaël Outtara, &#x27;Côte d&#x27;Ivoire,&#x27; in Alan Bryden, Boubacar N&#x27;Diaye, &#x27;Security Sector Governance in Francophone West Africa: Realities and Opportunities,&#x27; DCAF/Lit Verlag, 2011.
*Savannah de Tessieres, &#x27;Reforming the Ranks: Public Security in a Divided Côte d&#x27;Ivoire,&#x27; in Small Arms Survey 2011: States of Security, Small Arms Survey/Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies Geneva, Cambridge University Press, 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q897759" start="4" end="38" title="Armed Forces of the Republic of Ivory Coast" label="Armed Forces of Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="68" end="80" title="armed forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="84" end="95" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="237" end="255" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="285" end="290" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="292" end="299" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853565" start="475" end="497" title="Senegalese Tirailleurs" label="Senegalese Tirailleurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="612" end="623" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="650" end="662" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491106" start="1149" end="1159" title="Port-Bouët" label="Port-Bouët"/>
<link wikidata="Q941410" start="1647" end="1667" title="Max Holste Broussard" label="Max Holste Broussard"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="1689" end="1701" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q475616" start="1726" end="1738" title="M8 Greyhound" label="M8 Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389038" start="1765" end="1794" title="SC-497-class submarine chaser" label="SC-497-class submarine chaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="2597" end="2638" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q357779" start="2740" end="2757" title="Henri Konan Bédié" label="Henri Konan Bédié"/>
<link wikidata="Q357802" start="2784" end="2795" title="Robert Guéï" label="Robert Guéï"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594811" start="2927" end="2943" title="1999 Ivorian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236797" start="3051" end="3072" title="Ivorian presidential election, 2000" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q179242" start="3131" end="3145" title="Laurent Gbagbo" label="Laurent Gbagbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q271000" start="3651" end="3657" title="Bouaké" label="Bouaké"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="3869" end="3885" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021175" start="3916" end="3925" title="First Ivorian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855454" start="3993" end="4039" title="United Nations Operation in Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="United Nations Operation in Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436666" start="4615" end="4653" title="Forces Nouvelles de Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="Forces Nouvelles de Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087909" start="4735" end="4751" title="Second Ivorian Civil War" label="second civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q28234538" start="5284" end="5299" title="2017 Ivory Coast mutiny" label="A second mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="6075" end="6082" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="6137" end="6146" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="6162" end="6170" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="6223" end="6232" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q860304" start="6286" end="6291" title="Daloa" label="Daloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q271000" start="6377" end="6383" title="Bouaké" label="Bouaké"/>
<link wikidata="Q985627" start="6544" end="6551" title="Korhogo" label="Korhogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477500" start="6706" end="6730" title="First Liberian Civil War" label="First Liberian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7137" end="7144" title="Akouédo" label="Akouédo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7202" end="7209" title="Akouédo" label="Akouédo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7393" end="7434" title="1er Bataillon des Commandos Parachutistes" label="1er Bataillon des Commandos Parachutistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q860304" start="7560" end="7565" title="Daloa" label="Daloa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7737" end="7763" title="Group des Forces Speciales" label="Group des Forces Speciales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7771" end="7796" title="Fusiliers Commandos d Air" label="Fusiliers Commandos d Air"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7807" end="7846" title="Détachement d&amp;#x27; Intervention Rapide" label="Détachement d&amp;#x27; Intervention Rapide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7848" end="7874" title="Fusiliers Marins Commandos" label="Fusiliers Marins Commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="8210" end="8216" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="8218" end="8225" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="8231" end="8238" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="8549" end="8561" title="Douglas C-47 Skytrain" label="Douglas C-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q941410" start="8573" end="8590" title="Max Holste MH.1521 Broussard" label="MH.1521 Broussard"/>
<link wikidata="Q313740" start="8684" end="8693" title="Dassault/Dornier Alpha Jet" label="Alpha Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823132" start="8916" end="8949" title="Library of Congress Country Study" label="Library of Congress Country Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858679" start="9234" end="9268" title="2004 French–Ivorian clashes" label="air strikes on French peacekeepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021175" start="9449" end="9458" title="First Ivorian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q192137" start="9501" end="9513" title="Sukhoi Su-25" label="Sukhoi Su-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="9514" end="9520" title="bomber" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q271000" start="9582" end="9588" title="Bouaké" label="Bouaké"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="9700" end="9710" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="9898" end="9914" title="President of the French Republic" label="French President"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="9915" end="9929" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768" start="9998" end="10010" title="Yamoussoukro" label="Yamoussoukro"/>
<link wikidata="Q192137" start="10100" end="10112" title="Sukhoi Su-25" label="Sukhoi Su-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316223" start="10152" end="10170" title="helicopter gunship" label="helicopter gunship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="10250" end="10257" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q319361" start="10300" end="10318" title="Dassault Mirage F1" label="Dassault Mirage F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="10348" end="10353" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642099" start="10435" end="10471" title="Aviation Week &amp;amp; Space Technology" label="Aviation Week &amp;amp; Space Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q579939" start="10521" end="10534" title="Antonov An-32" label="Antonov An-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q164293" start="10559" end="10582" title="Cessna 421" label="Cessna 421 Golden Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39663" start="10605" end="10630" title="Eurocopter Dauphin" label="Eurocopter SA 365 Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q861792" start="10648" end="10661" title="Gulfstream IV" label="Gulfstream IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q155651" start="10684" end="10693" title="Mil Mi-24" label="Mil Mi-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q155679" start="10818" end="10841" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-23" label="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746796" start="10903" end="10919" title="brown-water navy" label="brown-water navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="10937" end="10942" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q744967" start="11455" end="11471" title="submarine chaser" label="submarine chaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q719226" start="11569" end="11586" title="fast attack craft" label="fast attack boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11651" end="11657" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q477986" start="11703" end="11722" title="French Armed Forces" label="French Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078933" start="11807" end="11824" title="Troupes de Marine" label="Troupes de Marine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11841" end="11851" title="Port Bouet" label="Port Bouet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165280" start="11868" end="11883" title="Abidjan Airport" label="Abidjan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q947391" start="12039" end="12056" title="Opération Licorne" label="Opération Licorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815911" start="12264" end="12292" title="2nd Marine Infantry Regiment" label="2nd Marine Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455188" start="12301" end="12343" title="Régiment d&amp;#x27;infanterie-chars de marine" label="Régiment d&amp;#x27;infanterie-chars de marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="12456" end="12470" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855454" start="12511" end="12516" title="ONUCI" label="ONUCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278645" start="12738" end="12743" title="UNMIL" label="UNMIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q57413" start="12817" end="12834" title="Alassane Ouattara" label="Alassane Ouattara"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="12928" end="12939" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446733" start="13884" end="13910" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Defence Weekly" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Defence Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052366" start="14040" end="14069" title="International Peace Institute" label="International Peace Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q583031" start="14454" end="14510" title="Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces" label="Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542649" start="14904" end="14921" title="Small Arms Survey" label="Small Arms Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q691686" start="14922" end="14981" title="Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies" label="Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="14990" end="15016" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5573" wikidata="Q224" url="?curid=5573" title="Croatia">
<text>Croatia, officially the Republic of Croatia, is a country in Central and Southeast Europe, on the coast of the Adriatic Sea. It borders Slovenia to the northwest, Hungary to the northeast, Serbia to the east, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro to the southeast, and shares a maritime border with Italy to the west. Its capital and largest city, Zagreb, forms one of the country&#x27;s primary subdivisions, with twenty counties. Other major urban centers include Split, Rijeka and Osijek. The country spans , and has a population of nearly 3.9 million.

The Croats arrived in modern-day Croatia in the late 6th century, then part of Roman Illyria. By the 7th century, they had organized the territory into two duchies. Croatia was first internationally recognized as independent on 7 June 879 during the reign of Duke Branimir. Tomislav became the first king by 925, elevating Croatia to the status of a kingdom. During the succession crisis after the Trpimirović dynasty ended, Croatia entered a personal union with Hungary in 1102. In 1527, faced with Ottoman conquest, the Croatian Parliament elected Ferdinand I of Austria to the Croatian throne. In October 1918, the State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs, independent from the Habsburg Empire, was proclaimed in Zagreb, and in December 1918, it merged into the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Following the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941, most of Croatia was incorporated into a Nazi-installed puppet state, the Independent State of Croatia. A resistance movement led to the creation of the Socialist Republic of Croatia, which after the war became a founding member and constituent of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. On 25 June 1991, Croatia declared independence, and the War of Independence was successfully fought over the next four years.

Croatia is a republic and has a parliamentary system. It is a member of the European Union, the Eurozone, the Schengen Area, NATO, the United Nations, the Council of Europe, the OSCE, the World Trade Organization, a founding member of the Union for the Mediterranean, and is currently in the process of joining the OECD. An active participant in United Nations peacekeeping, Croatia contributed troops to the International Security Assistance Force and was elected to fill a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council in the 2008–2009 term for the first time.

Croatia is a developed country with an advanced high-income economy. Service, industrial sectors, and agriculture dominate the economy. Tourism is a significant source of revenue for the country, with nearly 20 million tourist arrivals as of 2019. Since the 2000s, the Croatian government has heavily invested in infrastructure, especially transport routes and facilities along the Pan-European corridors. Croatia has also positioned itself as a regional energy leader in the early 2020s and is contributing to the diversification of Europe&#x27;s energy supply via its floating liquefied natural gas import terminal off Krk island, LNG Hrvatska. Croatia provides social security, universal health care, and tuition-free primary and secondary education while supporting culture through public institutions and corporate investments in media and publishing.

== Etymology ==

Croatia&#x27;s non-native name derives from Medieval Latin , itself a derivation of North-West Slavic , by liquid metathesis from Common Slavic period &quot;*Xorvat&quot;, from proposed Proto-Slavic &quot;&quot; which possibly comes from the 3rd-century Scytho-Sarmatian form attested in the Tanais Tablets as (&#x27;, alternate forms comprise and &#x27;). The origin of the ethnonym is uncertain, but most probably is from Proto-Ossetian / Alanian *&quot;xurvæt-&quot; or *&quot;xurvāt-&quot;, in the meaning of &quot;one who guards&quot; (&quot;guardian, protector&quot;).

The oldest preserved record of the Croatian ethnonym&#x27;s native variation &quot;*xъrvatъ&quot; is of the variable stem, attested in the Baška tablet in style zvъnъmirъ kralъ xrъvatъskъ (&quot;Zvonimir, Croatian king&quot;), while the Latin variation &quot;Croatorum&quot; is archaeologically confirmed on a church inscription found in Bijaći near Trogir dated to the end of the 8th or early 9th century. The presumably oldest stone inscription with fully preserved ethnonym is the 9th-century Branimir inscription found near Benkovac, where Duke Branimir is styled &quot;Dux Cruatorvm&quot;, likely dated between 879 and 892, during his rule. The Latin term &quot;&quot; is attributed to a charter of Duke Trpimir I of Croatia, dated to 852 in a 1568 copy of a lost original, but it is not certain if the original was indeed older than the Branimir inscription.

== History ==
=== Prehistory and antiquity ===

The area known as Croatia today was inhabited throughout the prehistoric period. Neanderthal fossils dating to the middle Palaeolithic period were unearthed in northern Croatia, best presented at the Krapina site. Remnants of Neolithic and Chalcolithic cultures were found in all regions. The largest proportion of sites is in the valleys of northern Croatia. The most significant are Baden, Starčevo, and Vučedol cultures. Iron Age hosted the early Illyrian Hallstatt culture and the Celtic La Tène culture.

The region of modern-day Croatia was settled by Illyrians and Liburnians, while the first Greek colonies were established on the islands of Hvar, Korčula, and Vis. In 9 AD, the territory of today&#x27;s Croatia became part of the Roman Empire. Emperor Diocletian was native to the region. He had a large palace built in Split, to which he retired after abdicating in AD 305.

During the 5th century, the last de jure Western Roman Emperor Julius Nepos ruled a small realm from the palace after fleeing Italy in 475.

=== Middle Ages ===
The Roman period ends with Avar and Croat invasions in the late 6th and first half of the 7th century and the destruction of almost all Roman towns. Roman survivors retreated to more favourable sites on the coast, islands, and mountains. The city of Dubrovnik was founded by such survivors from Epidaurum.

There&#x27;s some uncertainty about the ethnogenesis of Croats. The most accepted theory, the Slavic theory, proposes migration of White Croats from White Croatia during the Migration Period. Conversely, the Iranian theory proposes Sarmatian-Alanic origin of Proto-Croats, based on Tanais Tablets containing Ancient Greek inscriptions of given names &quot;Χορούαθος&quot;, &quot;Χοροάθος&quot;, and &quot;Χορόαθος&quot; (Khoroúathos, Khoroáthos, and Khoróathos) and their interpretation as anthroponyms related to the Croatian ethnonym.

According to the work &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot; written by 10th-century Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII, Croats settled in the Roman province of Dalmatia in the first half of the 7th century after they defeated the Avars. Although there exist some scholarly disputes about the account&#x27;s reliability and interpretation, recent archaeological data has established that the migration and settlement of the Slavs/Croats was in the late 6th and early 7th century. Eventually, a dukedom was formed, Duchy of Croatia, ruled by Borna, as attested by chronicles of Einhard starting in 818. The record represents the first document of Croatian realms, vassal states of Francia at the time. Its neighbor to the North was Principality of Lower Pannonia, at the time ruled by duke Ljudevit who ruled the territories between the Drava and Sava rivers, centred from his fort at Sisak. This population and territory throughout history was tightly related and connected to Croats and Croatia.

Christianisation of Croats began in the 7th century at the time of archon Porga of Croatia, initially probably encompassed only the elite and related people, but mostly finished by the 9th century. The Frankish overlordship ended during the reign of Mislav, or his successor Trpimir I. The native Croatian royal dynasty was founded by duke Trpimir I in the mid 9th century, who defeated the Byzantine and Bulgarian forces. The first native Croatian ruler recognised by the Pope was duke Branimir, who received papal recognition from Pope John VIII on 7 June 879. Tomislav was the first king of Croatia, noted as such in a letter of Pope John X in 925. Tomislav defeated Hungarian and Bulgarian invasions. The medieval Croatian kingdom reached its peak in the 11th century during the reigns of Petar Krešimir IV (1058–1074) and Dmitar Zvonimir (1075–1089). When Stjepan II died in 1091, ending the Trpimirović dynasty, Dmitar Zvonimir&#x27;s brother-in-law Ladislaus I of Hungary claimed the Croatian crown. This led to a war and personal union with Hungary in 1102 under Coloman.

=== Union with Hungary and Austria ===


For the next four centuries, the Kingdom of Croatia was ruled by the Sabor (parliament) and a Ban (viceroy) appointed by the king. This period saw the rise of influential nobility such as the Frankopan and Šubić families to prominence, and ultimately numerous Bans from the two families. An increasing threat of Ottoman conquest and a struggle against the Republic of Venice for control of coastal areas ensued. The Venetians controlled most of Dalmatia by 1428, except the city-state of Dubrovnik, which became independent. Ottoman conquests led to the 1493 Battle of Krbava field and the 1526 Battle of Mohács, both ending in decisive Ottoman victories. King Louis II died at Mohács, and in 1527, the Croatian Parliament met in Cetin and chose Ferdinand I of the House of Habsburg as the new ruler of Croatia, under the condition that he protects Croatia against the Ottoman Empire while respecting its political rights.

Following the decisive Ottoman victories, Croatia was split into civilian and military territories in 1538. The military territories became known as the Croatian Military Frontier and were under direct Habsburg control. Ottoman advances in Croatia continued until the 1593 Battle of Sisak, the first decisive Ottoman defeat, when borders stabilised. During the Great Turkish War (1683–1698), Slavonia was regained, but western Bosnia, which had been part of Croatia before the Ottoman conquest, remained outside Croatian control. The present-day border between the two countries is a remnant of this outcome. Dalmatia, the southern part of the border, was similarly defined by the Fifth and the Seventh Ottoman–Venetian Wars.

The Ottoman wars drove demographic changes. During the 16th century, Croats from western and northern Bosnia, Lika, Krbava, the area between the rivers Una and Kupa, and especially from western Slavonia, migrated towards Austria. Present-day Burgenland Croats are direct descendants of these settlers. To replace the fleeing population, the Habsburgs encouraged Bosnians to provide military service in the Military Frontier.

The Croatian Parliament supported King Charles III&#x27;s Pragmatic Sanction and signed their own Pragmatic Sanction in 1712. Subsequently, the emperor pledged to respect all privileges and political rights of the Kingdom of Croatia, and Queen Maria Theresa made significant contributions to Croatian affairs, such as introducing compulsory education.

Between 1797 and 1809, the First French Empire increasingly occupied the eastern Adriatic coastline and its hinterland, ending the Venetian and the Ragusan republics, establishing the Illyrian Provinces. In response, the Royal Navy blockaded the Adriatic Sea, leading to the Battle of Vis in 1811. The Illyrian provinces were captured by the Austrians in 1813 and absorbed by the Austrian Empire following the Congress of Vienna in 1815. This led to the formation of the Kingdom of Dalmatia and the restoration of the Croatian Littoral to the Kingdom of Croatia under one crown. The 1830s and 1840s featured romantic nationalism that inspired the Croatian National Revival, a political and cultural campaign advocating the unity of South Slavs within the empire. Its primary focus was establishing a standard language as a counterweight to Hungarian while promoting Croatian literature and culture. During the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, Croatia sided with Austria. Ban Josip Jelačić helped defeat the Hungarians in 1849 and ushered in a Germanisation policy.

By the 1860s, the failure of the policy became apparent, leading to the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867. The creation of a personal union between the Austrian Empire and the Kingdom of Hungary followed. The treaty left Croatia&#x27;s status to Hungary, which was resolved by the Croatian–Hungarian Settlement of 1868 when the kingdoms of Croatia and Slavonia were united. The Kingdom of Dalmatia remained under de facto Austrian control, while Rijeka retained the status of &quot;corpus separatum&quot; previously introduced in 1779.

After Austria-Hungary occupied Bosnia and Herzegovina following the 1878 Treaty of Berlin, the Military Frontier was abolished. The Croatian and Slavonian sectors of the Frontier returned to Croatia in 1881, under provisions of the Croatian–Hungarian Settlement. Renewed efforts to reform Austria-Hungary, entailing federalisation with Croatia as a federal unit, were stopped by World War I.

=== The World Wars and Yugoslavia ===


On 29 October 1918, the Croatian Parliament (&quot;Sabor&quot;) declared independence and decided to join the newly formed State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs, which in turn entered into union with the Kingdom of Serbia on 4 December 1918 to form the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes. The Croatian Parliament never ratified the union with Serbia and Montenegro. The 1921 constitution defining the country as a unitary state and abolition of Croatian Parliament and historical administrative divisions effectively ended Croatian autonomy.

The new constitution was opposed by the most widely supported national political party—the Croatian Peasant Party (HSS) led by Stjepan Radić.

The political situation deteriorated further as Radić was assassinated in the National Assembly in 1928, culminating in King Alexander I&#x27;s establishment of the 6 January Dictatorship in 1929. The dictatorship formally ended in 1931 when the king imposed a more unitary constitution. The HSS, now led by Vladko Maček, continued to advocate federalisation, resulting in the Cvetković–Maček Agreement of August 1939 and the autonomous Banovina of Croatia. The Yugoslav government retained control of defence, internal security, foreign affairs, trade, and transport while other matters were left to the Croatian Sabor and a crown-appointed Ban.
In April 1941, Yugoslavia was occupied by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. Following the invasion, a German-Italian installed puppet state named the Independent State of Croatia (NDH) was established. Most of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the region of Syrmia were incorporated into this state. Parts of Dalmatia were annexed by Italy, Hungary annexed the northern Croatian regions of Baranja and Međimurje. The NDH regime was led by Ante Pavelić and ultranationalist Ustaše, a fringe movement in pre-war Croatia. With German and Italian military and political support, the regime introduced racial laws and launched a genocide campaign against Serbs, Jews, and Roma. Many were imprisoned in concentration camps; the largest was the Jasenovac complex. Anti-fascist Croats were targeted by the regime as well. Several concentration camps (most notably the Rab, Gonars and Molat camps) were established in Italian-occupied territories, mostly for Slovenes and Croats. At the same time, the Yugoslav Royalist and Serbian nationalist Chetniks pursued a genocidal campaign against Croats and Muslims, aided by Italy. Nazi German forces committed crimes and reprisals against civilians in retaliation for Partisan actions, such as in the villages of Kamešnica and Lipa in 1944. 
A resistance movement emerged. On 22 June 1941, the 1st Sisak Partisan Detachment was formed near Sisak, the first military unit formed by a resistance movement in occupied Europe. That sparked the beginning of the Yugoslav Partisan movement, a communist, multi-ethnic anti-fascist resistance group led by Josip Broz Tito. In ethnic terms, Croats were the second-largest contributors to the Partisan movement after Serbs. In per capita terms, Croats contributed proportionately to their population within Yugoslavia. By May 1944 (according to Tito), Croats made up 30% of the Partisan&#x27;s ethnic composition, despite making up 22% of the population. The movement grew fast, and at the Tehran Conference in December 1943, the Partisans gained recognition from the Allies.

With Allied support in logistics, equipment, training and airpower, and with the assistance of Soviet troops taking part in the 1944 Belgrade Offensive, the Partisans gained control of Yugoslavia and the border regions of Italy and Austria by May 1945. Members of the NDH armed forces and other Axis troops, as well as civilians, were in retreat towards Austria. Following their surrender, many were killed in the Yugoslav death march of Nazi collaborators. In the following years, ethnic Germans faced persecution in Yugoslavia, and many were interned.

The political aspirations of the Partisan movement were reflected in the State Anti-fascist Council for the National Liberation of Croatia, which developed in 1943 as the bearer of Croatian statehood and later transformed into the Parliament in 1945, and AVNOJ—its counterpart at the Yugoslav level.

Based on the studies on wartime and post-war casualties by demographer Vladimir Žerjavić and statistician Bogoljub Kočović, a total of 295,000 people from the territory (not including territories ceded from Italy after the war) died, which amounted to 7.3% of the population, among whom were 125–137,000 Serbs, 118–124,000 Croats, 16–17,000 Jews, and 15,000 Roma. In addition, from areas joined to Croatia after the war, a total of 32,000 people died, among whom 16,000 were Italians and 15,000 were Croats. Approximately 200,000 Croats from the entirety of Yugoslavia (including Croatia) and abroad were killed in total throughout the war and its immediate aftermath, approximately 5.4% of the population.

After World War II, Croatia became a single-party socialist federal unit of the SFR Yugoslavia, ruled by the Communists, but having a degree of autonomy within the federation. In 1967, Croatian authors and linguists published a Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Standard Language demanding equal treatment for their language.

The declaration contributed to a national movement seeking greater civil rights and redistribution of the Yugoslav economy, culminating in the Croatian Spring of 1971, which was suppressed by Yugoslav leadership. Still, the 1974 Yugoslav Constitution gave increased autonomy to federal units, basically fulfilling a goal of the Croatian Spring and providing a legal basis for independence of the federative constituents.

Following Tito&#x27;s death in 1980, the political situation in Yugoslavia deteriorated. National tension was fanned by the 1986 SANU Memorandum and the 1989 coups in Vojvodina, Kosovo, and Montenegro. In January 1990, the Communist Party fragmented along national lines, with the Croatian faction demanding a looser federation. In the same year, the first multi-party elections were held in Croatia, while Franjo Tuđman&#x27;s win exacerbated nationalist tensions. Some of the Serbs in Croatia left Sabor and declared autonomy of the unrecognised Republic of Serbian Krajina, intent on achieving independence from Croatia.

=== Independence ===
As tensions rose, Croatia declared independence on 25 June 1991. However, the full implementation of the declaration only came into effect after a three-month moratorium on the decision on 8 October 1991. In the meantime, tensions escalated into overt war when the Serbian-controlled Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army (JNA) and various Serb paramilitary groups attacked Croatia.

By the end of 1991, a high-intensity conflict fought along a wide front reduced Croatia&#x27;s control to about two-thirds of its territory. Serb paramilitary groups then began a campaign of killing, terror, and expulsion of the Croats in the occupied territories, killing thousands of Croat civilians and expelling or displacing as many as 400,000-500,000 Croats and other non-Serbs from their homes. Serbs living in Croatian towns, especially those near the front lines, were subjected to various forms of discrimination. Croatian Serbs in Eastern and Western Slavonia and parts of the Krajina were forced to flee or were expelled by Croatian forces, though on a restricted scale and in lesser numbers. The Croatian Government publicly deplored these practices and sought to stop them, indicating that they were not a part of the Government&#x27;s policy.

On 15 January 1992, Croatia gained diplomatic recognition by the European Economic Community, followed by the United Nations. The war effectively ended in August 1995 with a decisive victory by Croatia; the event is commemorated each year on 5 August as Victory and Homeland Thanksgiving Day and the Day of Croatian Defenders. Following the Croatian victory, about 200,000 Serbs from the self-proclaimed Republic of Serbian Krajina fled the region and hundreds of mainly elderly Serb civilians were killed in the aftermath of the military operation. Approximately half have returned since then. Their homes were subsequently settled by Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina. The remaining occupied areas were restored to Croatia following the Erdut Agreement of November 1995, concluding with the UNTAES mission in January 1998. Most sources number the war deaths at around 20,000.

After the end of the war, Croatia faced the challenges of post-war reconstruction, the return of refugees, establishing democracy, protecting human rights, and general social and economic development.

The 2000s were characterized by democratization, economic growth, structural and social reforms, and problems such as unemployment, corruption, and the inefficiency of public administration. In November 2000 and March 2001, the Parliament amended the Constitution, first adopted on 22 December 1990, changing its bicameral structure back into its historic unicameral form and reducing presidential powers.

Croatia joined the Partnership for Peace on 25 May 2000 and became a member of the World Trade Organization on 30 November 2000. On 29 October 2001, Croatia signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the European Union, submitted a formal application for the EU membership in 2003, was given the status of a candidate country in 2004, and began accession negotiations in 2005. Although the Croatian economy had enjoyed a significant boom in the early 2000s, the financial crisis in 2008 forced the government to cut spending, thus provoking a public outcry.

Croatia served on the United Nations Security Council in the 2008–2009 term for the first time, assuming the non-permanent seat in December 2008. On 1 April 2009, Croatia joined NATO.

A wave of anti-government protests in 2011 reflected a general dissatisfaction with the current political and economic situation. The protests brought together diverse political persuasions in response to recent government corruption scandals and called for early elections. On 28 October 2011 MPs voted to dissolve Parliament and the protests gradually subsided. President Ivo Josipović agreed to a dissolution of Sabor on Monday, 31 October and scheduled new elections for Sunday 4 December 2011.

On 30 June 2011, Croatia successfully completed EU accession negotiations. The country signed the Accession Treaty on 9 December 2011 and held a referendum on 22 January 2012, where Croatian citizens voted in favor of an EU membership. Croatia joined the European Union on 1 July 2013.

Croatia was affected by the 2015 European migrant crisis when Hungary&#x27;s closure of borders with Serbia pushed over 700,000 refugees and migrants to pass through Croatia on their way to other EU countries.

On 19 October 2016, Andrej Plenković began serving as the current Croatian Prime Minister. The most recent presidential elections, held on 5 January 2020, elected Zoran Milanović as president.

On 25 January 2022, the OECD Council decided to open accession negotiations with Croatia. Throughout the accession process, Croatia was to implement numerous reforms that will advance all spheres of activity – from public services and the justice system to education, transport, finance, health, and trade. In line with the OECD Accession Roadmap from June 2022, Croatia will undergo technical reviews by 25 OECD committees and is so far progressing at a faster pace than expected. Full membership is expected in 2025 and is the last big foreign policy goal Croatia still has to achieve.

On 1 January 2023, Croatia adopted the euro as its official currency, replacing the kuna, and became the 20th Eurozone member. On the same day, Croatia became the 27th member of the border-free Schengen Area, thus marking its full EU integration.

== Geography ==


Croatia is situated in Central and Southeast Europe, on the coast of the Adriatic Sea. Hungary is to the northeast, Serbia to the east, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro to the southeast and Slovenia to the northwest. It lies mostly between latitudes 42° and 47° N and longitudes 13° and 20° E. Part of the territory in the extreme south surrounding Dubrovnik is a practical exclave connected to the rest of the mainland by territorial waters, but separated on land by a short coastline strip belonging to Bosnia and Herzegovina around Neum. The Pelješac Bridge connects the exclave with mainland Croatia.


The territory covers , consisting of of land and of water. It is the world&#x27;s 127th largest country. Elevation ranges from the mountains of the Dinaric Alps with the highest point of the Dinara peak at near the border with Bosnia and Herzegovina in the south to the shore of the Adriatic Sea which makes up its entire southwest border. Insular Croatia consists of over a thousand islands and islets varying in size, 48 of which are permanently inhabited. The largest islands are Cres and Krk, each of them having an area of around .

The hilly northern parts of Hrvatsko Zagorje and the flat plains of Slavonia in the east which is part of the Pannonian Basin are traversed by major rivers such as Danube, Drava, Kupa, and the Sava. The Danube, Europe&#x27;s second longest river, runs through the city of Vukovar in the extreme east and forms part of the border with Vojvodina. The central and southern regions near the Adriatic coastline and islands consist of low mountains and forested highlands. Natural resources found in quantities significant enough for production include oil, coal, bauxite, low-grade iron ore, calcium, gypsum, natural asphalt, silica, mica, clays, salt, and hydropower. Karst topography makes up about half of Croatia and is especially prominent in the Dinaric Alps. Croatia hosts deep caves, 49 of which are deeper than , 14 deeper than and three deeper than . Croatia&#x27;s most famous lakes are the Plitvice lakes, a system of 16 lakes with waterfalls connecting them over dolomite and limestone cascades. The lakes are renowned for their distinctive colours, ranging from turquoise to mint green, grey or blue.

=== Climate ===
Most of Croatia has a moderately warm and rainy continental climate as defined by the Köppen climate classification. Mean monthly temperature ranges between in January and in July. The coldest parts of the country are Lika and Gorski Kotar featuring a snowy, forested climate at elevations above . The warmest areas are at the Adriatic coast and especially in its immediate hinterland characterised by Mediterranean climate, as the sea moderates temperature highs. Consequently, temperature peaks are more pronounced in continental areas.

The lowest temperature of was recorded on 3 February 1919 in Čakovec, and the highest temperature of was recorded on 4 August 1981 in Ploče.

Mean annual precipitation ranges between and depending on geographic region and climate type. The least precipitation is recorded in the outer islands (Biševo, Lastovo, Svetac, Vis) and the eastern parts of Slavonia. However, in the latter case, rain occurs mostly during the growing season. The maximum precipitation levels are observed in the Dinaric Alps, in the Gorski Kotar peaks of Risnjak and Snježnik.

Prevailing winds in the interior are light to moderate northeast or southwest, and in the coastal area, prevailing winds are determined by local features. Higher wind velocities are more often recorded in cooler months along the coast, generally as the cool northeasterly bura or less frequently as the warm southerly jugo. The sunniest parts are the outer islands, Hvar and Korčula, where more than 2700 hours of sunshine are recorded per year, followed by the middle and southern Adriatic Sea area in general, and northern Adriatic coast, all with more than 2000 hours of sunshine per year.

=== Biodiversity ===


Croatia can be subdivided into ecoregions based on climate and geomorphology. The country is one of the richest in Europe in terms of biodiversity. Croatia has four types of biogeographical regions—the Mediterranean along the coast and in its immediate hinterland, Alpine in most of Lika and Gorski Kotar, Pannonian along Drava and Danube, and Continental in the remaining areas. The most significant are karst habitats which include submerged karst, such as Zrmanja and Krka canyons and tufa barriers, as well as underground habitats. The country contains three ecoregions: Dinaric Mountains mixed forests, Pannonian mixed forests, and Illyrian deciduous forests.

The karst geology harbours approximately 7,000 caves and pits, some of which are the habitat of the only known aquatic cave vertebrate—the olm. Forests are abundant, covering or 44% of Croatian land area. Other habitat types include wetlands, grasslands, bogs, fens, scrub habitats, coastal and marine habitats.

In terms of phytogeography, Croatia is a part of the Boreal Kingdom and is a part of Illyrian and Central European provinces of the Circumboreal Region and the Adriatic province of the Mediterranean Region. The World Wide Fund for Nature divides Croatia between three ecoregions—Pannonian mixed forests, Dinaric Mountains mixed forests and Illyrian deciduous forests.

Croatia hosts 37,000 known plant and animal species, but their actual number is estimated to be between 50,000 and 100,000. More than a thousand species are endemic, especially in Velebit and Biokovo mountains, Adriatic islands and karst rivers. Legislation protects 1,131 species. The most serious threat is habitat loss and degradation. A further problem is presented by invasive alien species, especially &quot;Caulerpa taxifolia&quot; algae.

Invasive algae are regularly monitored and removed to protect benthic habitat. Indigenous cultivated plant strains and domesticated animal breeds are numerous. They include five breeds of horses, five of cattle, eight of sheep, two of pigs, and one poultry. Indigenous breeds include nine that are endangered or critically endangered. Croatia has 444 protected areas, encompassing 9% of the country. Those include eight national parks, two strict reserves, and ten nature parks. The most famous protected area and the oldest national park in Croatia is Plitvice Lakes National Park, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Velebit Nature Park is a part of the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Programme. The strict and special reserves, as well as the national and nature parks, are managed and protected by the central government, while other protected areas are managed by counties. In 2005, the National Ecological Network was set up, as the first step in the preparation of the EU accession and joining of the Natura 2000 network.

== Governance ==
The Republic of Croatia is a unitary, constitutional state using a parliamentary system. Government powers in Croatia are legislative, executive, and judiciary powers.
The president of the republic () is the head of state, directly elected to a five-year term and is limited by the Constitution to two terms. In addition to serving as commander in chief of the armed forces, the president has the procedural duty of appointing the prime minister with the parliament and has some influence on foreign policy.

The Government is headed by the prime minister, who has four deputy prime ministers and 16 ministers in charge of particular sectors. As the executive branch, it is responsible for proposing legislation and a budget, enforcing the laws, and guiding foreign and internal policies. The Government is seated at Banski dvori in Zagreb.

=== Law and judicial system ===

A unicameral parliament (&quot;&quot;) holds legislative power. The number of Sabor members can vary from 100 to 160. They are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms. Legislative sessions take place from 15 January to 15 July, and from 15 September to 15 December annually. The two largest political parties in Croatia are the Croatian Democratic Union and the Social Democratic Party of Croatia.

Croatia has a civil law legal system in which law arises primarily from written statutes, with judges serving as implementers and not creators of law. Its development was largely influenced by German and Austrian legal systems. Croatian law is divided into two principal areas—private and public law. Before EU accession negotiations were completed, Croatian legislation had been fully harmonised with the Community acquis.

The main national courts are the Constitutional Court, which oversees violations of the Constitution, and the Supreme Court, which is the highest court of appeal. Administrative, Commercial, County, Misdemeanor, and Municipal courts handle cases in their respective domains. Cases falling within judicial jurisdiction are in the first instance decided by a single professional judge, while appeals are deliberated in mixed tribunals of professional judges. Lay magistrates also participate in trials. The State&#x27;s Attorney Office is the judicial body constituted of public prosecutors empowered to instigate prosecution of perpetrators of offences.

Law enforcement agencies are organised under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior which consist primarily of the national police force. Croatia&#x27;s security service is the Security and Intelligence Agency (SOA).

=== Foreign relations ===
Croatia has established diplomatic relations with 194 countries. supporting 57 embassies, 30 consulates and eight permanent diplomatic missions. 56 foreign embassies and 67 consulates operate in the country in addition to offices of international organisations such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), International Organization for Migration (IOM), Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), World Bank, World Health Organization (WHO), International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and UNICEF.

As of 2019, the Croatian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration employed 1,381 personnel and expended 765.295 million kunas (€101.17 million). Stated aims of Croatian foreign policy include enhancing relations with neighbouring countries, developing international co-operation and promotion of the Croatian economy and Croatia itself.

Croatia is a member of the European Union. As of 2021, Croatia had unsolved border issues with Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, and Slovenia. Croatia is a member of NATO. On 1 January 2023, Croatia simultaneously joined both the Schengen Area and the Eurozone, having previously joined the ERM II on 10 July 2020.

===Croatian diaspora===

The Croatian diaspora consists of communities of ethnic Croats and Croatian citizens living outside Croatia. Croatia maintains intensive contacts with Croatian communities abroad (e.g., administrative and financial support of cultural, sports activities, and economic initiatives). Croatia actively maintain foreign relations to strengthen and guarantee the rights of the Croatian minority in various host countries.

=== Military ===

The Croatian Armed Forces (CAF) consist of the Air Force, Army, and Navy branches in addition to the Education and Training Command and Support Command. The CAF is headed by the General Staff, which reports to the defence minister, who in turn reports to the president. According to the constitution, the president is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces. In case of immediate threat during wartime, he issues orders directly to the General Staff.

Following the 1991–95 war, defence spending and CAF size began a constant decline. , military spending was an estimated 1.68% of the country&#x27;s GDP, 67th globally. In 2005 the budget fell below the NATO-required 2% of GDP, down from the record high of 11.1% in 1994. Traditionally relying on conscripts, the CAF went through a period of reforms focused on downsizing, restructuring and professionalisation in the years before accession to NATO in April 2009. According to a presidential decree issued in 2006, the CAF employed around 18,100 active duty military personnel, 3,000 civilians and 2,000 voluntary conscripts between 18 and 30 years old in peacetime.

Until 2008 military service was obligatory for men at age 18 and conscripts served six-month tours of duty, reduced in 2001 from the earlier scheme of nine months. Conscientious objectors could instead opt for eight months of civilian service. Compulsory conscription was abolished in January 2008, but is set to be reintroduced in January 2025 with two months of active duty. The decision was influenced by the rising tensions in Europe and the region, following the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

, the Croatian military had 72 members stationed in foreign countries as part of United Nations-led international peacekeeping forces. , 323 troops served the NATO-led ISAF force in Afghanistan. Another 156 served with KFOR in Kosovo.

Croatia has a military-industrial sector that exported around 493 million kunas (€65,176 million) worth of military equipment in 2020. Croatian-made weapons and vehicles used by CAF include the standard sidearm HS2000 manufactured by HS Produkt and the M-84D battle tank designed by the Đuro Đaković factory. Uniforms and helmets worn by CAF soldiers are locally produced and marketed to other countries.

According to the 2024 Global Peace Index, Croatia is the 15th most peaceful country in the world.

=== Administrative divisions ===


Croatia was first divided into counties in the Middle Ages. The divisions changed over time to reflect losses of territory to Ottoman conquest and subsequent liberation of the same territory, changes of the political status of Dalmatia, Dubrovnik, and Istria. The traditional division of the country into counties was abolished in the 1920s when the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes and the subsequent Kingdom of Yugoslavia introduced oblasts and banovinas respectively.

Communist-ruled Croatia, as a constituent part of post-World War II Yugoslavia, abolished earlier divisions and introduced municipalities, subdividing Croatia into approximately one hundred municipalities. Counties were reintroduced in 1992 legislation, significantly altered in terms of territory relative to the pre-1920s subdivisions. In 1918, the Transleithanian part was divided into eight counties with their seats in Bjelovar, Gospić, Ogulin, Osijek, Požega, Varaždin, Vukovar, and Zagreb.

As of 1992, Croatia is divided into 20 counties and the capital city of Zagreb, the latter having the dual authority and legal status of a county and a city. County borders changed in some instances, last revised in 2006. The counties subdivide into 127 cities and 429 municipalities. Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS) division is performed in several tiers. NUTS 1 level considers the entire country in a single unit; three NUTS 2 regions come below that. Those are Northwest Croatia, Central and Eastern (Pannonian) Croatia, and Adriatic Croatia. The latter encompasses the counties along the Adriatic coast. Northwest Croatia includes Koprivnica-Križevci, Krapina-Zagorje, Međimurje, Varaždin, the city of Zagreb, and Zagreb counties and the Central and Eastern (Pannonian) Croatia includes the remaining areas—Bjelovar-Bilogora, Brod-Posavina, Karlovac, Osijek-Baranja, Požega-Slavonia, Sisak-Moslavina, Virovitica-Podravina, and Vukovar-Syrmia counties. Individual counties and the city of Zagreb also represent NUTS 3 level subdivision units in Croatia. The NUTS local administrative unit (LAU) divisions are two-tiered. LAU 1 divisions match the counties and the city of Zagreb in effect making those the same as NUTS 3 units, while LAU 2 subdivisions correspond to cities and municipalities.

== Economy ==

Croatia&#x27;s economy qualifies as high-income and developed. International Monetary Fund data projects that Croatian nominal GDP will reach $88.08 Billion in 2024, or $22,966 per capita. Purchasing power parity (PPP) GDP will increase to $175.269 Billion, or $45,702 per capita. According to Eurostat, Croatian GDP per capita in PPS stood at 76% of the EU average in 2023, with real GDP growth for the year being 2.8%. The average net salary of a Croatian worker in April 2024 was €1,326 per month, the average gross salary roughly €1,834 per month. The unemployment rate dropped to 5.6% in that month, down from 7.2% in July 2019 and 9.6% in December 2018. The unemployment rate between 1996 and 2018 averaged 17.38%, reaching an all-time high of 23.60% in January 2002 and a record low of 8.40% in September 2018. In 2017, economic output was dominated by the service sector — accounting for 70.1% of GDP — followed by the industrial sector with 26.2% and agriculture accounting for 3.7%.

According to 2017 data, 1.9% of the workforce were employed in agriculture, 27.3% by industry and 70.8% in services. Shipbuilding, food processing, pharmaceuticals, information technology, biochemical, and timber industry dominate the industrial sector. In 2018, Croatian exports were valued at 108 Billion kunas (€14.61 Billion) with 176 Billion kunas (€23.82 Billion) worth of imports. Croatia&#x27;s largest trading partner was the rest of the European Union, led by Germany, Italy, and Slovenia. According to Eurostat, Croatia has the highest quantity of water resources per capita in the EU (30,000 m3).

As a result of the war, economic infrastructure sustained massive damage, particularly the tourism industry. From 1989 to 1993, the GDP fell 40.5%. The Croatian state still controls significant economic sectors, with government expenditures accounting for 40% of GDP. A particular concern is a backlogged judiciary system, with inefficient public administration and corruption, upending land ownership. In the 2022 Corruption Perceptions Index, published by Transparency International, the country ranked 57th. At the end of June 2020, the national debt stood at 85.3% of GDP.

=== Tourism ===

Tourism dominates the Croatian service sector and accounts for up to 20% of GDP. Tourism income for 2019 was estimated to be €10.5 billion. Its positive effects are felt throughout the economy, increasing retail business, and increasing seasonal employment. The industry is counted as an export business because foreign visitor spending significantly reduces the country&#x27;s trade imbalance.

The tourist industry has rapidly grown, recording a sharp rise in tourist numbers since independence, attracting more than 17 million visitors each year (). Germany, Slovenia, Austria, Italy, United Kingdom, Czechia, Poland, Hungary, France, Netherlands, Slovakia and Croatia itself provide the most visitors. Tourist stays averaged 4.7 days in 2019.

Much of the tourist industry is concentrated along the coast. Opatija was the first holiday resort. It first became popular in the middle of the 19th century. By the 1890s, it had become one of the largest European health resorts. Resorts sprang up along the coast and islands, offering services catering to mass tourism and various niche markets. The most significant are nautical tourism, supported by marinas with more than 16 thousand berths, cultural tourism relying on the appeal of medieval coastal cities and cultural events taking place during the summer. Inland areas offer agrotourism, mountain resorts, and spas. Zagreb is a significant destination, rivalling major coastal cities and resorts.

Croatia has unpolluted marine areas with nature reserves and 116 Blue Flag beaches. Croatia was ranked first in Europe for swimming water quality in 2022 by European Environmental Agency.

Croatia ranked as the 23rd-most popular tourist destination in the world according to the World Tourism Organization in 2019. About 15% of these visitors, or over one million per year, participate in naturism, for which Croatia is famous. It was the first European country to develop commercial naturist resorts. In 2023, luggage storage company Bounce gave Croatia the highest solo travel index in the world (7.58), while a joint Pinterest and Zola wedding trends report from 2023 put Croatia among the most popular honeymoon destinations.

=== Infrastructure ===

==== Transport ====

The motorway network was largely built in the late 1990s and the 2000s. As of December 2020, Croatia had completed of motorways, connecting Zagreb to other regions and following various European routes and four Pan-European corridors. The busiest motorways are the A1, connecting Zagreb to Split and the A3, passing east to west through northwest Croatia and Slavonia.

A widespread network of state roads in Croatia acts as motorway feeder roads while connecting major settlements. The high quality and safety levels of the Croatian motorway network were tested and confirmed by EuroTAP and EuroTest programmes.

Croatia has an extensive rail network spanning , including of electrified railways and of double track railways (). The most significant railways in Croatia are within the Pan-European transport corridors Vb and X connecting Rijeka to Budapest and Ljubljana to Belgrade, both via Zagreb. Croatian Railways operates all rail services.

The construction of 2.4-kilometre-long Pelješac Bridge, the biggest infrastructure project in Croatia connects the two halves of Dubrovnik-Neretva County and shortens the route from the West to the Pelješac peninsula and the islands of Korčula and Lastovo by more than 32 km. The construction of the Pelješac Bridge started in July 2018 after Croatian road operator Hrvatske ceste (HC) signed a 2.08 billion kuna deal for the works with a Chinese consortium led by China Road and Bridge Corporation (CRBC). The project is co-financed by the European Union with 357 million euro. The construction was completed in July 2022.

There are international airports in Dubrovnik, Osijek, Pula, Rijeka, Split, Zadar, and Zagreb. The largest and busiest is Franjo Tuđman Airport in Zagreb. , Croatia complies with International Civil Aviation Organization aviation safety standards and the Federal Aviation Administration upgraded it to Category 1 rating.

==== Ports ====
The busiest cargo seaport is the Port of Rijeka. The busiest passenger ports are Split and Zadar. Many minor ports serve ferries connecting numerous islands and coastal cities with ferry lines to several cities in Italy. The largest river port is Vukovar, located on the Danube, representing the nation&#x27;s outlet to the Pan-European transport corridor VII.

==== Energy ====
 of crude oil pipelines serve Croatia, connecting the Rijeka oil terminal with refineries in Rijeka and Sisak, and several transhipment terminals.
The system has a capacity of 20 million tonnes per year. The natural gas transportation system comprises of trunk and regional pipelines, and more than 300 associated structures, connecting production rigs, the Okoli natural gas storage facility, 27 end-users and 37 distribution systems. Croatia also plays an important role in regional energy security. The floating liquefied natural gas import terminal off Krk island LNG Hrvatska commenced operations on January 1, 2021, positioning Croatia as a regional energy leader and contributing to diversification of Europe&#x27;s energy supply.

In 2010, Croatian energy production covered 85% of nationwide natural gas and 19% of oil demand. In 2016, Croatia&#x27;s primary energy production involved natural gas (24.8%), hydropower (28.3%), crude oil (13.6%), fuelwood (27.6%), and heat pumps and other renewable energy sources (5.7%). In 2017, net total electrical power production reached 11,543 GWh, while it imported 12,157 GWh or about 40% of its electric power energy needs.

Krško Nuclear Power Plant (Slovenia) supplies a large part of Croatian imports. 50% is owned by Hrvatska elektroprivreda, providing 15% of Croatia&#x27;s electricity.

== Demographics ==

Ethnic map of Croatia by municipalities (2021)

With an estimated population of 3.87 million in 2021, Croatia ranks 127th by population in the world. Its 2018 population density was 72.9 inhabitants per square kilometre, making Croatia one of the more sparsely populated European countries. The overall life expectancy in Croatia at birth was 76.3 years in 2018.

The total fertility rate of 1.41 children per mother, is one of the lowest in the world, far below the replacement rate of 2.1; it remains considerably below the high of 6.18 children rate in 1885. Croatia&#x27;s death rate has continuously exceeded its birth rate since 1998. Croatia subsequently has one of the world&#x27;s oldest populations, with an average age of 43.3 years. The population rose steadily from 2.1 million in 1857 until 1991, when it peaked at 4.7 million, with the exceptions of censuses taken in 1921 and 1948, i.e., following the world wars. The natural growth rate is negative with the demographic transition completed in the 1970s. In recent years, the Croatian government has been pressured to increase permit quotas for foreign workers, reaching an all-time high of 68.100 in 2019. In accordance with its immigration policy, Croatia is trying to entice emigrants to return. From 2008 to 2018, Croatia&#x27;s population dropped by 10%.

The population decrease was greater a result of war for independence. The war displaced large numbers of the population and emigration increased. In 1991, in predominantly occupied areas, more than 400,000 Croats were either removed from their homes by Serb forces or fled the violence. During the war&#x27;s final days, about 150–200,000 Serbs fled before the arrival of Croatian forces during Operation Storm. After the war, the number of displaced persons fell to about 250,000. The Croatian government cared for displaced persons via the social security system and the Office of Displaced Persons and Refugees. Most of the territories abandoned during the war were settled by Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, mostly from north-western Bosnia, while some displaced people returned to their homes.

According to the 2013 United Nations report, 17.6% of Croatia&#x27;s population were immigrants. According to the 2021 census, the majority of inhabitants are Croats (91.6%), followed by Serbs (3.2%), Bosniaks (0.62%), Roma (0.46%), Albanians (0.36%), Italians (0.36%), Hungarians (0.27%), Czechs (0.20%), Slovenes (0.20%), Slovaks (0.10%), Macedonians (0.09%), Germans (0.09%), Montenegrins (0.08%), and others (1.56%). Approximately 4 million Croats live abroad.

=== Religion ===

Croatia has no official religion. Freedom of religion is a Constitutional right that protects all religious communities as equal before the law and considers them separated from the state.

According to the 2011 census, 91.36% of Croatians identify as Christian; of these, Catholics make up the largest group, accounting for 86.28% of the population, after which follows Eastern Orthodoxy (4.44%), Protestantism (0.34%), and other Christians (0.30%). The largest religion after Christianity is Islam (1.47%). 4.57% of the population describe itself as non-religious. In the Eurostat Eurobarometer Poll of 2010, 69% of the population responded that &quot;they believe there is a God&quot;. In a 2009 Gallup poll, 70% answered yes to the question &quot;Is religion an important part of your daily life?&quot; Yet, only 24% of the population attends religious services regularly.

=== Languages ===

Croatian is the official language of the Republic of Croatia. Minority languages are in official use in local government units where more than a third of the population consists of national minorities or where local enabling legislation applies. Those languages are Czech, Hungarian, Italian, Serbian, and Slovak. The following minority languages are also recognised: Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, German, Hebrew, Macedonian, Montenegrin, Polish, Romanian, Istro-Romanian, Romani, Russian, Rusyn, Slovene, Turkish, and Ukrainian.

According to the 2011 Census, 95.6% of citizens declared Croatian as their native language, 1.2% declared Serbian as their native language, while no other language reaches more than 0.5%. Croatian is a member of the South Slavic languages and is written using the Latin alphabet. There are three major dialects spoken on the territory of Croatia, with standard Croatian based on the Shtokavian dialect. The Chakavian and Kajkavian dialects are distinguished from Shtokavian by their lexicon, phonology and syntax.

A 2011 survey revealed that 78% of Croats claim knowledge of at least one foreign language. According to a 2005 EC survey, 49% of Croats speak English as the second language, 34% speak German, 14% speak Italian, 10% speak French, 4% speak Russian and 2% speak Spanish. However several large municipalities support minority languages. A majority of Slovenes (59%) have some knowledge of Croatian. The country is a part of various language-based international associations, most notably the European Union Language Association.

=== Education ===

Literacy in Croatia stands at 99.2 per cent. Primary education in Croatia starts at the age of six or seven and consists of eight grades. In 2007 a law was passed to increase free, noncompulsory education until 18 years of age. Compulsory education consists of eight grades of elementary school.

Secondary education is provided by gymnasiums and vocational schools. As of 2019, there are 2,103 elementary schools and 738 schools providing various forms of secondary education. Primary and secondary education are also available in languages of recognised minorities in Croatia, where classes are held in Czech, Hungarian, Italian, Serbian, German and Slovak languages.

There are 133 elementary and secondary level music and art schools, as well as 83 elementary and 44 secondary schools for disabled children and youth and 11 elementary and 52 secondary schools for adults. Nationwide leaving exams () were introduced for secondary education students in the school year 2009–2010. It comprises three compulsory subjects (Croatian language, mathematics, and a foreign language) and optional subjects and is a prerequisite for university education.
Croatia has eight public universities and two private universities. The University of Zadar, the first university in Croatia, was founded in 1396 and remained active until 1807, when other institutions of higher education took over until the foundation of the renewed University of Zadar in 2002. The University of Zagreb, founded in 1669, is the oldest continuously operating university in Southeast Europe. There are also 15 polytechnics, of which two are private, and 30 higher education institutions, of which 27 are private. In total, there are 131 institutions of higher education in Croatia, attended by more than 160 thousand students.

There are 254 companies, government or education system institutions and non-profit organisations in Croatia pursuing scientific research and development of technology. Combined, they spent around 3 billion kuna (€400 million) gross and employed 11,801 full-time research staff in 2016. Among the scientific institutes operating in Croatia, the largest is the Ruđer Bošković Institute in Zagreb. The Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts in Zagreb is a learned society promoting language, culture, arts and science from its inception in 1866. Croatia was ranked 43rd in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

The European Investment Bank provided digital infrastructure and equipment to around 150 primary and secondary schools in Croatia. Twenty of these schools got specialised assistance in the form of gear, software, and services to help them integrate the teaching and administrative operations.

=== Healthcare ===


Croatia has a universal health care system, whose roots can be traced back to the Hungarian-Croatian Parliament Act of 1891, providing a form of mandatory insurance of all factory workers and craftsmen. The population is covered by a basic health insurance plan provided by statute and optional insurance. In 2017, annual healthcare related expenditures reached 22.2 billion kuna (around €3.0 billion). Healthcare expenditures comprise only 0.6% of private health insurance and public spending. In 2017, Croatia spent around 6.6% of its GDP on healthcare.
In 2020, Croatia ranked 41st in the world in life expectancy with 76.0 years for men and 82.0 years for women, and it had a low infant mortality rate of 3.4 per 1,000 live births.

There are hundreds of healthcare institutions in Croatia, including 75 hospitals, and 13 clinics with 23,049 beds. The hospitals and clinics care for more than 700 thousand patients per year and employ 6,642 medical doctors, including 4,773 specialists. There is a total of 69,841 health workers. There are 119 emergency units in health centres, responding to more than a million calls. The principal cause of death in 2016 was cardiovascular disease at 39.7% for men and 50.1% for women, followed by tumours, at 32.5% for men and 23.4% for women. In 2016 it was estimated that 37.0% of Croatians are smokers. According to 2016 data, 24.40% of the Croatian adult population is obese.

== Language ==

Standard Croatian is the official language of the Republic of Croatia, and has been an official language of the European Union since Croatia&#x27;s accession in 2013. Croatian replaced Latin as the official language of the Croatian government in the 19th century. Following the Vienna Literary Agreement in 1850, the language and its Latin alphabet underwent reforms to create an unified &quot;Croatian or Serbian&quot; or &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; standard, which under various names became the official language of Yugoslavia. In SFR Yugoslavia, from 1972 to 1989, the language was constitutionally designated as the &quot;Croatian literary language&quot; and the &quot;Croatian or Serbian language&quot;. It was the result of a resistance to and secession from &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; in the form of the Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Literary Language as part of the Croatian Spring. Since gaining independence in the early 1990s, the Republic of Croatia constitutionally designates the language as &quot;Croatian language&quot; and regulates it through linguistic prescription. The long-standing aspiration for development of its own expressions and thus enrichment of the language, as opposed to the adoption of foreign solutions in the form of loanwords, has been described by linguists as Croatian linguistic purism.

== Culture ==


Because of its geographical position, Croatia represents a blend of four different cultural spheres. It has been a crossroads of influences from western culture and the east since the schism between the Western Roman Empire and the Byzantine Empire, and also from Central Europe and Mediterranean culture. The Illyrian movement was the most significant period of national cultural history, as the 19th century proved crucial to the emancipation of Croatians and saw unprecedented developments in all fields of art and culture, giving rise to many historical figures.

The Ministry of Culture is tasked with preserving the nation&#x27;s cultural and natural heritage and overseeing its development. Further activities supporting the development of culture are undertaken at the local government level. The UNESCO&#x27;s World Heritage List includes ten sites in Croatia and a list of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Croatia. The country is also rich with intangible culture and holds 15 of UNESCO&#x27;s World&#x27;s intangible culture masterpieces, ranking fourth in the world. A global cultural contribution from Croatia is the necktie, derived from the cravat originally worn by the 17th-century Croatian mercenaries in France.

In 2019, Croatia had 95 professional theatres, 30 professional children&#x27;s theatres, and 51 amateur theatres visited by more than 2.27 million viewers per year. Professional theatres employ 1,195 artists. There are 42 professional orchestras, ensembles, and choirs, attracting an annual attendance of 297 thousand. There are 75 cinemas with 166 screens and attendance of 5.026 million.

Croatia has 222 museums, visited by more than 2.71 million people in 2016. Furthermore, there are 1,768 libraries, containing 26.8 million volumes, and 19 state archives. The book publishing market is dominated by several major publishers and the industry&#x27;s centrepiece event—Interliber exhibition held annually at Zagreb Fair.

=== Arts, literature, and music===

Architecture in Croatia reflects influences of bordering nations. Austrian and Hungarian influence is visible in public spaces and buildings in the north and the central regions, architecture found along coasts of Dalmatia and Istria exhibits Venetian influence. Squares named after culture heroes, parks, and pedestrian-only zones, are features of Croatian towns and cities, especially where large scale Baroque urban planning took place, for instance in Osijek (Tvrđa), Varaždin, and Karlovac. The subsequent influence of the Art Nouveau was reflected in contemporary architecture. The architecture is the Mediterranean with a Venetian and Renaissance influence in major coastal urban areas exemplified in works of Giorgio da Sebenico and Nicolas of Florence such as the Cathedral of St. James in Šibenik. The oldest preserved examples of Croatian architecture are the 9th-century churches, with the largest and the most representative among them being Church of St. Donatus in Zadar.

Besides the architecture encompassing the oldest artworks, there is a history of artists in Croatia reaching the Middle Ages. In that period the stone portal of the Trogir Cathedral was made by Radovan, representing the most important monument of Romanesque sculpture from Medieval Croatia. The Renaissance had the greatest impact on the Adriatic Sea coast since the remainder was embroiled in the Hundred Years&#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War. With the waning of the Ottoman Empire, art flourished during the Baroque and Rococo. The 19th and 20th centuries brought affirmation of numerous Croatian artisans, helped by several patrons of the arts such as bishop Josip Juraj Strossmayer. Croatian artists of the period achieving renown were Vlaho Bukovac, Ivan Meštrović, and Ivan Generalić.

The Baška tablet, a stone inscribed with the glagolitic alphabet found on the Krk island and dated to , is considered to be the oldest surviving prose in Croatian. The beginning of more vigorous development of Croatian literature is marked by the Renaissance and Marko Marulić. Besides Marulić, Renaissance playwright Marin Držić, Baroque poet Ivan Gundulić, Croatian national revival poet Ivan Mažuranić, novelist, playwright, and poet August Šenoa, children&#x27;s writer Ivana Brlić-Mažuranić, writer and journalist Marija Jurić Zagorka, poet and writer Antun Gustav Matoš, poet Antun Branko Šimić, expressionist and realist writer Miroslav Krleža, poet Tin Ujević and novelist, and short story writer Ivo Andrić are often cited as the greatest figures in Croatian literature.

Croatian music varies from classical operas to modern-day rock. Vatroslav Lisinski created the country&#x27;s first opera, &quot;Love and Malice&quot;, in 1846. Ivan Zajc composed more than a thousand pieces of music, including masses and oratorios. Pianist Ivo Pogorelić has performed across the world.

=== Media ===

In Croatia, the Constitution guarantees the freedom of the press and the freedom of speech. Croatia ranked 64th in the 2019 Press Freedom Index report compiled by Reporters Without Borders which noted that journalists who investigate corruption, organised crime or war crimes face challenges and that the Government was trying to influence the public broadcaster HRT&#x27;s editorial policies. In its 2019 Freedom in the World report, the Freedom House classified freedoms of press and speech in Croatia as generally free from political interference and manipulation, noting that journalists still face threats and occasional attacks. The state-owned news agency HINA runs a wire service in Croatian and English on politics, economics, society, and culture.

, there are thirteen nationwide free-to-air DVB-T television channels, with Croatian Radiotelevision (HRT) operating four, RTL Televizija three, and Nova TV operating two channels, and the Croatian Olympic Committee, Kapital Net d.o.o., and Author d.o.o. companies operate the remaining three. Also, there are 21 regional or local DVB-T television channels. The HRT is also broadcasting a satellite TV channel. In 2020, there were 147 radio stations and 27 TV stations in Croatia. Cable television and IPTV networks are gaining ground. Cable television already serves 450 thousand people, around 10% of the total population of the country.

In 2010, 267 newspapers and 2,676 magazines were published in Croatia. The print media market is dominated by the Croatian-owned Hanza Media and Austrian-owned Styria Media Group who publish their flagship dailies , and . Other influential newspapers are &quot;Novi list&quot; and &quot;Slobodna Dalmacija&quot;. In 2020, &quot;24sata&quot; was the most widely circulated daily newspaper, followed by &quot;Večernji list&quot; and &quot;Jutarnji list&quot;.

Croatia competed in the Eurovision Song Contest as part of Yugoslavia since 1961. The first and only victory Yugoslavia achieved in the competition was accomplished by the Croatian pop band Riva in 1989. Since its debut at the 1993 contest, Croatia won two fourth places at the 1996 and 1999 contests, and one second place at the 2024 contest, marking the country&#x27;s best result to date as an independent nation.

=== Film Industry===

Croatia&#x27;s film industry is small and heavily subsidised by the government, mainly through grants approved by the Ministry of Culture with films often being co-produced by HRT. Croatian cinema produces between five and ten feature films per year. Pula Film Festival, the national film awards event held annually in Pula, is the most prestigious film event featuring national and international productions. Animafest Zagreb, founded in 1972, is the prestigious annual film festival dedicated to the animated film. The first greatest accomplishment by Croatian filmmakers was achieved by Dušan Vukotić when he won the 1961 Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film for &quot;Ersatz&quot; (). Croatian film producer Branko Lustig won the Academy Awards for Best Picture for &quot;Schindler&#x27;s List&quot; and &quot;Gladiator&quot;. In addition to that, Croatian filmmaker got nominated for 97th Academy Awards in category for Best Live Action Short Film for his 2024 movie &quot;The Man Who Could Not Remain Silent&quot; (Croatian: ), making it first Croatian nomination in that category, and first since its independence.

Before and since its independence, Croatia has become a popular filming destination amongs international filming productions, and a lot of blockbuster films and TV series have been filmed in Croatia including: &quot;Game of Thrones&quot;, &quot;Star Wars: The Last Jedi&quot;, &quot;Robin Hood&quot; in Dubrovnik, &quot;Speak No Evil&quot; and &quot;Season of the Witch&quot; in Istria, &quot;Infinity Pool&quot; in Šibenik, &quot;Canary Black&quot;, &quot;Hitman&#x27;s Wife&#x27;s Bodyguard&quot;, &quot;Sophie&#x27;s Choice&quot; and &quot;Fiddler on the roof&quot; in Zagreb, &quot;Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again&quot; on island of Vis, &quot;Hercules&quot;, &quot;The Weekend Away&quot;, &quot;Bliss&quot; in Split, &quot;The Peacemaker&quot; and many others. Croatia became international filming location due to its biodiversity, landscape that can accommodate every visual requirements and cheaper filming costs. In last 11 years there has been 122 projects for international films in Croatia, and €263 million spent as part of the Filming in Croatia which increased in last years due to high demand for its location.

=== Cuisine ===
Croatian traditional cuisine varies from one region to another. Dalmatia and Istria have culinary influences of Italian and other Mediterranean cuisines which prominently feature various seafood, cooked vegetables and pasta, and condiments such as olive oil and garlic. Austrian, Hungarian, Turkish, and Balkan culinary styles influenced continental cuisine. In that area, meats, freshwater fish, and vegetable dishes are predominant.

There are two distinct wine-producing regions in Croatia. The continental in the northeast of the country, especially Slavonia, produces premium wines, particularly whites. Along the north coast, Istrian and Krk wines are similar to those in neighbouring Italy, while further south in Dalmatia, Mediterranean-style red wines are the norm. Annual production of wine exceeds 72 million litres . Croatia was almost exclusively a wine-consuming country up until the late 18th century when a more massive beer production and consumption started.

There are 11 restaurants in Croatia with a Michelin star and 89 restaurants bearing some of the Michelin&#x27;s marks.

=== Sports ===


There are more than 400,000 active sportspeople in Croatia. Croatia has a strong sporting tradition, and sport is an essential part of the educational system at all levels. Many young people engage in sports both within and outside of school, with many of these activities becoming a regular part of daily life as a form of recreation. In order to continue achieving success and further strengthen sports, the Croatian Parliament adopted the first National Sports Program for the period 2019–2026 in 2019, based on the Sports Act, recognizing sport as an activity of special importance to the country.

There are approximately 12,500 active sports associations in Croatia. Football is the most popular sport, with around 1,500 registered clubs and about 127,000 active players. Like in many other European countries, sports in Croatia are funded through both public and private sources, including government and local budgets, sponsorships, memberships, and household contributions. In recent years, the European Union has also provided increasing financial support.

The highest sports organization in the country is the Croatian Olympic Committee (HOO), established in 1991. The HOO oversees 86 national sports federations, 42 of which represent Olympic sports, while 44 are non-Olympic sports. Association football is the most popular sport. The Croatian Football Federation (), with more than 118,000 registered players, is the largest sporting association.

====Football====

Football is the most popular sport in Croatia, its umbrella organization is the Croatian Football Federation. The Croatian national football team first participated in FIFA World Cup in 1998, when they came in third, and kept participating in 2002, 2006, 2014, 2018 and in the 2022 FIFA World Cup. Croatian national football team made it to the finals in the 2018 FIFA World Cup, when they eventually lost to France, becoming runners-up (2nd). The match was attended by 78,000 people in Luzhniki Stadium. Croatian footballer Luka Modrić received Golden Ball. This achievement had major impact on Croatian sport and culture, gathering more than 550,000 fans in Zagreb, when they came back from Russia. Four years later, in 2022, Croatia made it to 3rd place of FIFA World Cup, making another achievement in Croatian Sport. Prva HNL football league attracts the highest average attendance of any professional sports league. In season 2010–11, it attracted 458,746 spectators.

====Athletes====
Croatian athletes competing at international events since Croatian independence in 1991 won 44 Olympic medals, including 15 gold medals. Also, Croatian athletes won 16 gold medals at world championships, including four in athletics at the World Championships in Athletics.

====Handball====
Croatia has often been portrayed as an international force in handball, having won the gold at the Olympic Games twice, one World Championship, and have played in the finals of the European Championship, three times. The Croatian national team that won the 1996 Olympics gold medal. Croatia won their first major trophy at the 2003 World Men&#x27;s Handball Championship. During 2025 World Men&#x27;s Handball Championship, Croatia men&#x27;s national handball team made it to the finals, and took 2nd place, after losing to Denmark. The event took place in Croatia, as well in Denmark and Norway.

====Tennis====
In tennis, they won Davis Cup in 2005 and 2018. Croatia&#x27;s most successful male players Goran Ivanišević and Marin Čilić have both won Grand Slam titles and have got into the top 3 of the ATP rankings. Ognjen Cvitan won the World Junior Chess Championship in 1981. In waterpolo, they have three world titles. Iva Majoli became the first Croatian female player to win the French Open when she won it in 1997.

===Sport events===
Croatia hosted several major sports competitions, including the 2009 World Men&#x27;s Handball Championship, the 2007 World Table Tennis Championships, the 2000 World Rowing Championships, the 1987 Summer Universiade, the 1979 Mediterranean Games, and several European Championships, including the 2000, 2018 and 2025 World Men&#x27;s Handball Championship, 2024 Men&#x27;s European Water Polo Championship.

The governing sports authority is the Croatian Olympic Committee (), founded on 10 September 1991 and recognised by the International Olympic Committee since 17 January 1992, in time to permit the Croatian athletes to appear at the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville, France representing the newly independent nation for the first time at the Olympic Games.

== Technology ==
In November 1992, the first international connection linking Zagreb and Vienna became operational, making it the first internet in Croatia.

70% of the Croatia&#x27;s population regularly uses the internet and 55% have been reported to have basic technological skills.

== See also ==

* Outline of Croatia
* Index of Croatia-related articles

== Explanatory notes ==
== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* Key Development Forecasts for Croatia from International Futures</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="0" end="7" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="24" end="43" title="Croatia" label="Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="61" end="68" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="73" end="89" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="111" end="123" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="136" end="144" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="163" end="170" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="189" end="195" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="209" end="231" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="236" end="246" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="278" end="293" title="maritime border" label="maritime border"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="299" end="304" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="348" end="354" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435941" start="388" end="408" title="Administrative divisions of Croatia" label="primary subdivisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q57053" start="415" end="430" title="Counties of Croatia" label="twenty counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="466" end="471" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="473" end="479" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="484" end="490" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="561" end="567" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="636" end="649" title="Illyria" label="Roman Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576305" start="709" end="720" title="Duchy of Croatia" label="two duchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q898531" start="821" end="829" title="Branimir of Croatia" label="Branimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q319638" start="831" end="839" title="Tomislav of Croatia" label="Tomislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q858841" start="907" end="914" title="Kingdom of Croatia (925–1102)" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259999" start="955" end="974" title="Trpimirović dynasty" label="Trpimirović dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="990" end="997" title="Croatia in personal union with Hungary" label="entered"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="1000" end="1014" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="1020" end="1027" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502774" start="1057" end="1073" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War" label="Ottoman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="1079" end="1098" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q150611" start="1107" end="1129" title="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="1175" end="1211" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1234" end="1249" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985477" start="1302" end="1308" title="Creation of Yugoslavia" label="merged"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="1318" end="1339" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="1360" end="1382" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="1471" end="1499" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638126" start="1503" end="1522" title="Croatian Partisans" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="1550" end="1579" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="Socialist Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="1649" end="1689" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016257" start="1716" end="1737" title="Independence of Croatia" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="1747" end="1766" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="1831" end="1839" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="1850" end="1870" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1894" end="1908" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="1914" end="1922" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="1928" end="1941" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1943" end="1947" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1953" end="1967" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="1973" end="1990" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="1996" end="2000" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2006" end="2030" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="2057" end="2084" title="Union for the Mediterranean" label="Union for the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="2133" end="2137" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q219575" start="2164" end="2191" title="United Nations peacekeeping" label="United Nations peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="2227" end="2266" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="International Security Assistance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="2319" end="2350" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856148" start="2358" end="2372" title="2007 United Nations Security Council election" label="2008–2009 term"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="2407" end="2424" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="2442" end="2461" title="World Bank high-income economy" label="high-income economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="2463" end="2470" title="Service (economics)" label="Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="2472" end="2490" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="industrial sectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="2496" end="2507" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067" start="2521" end="2528" title="Economy of Croatia" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q898224" start="2530" end="2537" title="Tourism in Croatia" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="2663" end="2682" title="Government of Croatia" label="Croatian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662678" start="2734" end="2765" title="Transport in Croatia" label="transport routes and facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q671469" start="2776" end="2798" title="Pan-European corridors" label="Pan-European corridors"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="2973" end="2994" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059" start="3015" end="3018" title="Krk" label="Krk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684768" start="3027" end="3039" title="LNG Hrvatska" label="LNG Hrvatska"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="3058" end="3073" title="Welfare spending" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691252" start="3075" end="3096" title="Healthcare in Croatia" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439910" start="3115" end="3146" title="Education in Croatia" label="primary and secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748196" start="3164" end="3171" title="Culture of Croatia" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916325" start="3229" end="3234" title="Mass media in Croatia" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221620" start="3239" end="3249" title="Croatian literature" label="publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="3284" end="3294" title="Endonym and exonym" label="non-native"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961525" start="3295" end="3299" title="Names of the Croats and Croatia" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="3313" end="3327" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145852" start="3353" end="3370" title="West Slavic languages" label="North-West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291644" start="3376" end="3393" title="Slavic liquid metathesis and pleophony" label="liquid metathesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="3455" end="3467" title="Proto-Slavic language" label="Proto-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q749834" start="3523" end="3539" title="Scythian languages" label="Scytho-Sarmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358309" start="3561" end="3575" title="Tanais Tablets" label="Tanais Tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q33968" start="3693" end="3707" title="Ossetian language" label="Proto-Ossetian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3710" end="3717" title="Scythian languages#Alanian" label="Alanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330496" start="3984" end="3996" title="Baška tablet" label="Baška tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767753" start="4000" end="4005" title="Style (form of address)" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q470647" start="4040" end="4048" title="Demetrius Zvonimir of Croatia" label="Zvonimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q252619" start="4050" end="4063" title="List of rulers of Croatia" label="Croatian king"/>
<link wikidata="Q859854" start="4183" end="4189" title="Bijaći" label="Bijaći"/>
<link wikidata="Q189161" start="4195" end="4201" title="Trogir" label="Trogir"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="4280" end="4291" title="Epigraphy" label="inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957376" start="4341" end="4361" title="Branimir inscription" label="Branimir inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q397443" start="4373" end="4381" title="Benkovac" label="Benkovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q898531" start="4394" end="4402" title="Branimir of Croatia" label="Branimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q470713" start="4554" end="4574" title="Trpimir I of Croatia" label="Trpimir I of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="4820" end="4838" title="prehistoric period" label="prehistoric period"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="4840" end="4851" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="4881" end="4893" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12632775" start="4959" end="4971" title="Krapina Neanderthal site" label="Krapina site"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="4985" end="4994" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="4999" end="5011" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q687230" start="5144" end="5149" title="Baden culture" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483547" start="5151" end="5159" title="Starčevo culture" label="Starčevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q922829" start="5165" end="5180" title="Vučedol culture" label="Vučedol culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5183" end="5191" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q202165" start="5218" end="5235" title="Hallstatt culture" label="Hallstatt culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="5251" end="5266" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="5317" end="5326" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259473" start="5331" end="5341" title="Liburnians" label="Liburnians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5993" start="5409" end="5413" title="Hvar" label="Hvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13288" start="5415" end="5422" title="Korčula" label="Korčula"/>
<link wikidata="Q203767" start="5428" end="5431" title="Vis (island)" label="Vis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5499" end="5511" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="5521" end="5531" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q322287" start="5561" end="5585" title="Diocletian&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="had a large palace built"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="5589" end="5594" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q125740" start="5673" end="5707" title="last de jure Western Roman Emperor" label="last de jure Western Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103860" start="5708" end="5720" title="Julius Nepos" label="Julius Nepos"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="5833" end="5837" title="Avars (Carpathians)" label="Avar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="5842" end="5847" title="Croat" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="6056" end="6065" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989678" start="6101" end="6110" title="Epidaurum" label="Epidaurum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562575" start="6153" end="6175" title="Origin hypotheses of the Croats" label="ethnogenesis of Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q997263" start="6244" end="6256" title="White Croats" label="White Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q167672" start="6262" end="6275" title="White Croatia" label="White Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="6287" end="6303" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="6345" end="6354" title="Sarmatian" label="Sarmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178054" start="6355" end="6361" title="Alans" label="Alanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358309" start="6395" end="6409" title="Tanais Tablets" label="Tanais Tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="6421" end="6434" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973833" start="6603" end="6614" title="anthroponym" label="anthroponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961525" start="6631" end="6648" title="Names of the Croats and Croatia" label="Croatian ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q463903" start="6679" end="6703" title="De Administrando Imperio" label="De Administrando Imperio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="6752" end="6767" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="6769" end="6775" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330965" start="6791" end="6817" title="Roman province of Dalmatia" label="Roman province of Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="6879" end="6884" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="7142" end="7149" title="dukedom (administrative division)" label="dukedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576305" start="7162" end="7178" title="Duchy of Croatia" label="Duchy of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q893940" start="7189" end="7194" title="Borna (duke)" label="Borna"/>
<link wikidata="Q154526" start="7225" end="7232" title="Einhard" label="Einhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="7311" end="7324" title="vassal states" label="vassal states"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="7328" end="7335" title="Francia" label="Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840813" start="7379" end="7409" title="Principality of Lower Pannonia" label="Principality of Lower Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q725901" start="7437" end="7445" title="Ljudevit (Lower Pannonia)" label="Ljudevit"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="7484" end="7489" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="7494" end="7498" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="7532" end="7537" title="Sisak" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="7646" end="7662" title="Christianisation" label="Christianisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272332" start="7720" end="7736" title="Porga of Croatia" label="Porga of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913524" start="7896" end="7902" title="Mislav of Croatia" label="Mislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q470713" start="7921" end="7930" title="Trpimir I of Croatia" label="Trpimir I"/>
<link wikidata="Q898531" start="8133" end="8141" title="Branimir of Croatia" label="Branimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q170504" start="8179" end="8193" title="Pope John VIII" label="Pope John VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q319638" start="8209" end="8217" title="Tomislav of Croatia" label="Tomislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q252619" start="8232" end="8247" title="king of Croatia" label="king of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227976" start="8278" end="8289" title="Pope John X" label="Pope John X"/>
<link wikidata="Q281316" start="8439" end="8456" title="Petar Krešimir IV" label="Petar Krešimir IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q470647" start="8473" end="8488" title="Dmitar Zvonimir" label="Dmitar Zvonimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060057" start="8507" end="8517" title="Stephen II of Croatia" label="Stjepan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q26486" start="8602" end="8624" title="Ladislaus I of Hungary" label="Ladislaus I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q842361" start="8667" end="8670" title="Battle of Gvozd Mountain" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="8675" end="8702" title="personal union of Croatia and Hungary" label="personal union with Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q83066" start="8717" end="8724" title="Coloman, King of Hungary" label="Coloman"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="8837" end="8842" title="Sabor" label="Sabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="8862" end="8865" title="Ban of Croatia" label="Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q943292" start="8960" end="8969" title="Frankopan" label="Frankopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q378793" start="8974" end="8979" title="Šubić" label="Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="9080" end="9087" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="9124" end="9142" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="9242" end="9265" title="city-state of Dubrovnik" label="city-state of Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502774" start="9293" end="9310" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War" label="Ottoman conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q694379" start="9327" end="9349" title="Battle of Krbava field" label="Battle of Krbava field"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="9363" end="9379" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Battle of Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q157092" start="9429" end="9437" title="Louis II of Hungary" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436757" start="9471" end="9503" title="Croatian Parliament met in Cetin" label="Croatian Parliament met in Cetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="9533" end="9550" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q699015" start="9845" end="9871" title="Croatian Military Frontier" label="Croatian Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q701335" start="9965" end="9980" title="Battle of Sisak" label="Battle of Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q74623" start="10053" end="10070" title="Great Turkish War" label="Great Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="10084" end="10092" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="10119" end="10125" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="10301" end="10309" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q699602" start="10373" end="10378" title="Cretan War (1645–1669)" label="Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q694835" start="10387" end="10416" title="Seventh Ottoman–Venetian Wars" label="Seventh Ottoman–Venetian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396146" start="10423" end="10435" title="Croatian–Ottoman wars" label="Ottoman wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="10521" end="10527" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="10529" end="10533" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110862" start="10535" end="10541" title="Krbava" label="Krbava"/>
<link wikidata="Q212927" start="10571" end="10574" title="Una (Sava)" label="Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q211046" start="10579" end="10583" title="Kupa" label="Kupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="10613" end="10621" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="10640" end="10647" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q701314" start="10661" end="10678" title="Burgenland Croats" label="Burgenland Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q221242" start="10825" end="10842" title="Military Frontier" label="Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="10849" end="10868" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="10879" end="10895" title="Emperor Charles VI" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q313102" start="10903" end="10921" title="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713" label="Pragmatic Sanction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789629" start="10943" end="10969" title="Pragmatic Sanction in 1712" label="Pragmatic Sanction in 1712"/>
<link wikidata="Q623573" start="11059" end="11077" title="Kingdom of Croatia (Habsburg)" label="Kingdom of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="11083" end="11102" title="Queen Maria Theresa" label="Queen Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="11225" end="11244" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="11279" end="11287" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="11346" end="11363" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Ragusan republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="11382" end="11400" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="11419" end="11429" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096663" start="11430" end="11456" title="blockade of the Adriatic Sea" label="blockaded the Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473448" start="11473" end="11486" title="Battle of Lissa (1811)" label="Battle of Vis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="11578" end="11593" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="11608" end="11626" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q698248" start="11669" end="11688" title="Kingdom of Dalmatia" label="Kingdom of Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789654" start="11716" end="11733" title="Croatian Littoral" label="Croatian Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="11806" end="11826" title="romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="11845" end="11870" title="Croatian National Revival" label="Croatian National Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="11930" end="11941" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="12038" end="12047" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221620" start="12064" end="12083" title="Croatian literature" label="Croatian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="12108" end="12136" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q154418" start="12170" end="12183" title="Josip Jelačić" label="Josip Jelačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="12238" end="12251" title="Germanisation" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="12333" end="12368" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="12388" end="12402" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="12439" end="12457" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q195384" start="12544" end="12573" title="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement" label="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="12709" end="12715" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473814" start="12739" end="12767" title="Corpus separatum (Fiume)" label="&amp;quot;corpus separatum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="12806" end="12821" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q609233" start="12822" end="12853" title="Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="occupied Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="12868" end="12889" title="1878 Treaty of Berlin" label="1878 Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q877234" start="12945" end="12954" title="Slavonian Military Frontier" label="Slavonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q666670" start="13082" end="13104" title="reform Austria-Hungary" label="reform Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="13116" end="13130" title="federalisation" label="federalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="13179" end="13190" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="13356" end="13392" title="State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="13436" end="13453" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="13485" end="13523" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280950" start="13606" end="13623" title="1921 constitution" label="1921 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="13650" end="13663" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q638194" start="13870" end="13892" title="Croatian Peasant Party" label="Croatian Peasant Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q347471" start="13906" end="13919" title="Stjepan Radić" label="Stjepan Radić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969543" start="14000" end="14017" title="Yugoslav Parliament" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="14047" end="14058" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436252" start="14087" end="14109" title="6 January Dictatorship" label="6 January Dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q254114" start="14230" end="14242" title="Vladko Maček" label="Vladko Maček"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382617" start="14299" end="14324" title="Cvetković–Maček Agreement" label="Cvetković–Maček Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q601252" start="14359" end="14378" title="Banovina of Croatia" label="Banovina of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="14584" end="14607" title="Invasion of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia was occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="14611" end="14623" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="14628" end="14641" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="14717" end="14745" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="14828" end="14834" title="Syrmia" label="Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888258" start="14893" end="14909" title="Treaties of Rome (1941)" label="annexed by Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q790230" start="14960" end="14967" title="Baranya (region)" label="Baranja"/>
<link wikidata="Q16114261" start="14972" end="14981" title="Međimurje (region)" label="Međimurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q36965" start="15009" end="15021" title="Ante Pavelić" label="Ante Pavelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="15043" end="15049" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348882" start="15167" end="15178" title="Nazi racial theories" label="racial laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="15194" end="15225" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="genocide campaign against Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509326" start="15227" end="15231" title="History of the Jews in Croatia" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502513" start="15237" end="15241" title="Romani people in Croatia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351708" start="15267" end="15286" title="Concentration camps in the Independent State of Croatia" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="15308" end="15325" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638126" start="15327" end="15346" title="Croatian Partisans" label="Anti-fascist Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652001" start="15392" end="15411" title="Italian concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q701901" start="15430" end="15433" title="Rab concentration camp" label="Rab"/>
<link wikidata="Q684986" start="15435" end="15441" title="Gonars concentration camp" label="Gonars"/>
<link wikidata="Q108782694" start="15446" end="15451" title="Molat concentration camp" label="Molat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="15520" end="15528" title="Slovenes" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097756" start="15585" end="15604" title="Serbian nationalism" label="Serbian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="15605" end="15613" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565489" start="15624" end="15642" title="Chetnik war crimes in World War II" label="genocidal campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="15662" end="15669" title="Bosniaks" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181906" start="15819" end="15828" title="Massacre of villages under Kamešnica" label="Kamešnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408337" start="15833" end="15837" title="Memorial Centre Lipa Remembers" label="Lipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638126" start="15850" end="15869" title="National Liberation Movement in Croatia" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858769" start="15900" end="15929" title="1st Sisak Partisan Detachment" label="1st Sisak Partisan Detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="15946" end="15951" title="Sisak" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="16012" end="16027" title="German-occupied Europe" label="occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="16063" end="16080" title="Yugoslav Partisan" label="Yugoslav Partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="16154" end="16169" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="16536" end="16553" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="16614" end="16620" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="16718" end="16731" title="Red Army" label="Soviet troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q328357" start="16756" end="16774" title="Belgrade Offensive" label="Belgrade Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16845" end="16850" title="Trieste#World War II and aftermath" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16855" end="16862" title="Carinthia (state)#From 1920 to the Present" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q681681" start="16891" end="16907" title="Croatian Armed Forces (Independent State of Croatia)" label="NDH armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q312388" start="17037" end="17079" title="Yugoslav death march of Nazi collaborators" label="Yugoslav death march of Nazi collaborators"/>
<link wikidata="Q191669" start="17105" end="17119" title="Germans of Croatia" label="ethnic Germans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17126" end="17151" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–50)#Yugoslavia" label="persecution in Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q135915" start="17251" end="17316" title="State Anti-fascist Council for the National Liberation of Croatia" label="State Anti-fascist Council for the National Liberation of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311464" start="17433" end="17438" title="AVNOJ" label="AVNOJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998713" start="17503" end="17534" title="World War II in Yugoslavia casualties" label="wartime and post-war casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938761" start="17550" end="17567" title="Vladimir Žerjavić" label="Vladimir Žerjavić"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937692" start="17585" end="17601" title="Bogoljub Kočović" label="Bogoljub Kočović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314717" start="17675" end="17691" title="Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947" label="ceded from Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18193" end="18205" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="18224" end="18236" title="single-party" label="single-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="18247" end="18259" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="federal unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="18267" end="18281" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="SFR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268048" start="18296" end="18306" title="League of Communists of Croatia" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q490988" start="18415" end="18483" title="Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Standard Language" label="Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Standard Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q616146" start="18674" end="18689" title="Croatian Spring" label="Croatian Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285081" start="18755" end="18781" title="1974 Yugoslav Constitution" label="1974 Yugoslav Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256076" start="19082" end="19097" title="SANU Memorandum" label="SANU Memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q574965" start="19106" end="19153" title="1989 coups in Vojvodina, Kosovo and Montenegro" label="1989 coups in Vojvodina, Kosovo, and Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="19243" end="19250" title="Political faction" label="faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286953" start="19304" end="19331" title="1990 Croatian parliamentary election" label="first multi-party elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q183703" start="19360" end="19373" title="Franjo Tuđman" label="Franjo Tuđman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="19431" end="19447" title="Serbs in Croatia" label="Serbs in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211853" start="19501" end="19528" title="Republic of Serbian Krajina" label="Republic of Serbian Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016257" start="19625" end="19646" title="Independence of Croatia" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q917606" start="19746" end="19784" title="Brioni Agreement" label="three-month moratorium on the decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="19845" end="19854" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="overt war"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="19883" end="19910" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="20682" end="20701" title="Government of Croatia" label="Croatian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058726" start="20867" end="20889" title="diplomatic recognition" label="diplomatic recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="20897" end="20924" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q769377" start="21006" end="21022" title="Operation Storm" label="decisive victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q728012" start="21086" end="21157" title="Victory Day (Croatia)" label="Victory and Homeland Thanksgiving Day and the Day of Croatian Defenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q211853" start="21236" end="21263" title="Republic of Serbian Krajina" label="Republic of Serbian Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330471" start="21516" end="21540" title="Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Syrmia (1995–1998)" label="remaining occupied areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q321885" start="21580" end="21595" title="Erdut Agreement" label="Erdut Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257607" start="21634" end="21640" title="United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium" label="UNTAES"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="22348" end="22369" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="22412" end="22436" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259507" start="22495" end="22534" title="Stabilisation and Association Agreement" label="Stabilisation and Association Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="22544" end="22558" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22685" end="22707" title="2013 enlargement of the European Union#Negotiation progress" label="accession negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="22921" end="22952" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="23077" end="23081" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q29626070" start="23378" end="23381" title="List of MPs elected in the Croatian parliamentary election, 2007" label="MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q268984" start="23448" end="23457" title="President of Croatia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="23499" end="23504" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Sabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526639" start="23682" end="23698" title="Treaty of Accession 2011" label="Accession Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259139" start="23729" end="23739" title="2012 Croatian European Union membership referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q748162" start="23820" end="23853" title="Croatia joined the European Union" label="Croatia joined the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857240" start="23899" end="23927" title="2015 European migrant crisis" label="2015 European migrant crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685764" start="24102" end="24118" title="Andrej Plenković" label="Andrej Plenković"/>
<link wikidata="Q57687" start="24245" end="24260" title="Zoran Milanović" label="Zoran Milanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="24300" end="24304" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="24904" end="24908" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q26360" start="24949" end="24953" title="Croatian kuna" label="kuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="24975" end="24983" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="25059" end="25072" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="25154" end="25161" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="25204" end="25216" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="25247" end="25253" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="25267" end="25289" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="25294" end="25304" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="25326" end="25334" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317511" start="25386" end="25389" title="42nd parallel north" label="42°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256610" start="25394" end="25399" title="47° N" label="47° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704721" start="25415" end="25418" title="13th meridian east" label="13°"/>
<link wikidata="Q796502" start="25423" end="25428" title="20° E" label="20° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="25485" end="25494" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="25500" end="25517" title="practical exclave" label="practical exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="25559" end="25577" title="territorial waters" label="territorial waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q320623" start="25671" end="25675" title="Neum" label="Neum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155248" start="25681" end="25696" title="Pelješac Bridge" label="Pelješac Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="25891" end="25903" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q736047" start="25934" end="25940" title="Dinara" label="Dinara"/>
<link wikidata="Q646054" start="26116" end="26145" title="a thousand islands and islets" label="a thousand islands and islets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195459" start="26179" end="26200" title="List of inhabited islands of Croatia" label="permanently inhabited"/>
<link wikidata="Q13280" start="26226" end="26230" title="Cres" label="Cres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059" start="26235" end="26238" title="Krk" label="Krk"/>
<link wikidata="Q743502" start="26309" end="26325" title="Hrvatsko Zagorje" label="Hrvatsko Zagorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="26391" end="26406" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="26445" end="26451" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="26453" end="26458" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q211046" start="26460" end="26464" title="Kupa" label="Kupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="26474" end="26478" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867" start="26553" end="26560" title="Vukovar" label="Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="26615" end="26624" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="26945" end="26961" title="Karst topography" label="Karst topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609084" start="27056" end="27066" title="List of caves in Croatia" label="deep caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q189849" start="27178" end="27192" title="Plitvice lakes" label="Plitvice lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="27252" end="27260" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="27265" end="27274" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="27456" end="27475" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="27494" end="27523" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="27626" end="27630" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538487" start="27635" end="27647" title="Gorski Kotar" label="Gorski Kotar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="27810" end="27831" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q167839" start="28009" end="28016" title="Čakovec" label="Čakovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q115117" start="28082" end="28087" title="Ploče" label="Ploče"/>
<link wikidata="Q879332" start="28242" end="28248" title="Biševo" label="Biševo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216878" start="28250" end="28257" title="Lastovo" label="Lastovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263995" start="28259" end="28265" title="Svetac" label="Svetac"/>
<link wikidata="Q203767" start="28267" end="28270" title="Vis (island)" label="Vis"/>
<link wikidata="Q732240" start="28366" end="28380" title="growing season" label="growing season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519978" start="28478" end="28485" title="Risnjak" label="Risnjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q631183" start="28490" end="28498" title="Snježnik" label="Snježnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q190825" start="28773" end="28777" title="Bora (wind)" label="bura"/>
<link wikidata="Q180372" start="28819" end="28823" title="jugo" label="jugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="29149" end="29158" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q85784728" start="29320" end="29333" title="Mediterranean Biogeographic Region" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q85741023" start="29383" end="29389" title="Alpine Biogeographic Region" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29789655" start="29424" end="29433" title="Pannonian Biogeographic Region" label="Pannonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753949" start="29462" end="29473" title="Continental Biogeographic Region" label="Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="29523" end="29528" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q227187" start="29577" end="29584" title="Zrmanja" label="Zrmanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q591224" start="29589" end="29593" title="Krka (Croatia)" label="Krka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845967" start="29693" end="29724" title="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests" label="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q771194" start="29726" end="29749" title="Pannonian mixed forests" label="Pannonian mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269041" start="29755" end="29781" title="Illyrian deciduous forests" label="Illyrian deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609084" start="29825" end="29845" title="List of caves in Croatia" label="7,000 caves and pits"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="29908" end="29918" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15856" start="29923" end="29926" title="olm" label="olm"/>
<link wikidata="Q771220" start="30109" end="30123" title="phytogeography" label="phytogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092732" start="30150" end="30164" title="Boreal Kingdom" label="Boreal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q968104" start="30229" end="30248" title="Circumboreal Region" label="Circumboreal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="30282" end="30302" title="Mediterranean Region" label="Mediterranean Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="30308" end="30334" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845967" start="30401" end="30432" title="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests" label="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269041" start="30437" end="30463" title="Illyrian deciduous forests" label="Illyrian deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q310961" start="30880" end="30898" title="Caulerpa taxifolia" label="Caulerpa taxifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="30975" end="30990" title="benthic habitat" label="benthic habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501229" start="31264" end="31279" title="protected areas of Croatia" label="protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501229" start="31333" end="31347" title="List of national parks of Croatia" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q728904" start="31378" end="31389" title="nature park" label="nature park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="31438" end="31451" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q189849" start="31466" end="31494" title="Plitvice Lakes National Park" label="Plitvice Lakes National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498551" start="31498" end="31524" title="World Heritage Sites in Croatia" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="31570" end="31601" title="Man and the Biosphere Programme" label="Man and the Biosphere Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="31913" end="31924" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="32019" end="32039" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q268984" start="32124" end="32149" title="President of Croatia" label="president of the republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="32160" end="32173" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="32287" end="32305" title="commander in chief" label="commander in chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="32465" end="32475" title="Croatian Government" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195270" start="32493" end="32507" title="Prime Minister of Croatia" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="32602" end="32618" title="Executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q806072" start="32769" end="32781" title="Banski dvori" label="Banski dvori"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="32829" end="32839" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="32872" end="32889" title="legislative power" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280941" start="33127" end="33155" title="political parties in Croatia" label="political parties in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="33164" end="33189" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q830323" start="33198" end="33232" title="Social Democratic Party of Croatia" label="Social Democratic Party of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="33249" end="33258" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122235" start="33512" end="33519" title="Private law" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q207892" start="33524" end="33534" title="public law" label="public law"/>
<link wikidata="Q748162" start="33543" end="33568" title="Accession of Croatia to the European Union" label="EU accession negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q256414" start="33641" end="33657" title="Community acquis" label="Community acquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583191" start="33693" end="33713" title="Constitutional Court of Croatia" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593628" start="33770" end="33783" title="Supreme Court of Croatia" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137280" start="33851" end="33857" title="County Court" label="County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593593" start="34165" end="34193" title="State&amp;#x27;s Attorney Office of the Republic of Croatia" label="State&amp;#x27;s Attorney Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607663" start="34380" end="34404" title="Ministry of the Interior (Croatia)" label="Ministry of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600717" start="34498" end="34530" title="Security and Intelligence Agency (Croatia)" label="Security and Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="34738" end="34748" title="Consul (representative)" label="consulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="34838" end="34886" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="34895" end="34935" title="International Organization for Migration" label="International Organization for Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="34943" end="34995" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="35004" end="35014" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="35016" end="35041" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="35049" end="35106" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="35115" end="35151" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="35160" end="35205" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="35219" end="35225" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789649" start="35253" end="35305" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration (Croatia)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="35818" end="35831" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="35840" end="35848" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="35985" end="35991" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q220970" start="36412" end="36421" title="Croatian Air Force and Air Defence" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753805" start="36423" end="36427" title="Croatian Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349884" start="36433" end="36437" title="Croatian Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513252" start="36543" end="36556" title="General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia" label="General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113255" start="36579" end="36595" title="Ministry of Defence (Croatia)" label="defence minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="36687" end="36705" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q355523" start="37210" end="37229" title="professionalisation" label="professionalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640448" start="37250" end="37267" title="Accession of Croatia to NATO" label="accession to NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="37955" end="37982" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="38153" end="38157" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="ISAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="38204" end="38208" title="Kosovo Force" label="KFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="38235" end="38254" title="military industry" label="military-industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275584" start="38432" end="38438" title="HS2000" label="HS2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125198" start="38455" end="38465" title="HS Produkt" label="HS Produkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619586" start="38474" end="38479" title="M-84D" label="M-84D"/>
<link wikidata="Q342143" start="38508" end="38528" title="Đuro Đaković factory" label="Đuro Đaković factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="38649" end="38667" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="38808" end="38819" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="39013" end="39019" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="39201" end="39207" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998182" start="39213" end="39222" title="Subdivisions of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="banovinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="39589" end="39603" title="Transleithania" label="Transleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5707" start="39662" end="39670" title="Bjelovar" label="Bjelovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q319276" start="39672" end="39678" title="Gospić" label="Gospić"/>
<link wikidata="Q397372" start="39680" end="39686" title="Ogulin" label="Ogulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="39688" end="39694" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q273114" start="39696" end="39702" title="Požega, Croatia" label="Požega"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420" start="39704" end="39712" title="Varaždin" label="Varaždin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57053" start="39772" end="39783" title="Counties of Croatia" label="20 counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="39792" end="39814" title="capital city of Zagreb" label="capital city of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744" start="39986" end="39996" title="List of cities in Croatia" label="127 cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q57058" start="40001" end="40019" title="Municipalities of Croatia" label="429 municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q193083" start="40021" end="40069" title="Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics" label="Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313890" start="40077" end="40085" title="division of Croatia" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="40827" end="40852" title="Administrative division" label="local administrative unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="41110" end="41121" title="high-income" label="high-income"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="41126" end="41135" title="Developed country" label="developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="41137" end="41164" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="41193" end="41204" title="nominal GDP" label="nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="41263" end="41286" title="Purchasing power parity" label="Purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="41368" end="41376" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="41938" end="41952" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="42001" end="42018" title="industrial sector" label="industrial sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="42479" end="42494" title="international trade" label="trading partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="43018" end="43039" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="43093" end="43121" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="43136" end="43162" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q223353" start="44083" end="44090" title="Opatija" label="Opatija"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="44329" end="44341" title="mass tourism" label="mass tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445893" start="44394" end="44410" title="nautical tourism" label="nautical tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415049" start="44468" end="44484" title="cultural tourism" label="cultural tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956672" start="44605" end="44616" title="agrotourism" label="agrotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925559" start="44618" end="44633" title="mountain resort" label="mountain resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341387" start="44640" end="44643" title="spa" label="spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="44793" end="44808" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue Flag beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q632988" start="44885" end="44914" title="European Environmental Agency" label="European Environmental Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="45007" end="45033" title="World Tourism Organization" label="World Tourism Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="45117" end="45125" title="naturism" label="naturism"/>
<link wikidata="Q255381" start="45348" end="45357" title="Pinterest" label="Pinterest"/>
<link wikidata="Q59788069" start="45362" end="45366" title="Zola (company)" label="Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q220161" start="45434" end="45443" title="honeymoon" label="honeymoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q115916067" start="45508" end="45524" title="Motorways in Croatia" label="motorway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q106123" start="45690" end="45705" title="International E-road network" label="European routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q671469" start="45715" end="45737" title="Pan-European corridors" label="Pan-European corridors"/>
<link wikidata="Q429165" start="45769" end="45771" title="A1 (Croatia)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q429577" start="45808" end="45810" title="A3 (Croatia)" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q115916067" start="45898" end="45920" title="state roads in Croatia" label="state roads in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11332551" start="45938" end="45950" title="Feeder line (network)" label="feeder roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658179" start="46133" end="46155" title="List of railways in Croatia" label="extensive rail network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="46343" end="46349" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="46353" end="46361" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="46398" end="46404" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q931988" start="46406" end="46423" title="Croatian Railways" label="Croatian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155248" start="46492" end="46507" title="Pelješac Bridge" label="Pelješac Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q725896" start="46651" end="46659" title="Pelješac" label="Pelješac"/>
<link wikidata="Q13288" start="46689" end="46696" title="Korčula" label="Korčula"/>
<link wikidata="Q216878" start="46701" end="46708" title="Lastovo" label="Lastovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845306" start="46819" end="46833" title="Hrvatske ceste" label="Hrvatske ceste"/>
<link wikidata="Q26360" start="46861" end="46865" title="Croatian kuna" label="kuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339474" start="46918" end="46951" title="China Road and Bridge Corporation" label="China Road and Bridge Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="46994" end="47008" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="47088" end="47109" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147000" start="47114" end="47123" title="Dubrovnik Airport" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423278" start="47125" end="47131" title="Osijek Airport" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q389327" start="47133" end="47137" title="Pula Airport" label="Pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141414" start="47139" end="47145" title="Rijeka Airport" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125392" start="47147" end="47152" title="Split Airport" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q155359" start="47154" end="47159" title="Zadar Airport" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128016" start="47165" end="47171" title="Zagreb International Airport" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="47257" end="47298" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="47333" end="47364" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567835" start="47449" end="47463" title="Port of Rijeka" label="Port of Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231268" start="47497" end="47502" title="Port of Split" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q863915" start="47649" end="47659" title="inland port" label="river port"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867" start="47663" end="47670" title="Vukovar" label="Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="47687" end="47693" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="47849" end="47855" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="47899" end="47904" title="Sisak" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="48310" end="48331" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059" start="48352" end="48355" title="Krk" label="Krk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684768" start="48363" end="48375" title="LNG Hrvatska" label="LNG Hrvatska"/>
<link wikidata="Q474478" start="48972" end="48997" title="Krško Nuclear Power Plant" label="Krško Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636760" start="49068" end="49092" title="Hrvatska elektroprivreda" label="Hrvatska elektroprivreda"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="49174" end="49181" title="Republic of Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="49270" end="49295" title="List of countries by population" label="ranks 127th by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="49319" end="49337" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="49463" end="49489" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="life expectancy in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="49528" end="49548" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075150" start="49592" end="49611" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by fertility rate" label="lowest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="49737" end="49747" title="death rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="49778" end="49788" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="50135" end="50157" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="50741" end="50745" title="Serbs in Croatia" label="Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q769377" start="50883" end="50898" title="Operation Storm" label="Operation Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947386" start="51501" end="51509" title="Bosniaks of Croatia" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502513" start="51519" end="51523" title="Romani people in Croatia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709238" start="51533" end="51542" title="Albanians of Croatia" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503479" start="51552" end="51560" title="Italians of Croatia" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q837094" start="51570" end="51580" title="Hungarians of Croatia" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441791" start="51590" end="51596" title="Czechs of Croatia" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503182" start="51606" end="51614" title="Slovenes of Croatia" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566878" start="51624" end="51631" title="Slovaks of Croatia" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407146" start="51641" end="51652" title="Macedonians of Croatia" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q191669" start="51662" end="51669" title="Germans of Croatia" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503053" start="51679" end="51691" title="Montenegrins of Croatia" label="Montenegrins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253297" start="51752" end="51763" title="Croatian diaspora" label="live abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="51818" end="51837" title="Freedom of religion" label="Freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="51882" end="51903" title="religious denomination" label="religious communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="51907" end="51971" title="separation of church and state" label="equal before the law and considers them separated from the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="52155" end="52172" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="52182" end="52195" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="52278" end="52283" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="52358" end="52366" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656567" start="52743" end="52781" title="Minority languages of Croatia" label="Minority languages are in official use"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="52947" end="52952" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="52954" end="52963" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858603" start="52965" end="52972" title="Italian language in Croatia" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20974148" start="52974" end="52981" title="Serbian language in Croatia" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="52987" end="52993" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="53049" end="53057" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="53059" end="53066" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="53068" end="53077" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="53087" end="53093" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="53095" end="53105" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="53107" end="53118" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="53120" end="53126" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="53128" end="53136" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33622" start="53138" end="53152" title="Istro-Romanian language" label="Istro-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="53154" end="53160" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q26245" start="53171" end="53176" title="Rusyn language" label="Rusyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="53178" end="53185" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="53187" end="53194" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="53200" end="53209" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q146665" start="53428" end="53450" title="South Slavic languages" label="South Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="53476" end="53490" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="53595" end="53605" title="Shtokavian" label="Shtokavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q337565" start="53619" end="53628" title="Chakavian" label="Chakavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q838165" start="53633" end="53642" title="Kajkavian" label="Kajkavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="53695" end="53702" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="53704" end="53713" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="53718" end="53724" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656567" start="54041" end="54059" title="Minority languages of Croatia" label="minority languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11150" start="54216" end="54252" title="Languages of the European Union" label="European Union Language Association."/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="54605" end="54615" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="54989" end="54994" title="music school" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q383092" start="54999" end="55010" title="art schools" label="art schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q694222" start="55160" end="55173" title="leaving exams" label="leaving exams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496233" start="55494" end="55513" title="University of Zadar" label="University of Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q675848" start="55723" end="55743" title="University of Zagreb" label="University of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371037" start="55849" end="55861" title="institute of technology" label="polytechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383690" start="56427" end="56451" title="Ruđer Bošković Institute" label="Ruđer Bošković Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264085" start="56467" end="56504" title="Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="56520" end="56535" title="learned society" label="learned society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="56641" end="56664" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q192247" start="56679" end="56703" title="European Investment Bank" label="European Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="57004" end="57025" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="57674" end="57695" title="infant mortality rate" label="infant mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543380" start="57713" end="57724" title="Live birth (human)" label="live births"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="57935" end="57950" title="medical doctors" label="medical doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="58155" end="58177" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="58437" end="58445" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11150" start="58515" end="58554" title="Official languages of the European Union" label="official language of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="58613" end="58618" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280978" start="58706" end="58731" title="Vienna Literary Agreement" label="Vienna Literary Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="58857" end="58871" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="58946" end="58956" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="58961" end="58975" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="SFR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143860" start="59178" end="59187" title="Language secessionism" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q490988" start="59239" end="59307" title="Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Literary Language" label="Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Literary Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q616146" start="59323" end="59338" title="Croatian Spring" label="Croatian Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321978" start="59510" end="59533" title="linguistic prescription" label="linguistic prescription"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="59703" end="59712" title="loanwords" label="loanwords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187186" start="59749" end="59775" title="Croatian linguistic purism" label="Croatian linguistic purism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="59997" end="60017" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="60026" end="60042" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="60058" end="60072" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q446185" start="60077" end="60098" title="Mediterranean culture" label="Mediterranean culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="60104" end="60121" title="Illyrian movement" label="Illyrian movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202072" start="60341" end="60359" title="List of people from Croatia" label="historical figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443835" start="60366" end="60385" title="Ministry of Culture (Croatia)" label="Ministry of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980638" start="60430" end="60459" title="Natural and Cultural Heritage of Croatia" label="cultural and natural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="60599" end="60605" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q945996" start="60613" end="60632" title="World Heritage Sites by country" label="World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498551" start="60642" end="60662" title="ten sites in Croatia" label="ten sites in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q84036549" start="60748" end="60766" title="intangible culture" label="intangible culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="60783" end="60841" title="UNESCO&amp;#x27;s World&amp;#x27;s intangible culture masterpieces" label="UNESCO&amp;#x27;s World&amp;#x27;s intangible culture masterpieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245189" start="60949" end="60955" title="Cravat (early)" label="cravat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18713042" start="61697" end="61707" title="Interliber" label="Interliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q603772" start="61736" end="61747" title="Zagreb Fair" label="Zagreb Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="62191" end="62198" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815788" start="62250" end="62255" title="Tvrđa" label="Tvrđa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="62314" end="62325" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q510203" start="62503" end="62522" title="Giorgio da Sebenico" label="Giorgio da Sebenico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62527" end="62546" title="Nicolas of Florence" label="Nicolas of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q391973" start="62559" end="62581" title="Šibenik Cathedral" label="Cathedral of St. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q426935" start="62741" end="62762" title="Church of St. Donatus" label="Church of St. Donatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="62766" end="62771" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434349" start="62939" end="62955" title="Trogir Cathedral" label="Trogir Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254704" start="62968" end="62975" title="Radovan (master)" label="Radovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46805" start="63021" end="63031" title="Romanesque art" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="63047" end="63063" title="Croatia in the union with Hungary" label="Medieval Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312467" start="63069" end="63080" title="Renaissance in Croatia" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="63279" end="63286" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="63291" end="63297" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q434257" start="63431" end="63454" title="Josip Juraj Strossmayer" label="Josip Juraj Strossmayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q468219" start="63509" end="63522" title="Vlaho Bukovac" label="Vlaho Bukovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q313828" start="63524" end="63538" title="Ivan Meštrović" label="Ivan Meštrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q965675" start="63544" end="63558" title="Ivan Generalić" label="Ivan Generalić"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="63606" end="63625" title="glagolitic alphabet" label="glagolitic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q336571" start="63824" end="63837" title="Marko Marulić" label="Marko Marulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q380525" start="63879" end="63890" title="Marin Držić" label="Marin Držić"/>
<link wikidata="Q317588" start="63905" end="63918" title="Ivan Gundulić" label="Ivan Gundulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="63920" end="63945" title="Croatian national revival" label="Croatian national revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q453536" start="63951" end="63965" title="Ivan Mažuranić" label="Ivan Mažuranić"/>
<link wikidata="Q347672" start="63998" end="64010" title="August Šenoa" label="August Šenoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q254383" start="64035" end="64056" title="Ivana Brlić-Mažuranić" label="Ivana Brlić-Mažuranić"/>
<link wikidata="Q291016" start="64080" end="64100" title="Marija Jurić Zagorka" label="Marija Jurić Zagorka"/>
<link wikidata="Q610015" start="64118" end="64136" title="Antun Gustav Matoš" label="Antun Gustav Matoš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277590" start="64143" end="64161" title="Antun Branko Šimić" label="Antun Branko Šimić"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="64163" end="64176" title="expressionist" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="64181" end="64188" title="Realism (arts)" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q325428" start="64196" end="64211" title="Miroslav Krleža" label="Miroslav Krleža"/>
<link wikidata="Q347643" start="64218" end="64228" title="Tin Ujević" label="Tin Ujević"/>
<link wikidata="Q47561" start="64266" end="64276" title="Ivo Andrić" label="Ivo Andrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277066" start="64406" end="64424" title="Vatroslav Lisinski" label="Vatroslav Lisinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q380547" start="64503" end="64512" title="Ivan Zajc" label="Ivan Zajc"/>
<link wikidata="Q365469" start="64600" end="64613" title="Ivo Pogorelić" label="Ivo Pogorelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="64786" end="64805" title="Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="64825" end="64850" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q912735" start="65025" end="65028" title="Croatian Radiotelevision" label="HRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="65101" end="65114" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040168" start="65325" end="65329" title="HINA" label="HINA"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="65337" end="65349" title="wire service" label="wire service"/>
<link wikidata="Q382607" start="65465" end="65470" title="DVB-T" label="DVB-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q912735" start="65497" end="65521" title="Croatian Radiotelevision" label="Croatian Radiotelevision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267223" start="65544" end="65558" title="RTL (Croatian TV channel)" label="RTL Televizija"/>
<link wikidata="Q968850" start="65570" end="65577" title="Nova TV (Croatia)" label="Nova TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632564" start="65610" end="65636" title="Croatian Olympic Committee" label="Croatian Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="65923" end="65927" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q489717" start="66191" end="66202" title="Hanza Media" label="Hanza Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q877217" start="66222" end="66240" title="Styria Media Group" label="Styria Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q478374" start="66323" end="66332" title="Novi list" label="Novi list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281282" start="66349" end="66367" title="Slobodna Dalmacija" label="Slobodna Dalmacija"/>
<link wikidata="Q321550" start="66521" end="66528" title="Croatia in the Eurovision Song Contest" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="66545" end="66568" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q215088" start="66580" end="66590" title="Yugoslavia in the Eurovision Song Contest" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q544203" start="66711" end="66715" title="Riva (band)" label="Riva"/>
<link wikidata="Q208243" start="66748" end="66760" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1993" label="1993 contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q207815" start="66799" end="66803" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q11117" start="66808" end="66812" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q114565318" start="66851" end="66863" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2024" label="2024 contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262315" start="67212" end="67230" title="Pula Film Festival" label="Pula Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656" start="67280" end="67284" title="Pula" label="Pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269994" start="67371" end="67387" title="Animafest Zagreb" label="Animafest Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268232" start="67551" end="67564" title="Dušan Vukotić" label="Dušan Vukotić"/>
<link wikidata="Q917808" start="67586" end="67628" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film" label="Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193176" start="67639" end="67645" title="Surogat" label="Ersatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q703611" start="67679" end="67692" title="Branko Lustig" label="Branko Lustig"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="67701" end="67732" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Awards for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q483941" start="67743" end="67764" title="Schindler&amp;#x27;s List" label="Schindler&amp;#x27;s List"/>
<link wikidata="Q128518" start="67781" end="67790" title="Gladiator (2000 film)" label="Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q85315076" start="67856" end="67875" title="97th Academy Awards" label="97th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324407" start="67892" end="67919" title="Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film" label="Best Live Action Short Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q126099154" start="67945" end="67980" title="The Man Who Could Not Remain Silent" label="The Man Who Could Not Remain Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="67988" end="67996" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016257" start="68075" end="68087" title="Croatian independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016257" start="68111" end="68123" title="Independence of Croatia" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="68229" end="68240" title="Blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23572" start="68306" end="68321" title="Game of Thrones" label="Game of Thrones"/>
<link wikidata="" start="68335" end="68359" title="Star Wars: The Last Jedi" label="Star Wars: The Last Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28811584" start="68373" end="68383" title="Robin Hood (2018 film)" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q119064873" start="68410" end="68423" title="Speak No Evil (2024 film)" label="Speak No Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q848391" start="68440" end="68459" title="Season of the Witch (2011 film)" label="Season of the Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q109312634" start="68483" end="68496" title="Infinity Pool (film)" label="Infinity Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q117848301" start="68521" end="68533" title="Canary Black" label="Canary Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q61951885" start="68547" end="68582" title="Hitman&amp;#x27;s Wife&amp;#x27;s Bodyguard" label="Hitman&amp;#x27;s Wife&amp;#x27;s Bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q165627" start="68596" end="68616" title="Sophie&amp;#x27;s Choice (film)" label="Sophie&amp;#x27;s Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q934036" start="68633" end="68652" title="Fiddler on the Roof (film)" label="Fiddler on the roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q36951175" start="68676" end="68703" title="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again" label="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q14522493" start="68734" end="68742" title="Hercules (2014 film)" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q111133781" start="68756" end="68772" title="The Weekend Away" label="The Weekend Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q73547335" start="68786" end="68791" title="Bliss (2021 film)" label="Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141706" start="68814" end="68828" title="The Peacemaker (1997 film)" label="The Peacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="69341" end="69348" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q934309" start="69359" end="69380" title="Mediterranean cuisine" label="Mediterranean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42029" start="69499" end="69507" title="Austrian cuisine" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q264327" start="69509" end="69518" title="Hungarian cuisine" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q654493" start="69520" end="69527" title="Turkish cuisine" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q805060" start="69533" end="69539" title="Balkan cuisine" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="70250" end="70263" title="Michelin star" label="Michelin star"/>
<link wikidata="Q446760" start="70483" end="70501" title="educational system" label="educational system"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="70754" end="70773" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="71348" end="71362" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q328689" start="71693" end="71721" title="Croatian Football Federation" label="Croatian Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q328689" start="71905" end="71933" title="Croatian Football Federation" label="Croatian Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="71939" end="71970" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatian national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="71993" end="72007" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="72011" end="72015" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="72068" end="72072" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="72074" end="72078" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="72080" end="72084" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q170645" start="72086" end="72090" title="2018 FIFA World Cup" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q284163" start="72102" end="72121" title="2022 FIFA World Cup" label="2022 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q170645" start="72184" end="72203" title="2018 FIFA World Cup" label="2018 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="72234" end="72240" title="France National Football Team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q202163" start="72312" end="72328" title="Luzhniki Stadium" label="Luzhniki Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q483837" start="72350" end="72361" title="Luka Modrić" label="Luka Modrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q368974" start="72371" end="72382" title="FIFA World Cup awards" label="Golden Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="72485" end="72491" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="72518" end="72524" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q284163" start="72547" end="72551" title="2022 FIFA World Cup" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="72585" end="72599" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q162604" start="72647" end="72655" title="Prva HNL" label="Prva HNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245667" start="72693" end="72711" title="List of sports attendance figures" label="average attendance"/>
<link wikidata="Q525726" start="72750" end="72764" title="2010–11 Prva HNL" label="season 2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q742792" start="72912" end="72926" title="Croatia at the Olympics" label="Olympic medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q715992" start="73207" end="73220" title="Handball at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q205570" start="73232" end="73250" title="IHF World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118005" start="73289" end="73310" title="European Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="73365" end="73378" title="1996 Olympics" label="1996 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q733806" start="73435" end="73478" title="2003 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2003 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q78210015" start="73487" end="73530" title="2025 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2025 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q639266" start="73532" end="73573" title="Croatia men&amp;#x27;s national handball team" label="Croatia men&amp;#x27;s national handball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q728491" start="73633" end="73640" title="Denmark men&amp;#x27;s national handball team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="73686" end="73693" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="73698" end="73704" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="73742" end="73751" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q204279" start="73814" end="73830" title="Goran Ivanišević" label="Goran Ivanišević"/>
<link wikidata="Q245241" start="73835" end="73846" title="Marin Čilić" label="Marin Čilić"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="73861" end="73871" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571500" start="73914" end="73926" title="ATP rankings" label="ATP rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999428" start="73928" end="73941" title="Ognjen Cvitan" label="Ognjen Cvitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96141142" start="73950" end="73981" title="World Junior Chess Championship" label="World Junior Chess Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q232472" start="74035" end="74045" title="Iva Majoli" label="Iva Majoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081089" start="74128" end="74132" title="1997 French Open – Women&amp;#x27;s Singles" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q478755" start="74218" end="74261" title="2009 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2009 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932053" start="74267" end="74304" title="2007 World Table Tennis Championships" label="2007 World Table Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q665754" start="74310" end="74341" title="2000 World Rowing Championships" label="2000 World Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142713" start="74347" end="74370" title="1987 Summer Universiade" label="1987 Summer Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q402437" start="74376" end="74400" title="1979 Mediterranean Games" label="1979 Mediterranean Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375427" start="74414" end="74435" title="European Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q558881" start="74452" end="74456" title="2000 European Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q16577781" start="74458" end="74462" title="2018 European Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q78210015" start="74467" end="74510" title="2025 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2025 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q115415589" start="74512" end="74560" title="2024 Men&amp;#x27;s European Water Polo Championship" label="2024 Men&amp;#x27;s European Water Polo Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632564" start="74601" end="74627" title="Croatian Olympic Committee" label="Croatian Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="74683" end="74714" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9660" start="74795" end="74815" title="1992 Winter Olympics" label="1992 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159469" start="74819" end="74830" title="Albertville" label="Albertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="74907" end="74920" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112240" start="75228" end="75246" title="Outline of Croatia" label="Outline of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243241" start="75249" end="75282" title="Index of Croatia-related articles" label="Index of Croatia-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="75466" end="75487" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5574" wikidata="Q210726" url="?curid=5574" title="History of Croatia">
<text>At the time of the Roman Empire, the area of modern Croatia comprised two Roman provinces, Pannonia and Dalmatia. After the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century, the area was subjugated by the Ostrogoths for 50 years, before being incorporated into the Byzantine Empire.

Croatia, as a polity, first appeared as a duchy in the 7th century, the Duchy of Croatia. With the nearby Principality of Lower Pannonia, it was united and elevated into the Kingdom of Croatia which lasted from 925 until 1102. From the 12th century, the Kingdom of Croatia entered a personal union with the Kingdom of Hungary. It remained a distinct state with its ruler (&quot;Ban&quot;) and Sabor, but it elected royal dynasties from neighboring powers, primarily Hungary, Naples, and the Habsburg monarchy.

The period from the 15th to the 17th centuries was marked by intense struggles between the Ottoman Empire to the south and the Habsburg Empire to the north.

Following the First World War and the dissolution of Austria-Hungary in 1918, Croatian lands were incorporated into the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Following the German invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941, the puppet state Independent State of Croatia the Axis powers satellite state, was established. It was defeated in May 1945, after the Bleiburg repatriations. The Socialist Republic of Croatia was formed as a constituent republic of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In 1991, Croatia&#x27;s leadership severed ties with Yugoslavia and proclaimed independence amidst the dissolution of Yugoslavia.

== Prehistoric period ==

The area known today as Croatia was inhabited by hominids throughout the prehistoric period. Fossils of Neanderthals dating to the middle Palaeolithic period have been unearthed in northern Croatia, with the most famous and best-presented site in Krapina. Remnants of several Neolithic and Chalcolithic cultures have been found throughout the country. Most of the sites are in the northern Croatian river valleys, and the most significant cultures whose presence was discovered include the Starčevo, Vučedol and Baden cultures. The Iron Age left traces of the early Illyrian Hallstatt culture and the Celtic La Tène culture.

=== Protohistoric period ===

Greek author Hecataeus of Miletus mentions that around 500 BC, the Eastern Adriatic region was inhabited by local tribes such as Histrians, Liburnians, and Illyrians. Greek colonization saw settlers establish communities on of Issa (Vis), Korkyra Melaina (Korčula) and Pharos (Starigrad on Hvar) islands as well as trading outposts of Tragurion (Trogir) and Epetion (Stobreč). Somewhere in 3rd century by, Greek colony of Issa formed an alliance with then emerging Roman Republic. As Isseian maritime trade became affected by Illyrian pirating activities, they asked for Roman intervention against the Illyrian kingdom, leading to the First Illyrian War in 229. BC and beginning of Roman expansion on the Eastern Adriatic.

== Roman expansion ==

Before the Roman expansion, the eastern Adriatic coast formed the northern part of the Illyrian kingdom from the 4th century BC to the Illyrian Wars in the 220s BC. In 168 BC, the Roman Republic established its protectorate south of the Neretva river. The area north of the Neretva was slowly incorporated into Roman possession until the province of Illyricum was formally established 32–27 BC.

These lands then became part of the Roman province of Illyricum. Between 6 and 9 AD, tribes including the Dalmatae, who gave name to these lands, rose up against the Romans in the Great Illyrian revolt, but the uprising was crushed, and in 10 AD Illyricum was split into two provinces—Pannonia and Dalmatia. The province of Dalmatia spread inland to cover all of the Dinaric Alps and most of the eastern Adriatic coast. Dalmatia was the birthplace of the Roman Emperor Diocletian, who, when he retired as Emperor in 305 AD, built a large palace near Salona, from which the city of Split later developed.

Historians such as Theodore Mommsen and Bernard Bavant argue that all of Dalmatia was fully Romanized and Latin-speaking by the 4th century. Others, such as Aleksandar Stipčević, argue that the process of Romanization was selective and involved mostly the urban centers but not the countryside, where previous Illyrian socio-political structures were adapted to Roman administration and political structure only where necessary. has argued that the Vlachs, or Morlachs, were Latin-speaking, pastoral peoples who lived in the Balkan mountains since pre-Roman times. They are mentioned in the oldest Croatian chronicles.

After the Western Roman Empire collapsed in 476, with the beginning of the Migration Period, Julius Nepos briefly ruled his diminished domain from Diocletian&#x27;s Palace after his 476 flight from Italy. The region was then ruled by the Ostrogoths until 535 when Justinian I added the territory to the Byzantine Empire. Later, the Byzantines formed the Theme of Dalmatia in the same territory.

=== Migration period ===

The Roman period ended with the Avar and Croat invasions in the 6th and 7th centuries and the destruction of almost all Roman towns. Roman survivors retreated to more favorable sites on the coast, islands, and mountains. The city of Ragusa was founded by survivors from Epidaurum. According to the work &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot;, written by the 10th-century Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII, the Croats arrived in what is today Croatia from southern Poland and Western Ukraine in the early 7th century. However, that claim is disputed and competing hypotheses date the event between late the 6th-early 7th (mainstream) or the late 8th-early 9th (fringe) centuries. Recent archaeological data established that the migration and settlement of the Slavs/Croats occurred in the late 6th and early 7th centuries.

== Duchy of Croatia (800–925) ==


From the middle of the seventh century until the unification in 925, there were two duchies on the territory of today&#x27;s Croatia, Duchy of Croatia and Principality of Lower Pannonia. Eventually, a dukedom was formed, the Duchy of Croatia, ruled by Borna, as attested by chronicles of Einhard starting in the year 818. The record represents the first documented Croatian realms, vassal states of Francia at the time. The most important ruler of Lower Pannonia was Ljudevit Posavski, who fought against the Franks between 819 and 823. He ruled Pannonian Croatia from 810 to 823.
The Frankish overlordship ended during the reign of Mislav two decades later. Duke Mislav was succeeded by Duke Trpimir, the founder of the Trpimirović dynasty. Trpimir successfully fought against Byzantium, Venice and Bulgaria. Duke Trpimir was succeeded by Duke Domagoj, who repeatedly led wars against the Venetians and the Byzantines, and the Venetians called this Croatian ruler &quot;the worst Croatian prince&quot; (dux pessimus Croatorum) According to Constantine VII, the Christianization of Croats began in the 7th century, but the claim is disputed and generally, Christianization is associated with the 9th century. In 879, under Branimir, the duke of Croatia, Dalmatian Croatia received papal recognition as a state from Pope John VIII.

==Kingdom of Croatia (925–1102)==
The first king of Croatia is generally considered to have been Tomislav in the first half of the 10th century, who is mentioned as such in notes from Church Councils of Split and the letter of Pope John X.

Other important Croatian rulers from that period are:
* Mihajlo Krešimir II, 949–969, who conquered Bosnia and restored the power of the Croatian kingdom. Two Croatian queens are also known from 10th century. The first one is Domaslava and the second one is Helen of Zadar, whose epitaph was found in the Solin area at the end of the 19th century during archeological excavations conducted by Frane Bulić. The latter was also a mother of King Stjepan Držislav, 969–997. He sided with Byzantium in a war against Bulgarian emperor Samuil, so Bulgarians, in response, raided Croatia and ravaged it as far as Zadar before retreating back to Ohrid. Byzantine emperor Basil II in return named Stjepan Držislav a hereditary King of Croatia and Dalmatia and sent him royal insignia.
* Stjepan, 1030–1058, restored the Croatian kingdom and founded the diocese in Knin.

The medieval Croatian kingdom reached its peak in the 11th century during the reigns of Petar Krešimir IV (1058–1074) and Demetrius Zvonimir (1075–1089). From the time of Petar Krešimir IV kingdom was officially called &quot;Kingdom of Croatia and Dalmatia&quot;. He used The Great Schism of 1054 which weakened the Byzantine rule over Dalmatian cities to assert his own control over them. He left the cities a certain amount of self-rule, but also collected a certain amount of tribute and demanded their ships in the case of war. Except for croatization of old cities such as Zadar and Split, Petar Krešimir IV encouraged the development of new cities such as Biograd, Nin, Karin, Skradin and Šibenik. He also encouraged the foundation of new monasteries and gave donations to the Church. Historians such as Trpimir Macan consider that during Krešimir&#x27;s reign medieval Croatian kingdom reached its greatest extent. Modern historians also consider that his rule probably ended when he was captured by Norman count Amicus of Giovinazzo.Krešimir IV was succeeded by Demetrius Zvonimir who married Hungarian princess Helen and ruled from Knin as his capital. Zvonimir&#x27;s rule was marked by stability. He was a papal vassal and enjoyed a papal protection as seen when his kingdom was threatened by an invasion of knight Wezelin, who was deterred after pope threatened to excommunicate him. He had a son named Radovan who died at young age, so Zvonimir left no male heir when he died in 1089.

Meanwhile, in 1096, a group of crusaders led by Raymond of Toulouse going on first crusade passed through mountainous parts of Croatia. The crusaders were met with hostile locals who attacked crusader columns, while Raymond of Toulouse brutally retailated by mutilating those attackers whom they managed to capture. Historian Krešimir Kužić explains these hostilities by the &quot;state of anarchy&quot; which was then in Croatia.

=== Interregnum ===
King Zvonimir was succeeded by Stjepan II who died in 1091, ending the Trpimirović dynasty. As Kingdom of Croatia descended in another feudal power struggle, Zvonimir&#x27;s widow Jelena (Helen), who was the daughter of Hungarian king Béla I, invited her brother Ladislaus I of Hungary to come to Croatia and claim Croatian royal crown. Meanwhile, in Croatia, Petar Snačić, another pretender to the royal throne arose, but his army was defeated by Hungarians in Battle of Gvozd Mountain where Snačić was killed. Hungarian king Coloman continued to lay claims on throne of Croatia and eventually a personal union between Croatia and Hungary was created in 1102 with Hungarian king as its ruler. This meant that Croatia and Hungary still remained separate kingdoms which are connected only by a common king, therefore from the reign of Coloman onwards, Hungarian kings bore official title of &quot;king of Hungary, Dalmatia and Croatia&quot;. Another example was a coronation process as new kings of Hungary continued to be separately crowned kings of Croatia from the times of Coloman, until Andrew II. There was also an institution of ban (viceroy) of Croatia representing a royal deputy, separate tax system, money and army. According to one group of historians, during this interregnum, Croatia was simply conquered by Hungarians, while another group of historians thinks that king Coloman and Croatian nobility possibly reached some kind of agreement.

==Personal union with Hungary (1102–1527) and the Republic of Venice==
=== Croatia under the Árpád dynasty ===

One consequence of entering a personal union with Hungary under the Hungarian king was the introduction of a feudal system. Later kings sought to restore some of their influence by giving certain privileges to the towns. Somewhere between Second and Third Crusade, Knights Templars and Hospitallers appeared in Croatian lands for the first time. According to historian Lelja Dobronić the purpose of their arrival appears to be to secure transport routes and protect travelers going from Europe towards the Middle East.

After proclamation of Fourth crusade in 1202, the crusader army could not afford to pay the agreed amount of money to the Venetians who were supposed to provide the maritime transport to the Holy Land. Venetians in turn requested that crusaders compensate this difference by capturing town of Zadar (Zara) which was then supposed to be handed over to Venice. The pope issued sharp warnings against this kind of attack and some crusaders refused to participate. When Venetian-crusader army arrived before Zadar, its citizens posted signs of cross on their town walls to demonstrate their catholic faith. Despite everything, in November 1202 crusader-Venetian army launched an attack on Zadar, captured it and then looted it. In response, pope excommunicated entire crusader army. Hungarian-Croatian king Emeric also provided no real help to town. He merely wrote a letter to pope Innocent III, where he asked him to make crusaders return Zadar to its legitimate ruler.

In year 1217, the Hungarian king Andrew II took the sign of the cross and vowed to go on the Fifth Crusade. After assembling his army king marched by so-called &quot;via exercitualis&quot; (English: the military road) from Hungary proper southwards to Koprivnica and further towards: Križevci, Zagreb, Topusko, Bihać and then Knin, eventually reaching town of Split on the Adriatic coast. As Andrew lacked needed naval fleet to take his army to the Holy Land, he decided to arrange transport with Venetians. In return, Andrew II decided to completely give up the Hungarian kings&#x27; rights on Zadar, whom Venetians had captured during the Fourth crusade. After staying in Split for three weeks for logistical reasons and realising that Croatians will not be joining his crusade, king and his army sailed off to the Holy Land. Historian Krešimir Kužić attributes this low desire of Croatians to join king Andrew&#x27;s crusade to earlier bad memories related to destruction and looting of Zadar in 1202. When king Andrew II returned from the crusade, he brought back a number of relics, some of which remain stored in the treasury of Zagreb Cathedral.

Andrew&#x27;s son King Béla IV was forced to deal with troubles brought by the first Mongol invasion of Hungary. Following the Hungarian defeat in the Battle of the Sajó River in 1241, the king withdrew to Dalmatia, hoping to take refuge there, with the Mongols in pursuit. The Mongol army followed the king to Split hinterland, which they ravaged. The king took refuge in nearby town of Trogir, hoping to make use of its island-like fort which offered some protection from Mongol onslaught. 

Meanwhile, Mongols thinking that the king is hiding in Klis fortress attempted to clib up the steep cliffs of Klis, while the fort defenders hurled rocks on their heads. Eventually hand-to-hand combat ensued inside the fortress, but upon realising that king isn&#x27;t in Klis, the Mongols abandoned their attempts to take the fort and headed towards Trogir. As Mongols prepared to attack Trogir, king Bela prepared boats in an attempt to flee across the sea.

This decisive Mongol attack on Trogir never happened as they withdrew upon receiving news about the death of Ögedei Khan. As Croatian historian Damir Karbić notes, during Béla&#x27;s stay in Dalmatia, members of the Šubić noble family earned merit for sheltering him, so in return, the king granted them the County of Bribir in hereditary possession, where their power grew until reached the peak in the time of Paul I Šubić of Bribir.

This period, therefore, saw the rise of the Frankopans and the Šubićs, native nobility, to prominence. Numerous future Bans of Croatia originated from these two noble families. The princes of Bribir from the Šubić family became particularly influential, as they asserted their control over large parts of Dalmatia, Slavonia, and even Bosnia.

=== Croatia under the Anjou dynasty ===

By the early 14th century lord Paul Šubić accumulated so much power, that he ruled as a de facto independent ruler. He coined his own money and held the hereditary title of Ban of Croatia. Following the death of king Ladislaus IV of Hungary, who had no male heir, a succession crisis emerged, and in 1300, Paul invited Charles Robert of Anjou to come to the Kingdom of Hungary and take over its royal seat. A civil war ensued, in which Charles&#x27; party prevailed after winning a decisive victory in the Battle of Rozgony in 1312.

Coronations of the kings of Croatia gradually fell into abeyance as a custom. Charles Robert was the last to be separately crowned as King of Croatia in 1301, after which Croatia had a separate constitution. Lord Paul Šubić died in 1312, and his son Mladen inherited the title of Ban of Croatia. Mladen&#x27;s power was diminished due to the new king&#x27;s policy of centralization, after he and his forces were defeated by the royal army and its allies in the Battle of Bliska in 1322. The power vacuum caused by the downfall of Mladen Šubić was used by Venice to reassert control over Dalmatian cities. Following downfall of Croatian magnates and restoration of royal authority over Croatia, around 1350, first instance of Croatian-Dalmatian Assembly (hrvatski Sabor), attested by historical sources, took place near Benkovac. The assembly was summoned by ban of Croatia in August and it gathered members of twelve Croatian noble families. In subsequent period, the Croatian-Dalmatian assembly most often took place in Knin.

The ensuing reign of King Louis the Great (1342–1382) is considered the golden age of medieval Croatian history. Louis launched a campaign against Venice, with aim of retaking Dalmatian cities, and eventually succeeded, forcing Venice to sign the Treaty of Zadar in 1358. The same peace treaty caused the Republic of Ragusa to gain independence from Venice. 

=== Anti-Court struggles period ===

After king Louis The Great died in 1382, the Kingdom of Hungary and Croatia descended into a period of destructive dynastic struggles called The Anti-Court movement. The struggle was waged between two factions, one of which was centered around late king&#x27;s daughter Mary, her mother queen Elizabeth, and her fiancé Sigismund of Luxemburg. The faction which opposed them was a coalition of Croatian nobility which supported Charles of Durazzo to become a new king of Hungary and Croatia. This faction consisted of powerful John of Palisna, and Horvat brothers, who opposed the idea of being ruled by a female and, secondly, of being ruled by Sigismund of Luxemburg whom they considered alien. As alternative, they arranged for Charles of Durazzo to come to Croatia and crowned him as new king of Hungary-Croatia in Szekezfehervar in December 1385. Charles&#x27; opponents - queen Elizabeth and princess Mary, responded by organizing Charles&#x27; assassination in Buda in February 1386. Enraged anti-court supporters then retaliated by making an ambush for two queens near Gorjani in July 1386, where their escort was eliminated and both queens were taken to captivity in Novigrad Castle near Zadar. Once in Novigrad, queen Elizabeth was strangled to death, but her daughter Mary was eventually rescued by her fiancé Sigismund.
In 1387, Sigismund of Luxemburg crowned himself a new king of Hungary-Croatia. In following period he too became engaged in power struggle against opposing Croatian and Bosnian nobility in order to assert his rule over the realm. In 1396, Sigismund organized a crusade against the expanding Ottomans which culminated in Battle of Nicopolis. When the battle ended, it was unclear whether Sigismund got out alive or not, so Stephen II Lackfi proclaimed Ladislaus of Naples a new king of Hungary-Croatia. When Sigismund, nonetheless did returned to Croatia, he summoned diet in Križevci in 1397, where he confronted his adversaries and eliminated them. Sigismund was again forced fight for the control, but by 1403 entire southern Croatia and Dalmatian cities defected to Ladislaus of Naples. Sigismund eventually managed to crush anti-court movement by winning 1408 Battle of Dobor in Bosnia. Since anti-king Ladislaus lost hope of prevailing in struggle against Sigismund, he sold all his nominal possessions in Dalmatia to Republic of Venice for 100 000 Ducats in 1409. The Venetians asserted their control over most of Dalmatia by 1428. The rule of Venice over most of Dalmatia continued on for nearly four centuries ( 1420–1797) until the end of The Republic by Treaty of Campo Formio. Another long term consequence of Anti-Court struggles was arrival of Ottomans to neighbouring Kingdom of Bosnia at the invite of powerful Bosnian duke Hrvoje Vukčić Hrvatinić to help him fight against forces of king Sigismund. The Ottomans gradually strengthened their influence in Bosnia until finally completely conquering the kingdom in 1463.

=== Ottoman invasions ===
Serious Ottoman attacks on Croatian lands began after the fall of Bosnia to the Ottomans in 1463. At this point main Ottoman attacks were not yet directed towards Central Europe, with Vienna as its main objective, but towards renaissance Italy with Croatia standing on their way between. As the Ottomans launched expansion further into Europe, Croatian lands became a place of permanent warfare. This period of history is considered to be one of the direst for the people living in Croatia. Baroque poet Pavao Ritter Vitezović subsequently described this period of Croatian history as &quot;two centuries of weeping Croatia&quot;.

Armies of Croatian nobility fought numerous battles to counter the Ottoman akinji and martolos raids. The Ottoman forces frequently raided the Croatian countryside, plundering towns and villages and captured the local inhabitants as slaves. These &quot;scorched earth&quot; tactics, also called &quot;The Small War&quot;, were usually conducted once a year with intention to soften up the region&#x27;s defenses, but didn&#x27;t result in actual conquest of territory. According to historian James Tracy, the armies Croatian ban could muster proved too few to counter akinji raids along the long border with the Ottoman Empire. On the other hand, armies of Croatian nobility could never mobilize fast enough to intercept akinji raids &quot;head on&quot;, instead, Croatians hoped to intercept Ottoman raiders on their return, as they were slowed down by their booty and hostages.

Frequent Ottoman raids eventually led to the 1493 Battle of Krbava field which ended in Croatian defeat.

Meanwhile, after king Mathias Corvinus died in 1490, a succession war ensued, where supporters of Vladislaus Jagiellon prevailed over those of Maximilian Habsburg, another contester to the throne of Kingdom of Hungary-Croatia. Maximilian gained many supporters among Croatian nobility and a favourable peace treaty he concluded with Vladislaus enabled Croatians to increasingly turn towards Habsburgs when seeking protections from the Ottoman attacks, as their lawful king Vladislaus turned out unable to protect his subjects in Croatia. On same year, the estates of Croatia also declined to recognize Vladislaus II as a ruler until he had taken an oath to respect their liberties and insisted that he strike from the constitution certain phrases which seemed to reduce Croatia to the rank of a mere province. The dispute was resolved in 1492 when according to Lujo Margetić, king Vladislaus recognised the authonomy of both Croatia and Slavonia, whose nobility gave a separate confirmation to the succession agreement between Vladislaus and the house of Habsburg, enabling Croatians and Slavonians to have their say in future interregnum periods. 

==Croatia in the Habsburg monarchy (1527–1918)==
A decisive battle between Hungarian army and the Ottomans occurred on Mohács in 1526, where Hungarian king Louis II was killed and his army was destroyed. As a consequence, in November of the same year, the Hungarian parliament elected János Szapolyai as the new king of Hungary. In December 1526, another Hungarian parliament elected Ferdinand Habsburg as King of Hungary.

=== 1527 Cetingrad Assembly ===

According to historian , the crucial decision determining next four centuries of Croatian history happened when Croatian nobles assembled in Cetingrad in 1527 and chose Ferdinand I of the House of Habsburg as the new ruler of Croatia. Albeit Habsburg delegation composed of Pavao Oberstein, Nikola Jurišić and Ivan Puchler arrived in Cetingrad, Croatia, as early s Christmas Eve 1526, they had to wait, as Croat high dignitaries spent Christmas holidays at home. After finally assemblying on New Year&#x27;s Eve 1526, Croats publicly proclaimed their decision on a mass held next day in Francisian Monastery in Cetin. In turn, the present Habsburg delegation confirmed that new Habsburg rulers will contribute to the defense of Croatia against the Ottomans, and respect its political rights. 

As Assembly of neighbouring Slavonia, on the other hand, elected Szapolyai - a civil war between the two rival kings ensued, but later both crowns united as the Habsburgs prevailed over Szapolyai. The Ottoman Empire used these instabilities to expand in the 16th century to include most of Slavonia, western Bosnia (then called Turkish Croatia), and Lika. Those territories initially made up part of Rumelia Eyalet, and subsequently parts of Budin Eyalet, Bosnia Eyalet, and Kanije Eyalet.

=== Remnants of the remnants ===

Croats and Slavonians fought an increasing number of battles, but lost increasing swathes of territory to the Ottoman Empire, until being reduced to what is commonly called in Croatian historiography the &quot;Remains of the Remains of Once Glorious Croatian Kingdom&quot; (&quot;Reliquiae reliquiarum olim inclyti regni Croatiae&quot;), or simply the &quot;Remains of the Remains&quot;. By the late 16th century Remnants of the Remnants stretched at around 18200 km2. The eastern border towards the Ottoman Empire went through the Pitomača - Rača - Moslavina line. Southern border towards the Ottoman Empire went a bit below the line Sisak - Petrinja - Karlovac and continued southwest towards the Adriatic. The western border towards Carniola and Styria were rivers Kupa and Sutla, while Mura and Drava rivers made frontier towards the Hungary.

==== Amalgamation of medieval Croatia and medieval Slavonia ====
The area spanning between rivers Sava and Drava on north-south axis and river Sutla and Požega valley on west-east axis, during medieval period came to be known as Slavonia. Its first recorded Assembly of nobles was held in 1273 in Zagreb. Albeit Slavonia shared certain ties with medieval Croatia, it was more tightly connected to Hungary than Croatia Proper was. In 15th century, during the rule of Vladislaus Jagiellon, Slavonia was granted the status of Kingdom. At the same time, ongoing Ottoman attacks on Croatia, coupled with famines, diseases, and a cold climate, led to widespread depopulation and a refugee crisis as people fled to safer areas. Croatian historian Ivan Jurković points out that due to the combination of these factors, Croatia &quot;lost almost three-fifths of its population&quot; and the compactness of its territory. Consequently, the center of the medieval Croatian state gradually shifted northwards into western Slavonia, around Zagreb. As both nobility and commoners migrated from Croatia to Slavonia, the territory also gradually began to be called Croatia. On 1 September 1558, due to Ottoman pressure, the two assemblies of Kingdom of Slavonia and Kingdom of Croatia were permanently merged into one single assembly then called The Assembly of Kingdom of Croatia and Slavonia (Croatian: Sabor Kraljevine Hrvatske i Slavonije), held in Zagreb. On assembly session held on 7 March 1577, Zagreb was for the first time called the capital city of Croatia-Slavonia. 

==== Formation of Military Frontier ====
Later in 16th century, Croatia was so weak that its parliament authorized Ferdinand Habsburg to carve out large areas of Croatia and Slavonia adjacent to the Ottoman Empire for the creation of the Military Frontier (&quot;Vojna Krajina&quot;, German: &quot;Militaergrenze&quot;) - a buffer zone for the Ottoman Empire managed directly by the Imperial War Council in Austria. This buffer area became devastated and depopulated due to constant warfare and was subsequently settled by Serbs, Vlachs, Croats, and Germans. As a result of their compulsory military service to the Habsburg Empire during the conflict with the Ottoman Empire, the population in the Military Frontier was free of serfdom and enjoyed much political autonomy, unlike the population living in the parts managed by the Croatian Ban and Sabor. They were considered free peasant-soldiers who were granted land without the usual feudal obligations, except for the military service. This was officially confirmed by an Imperial decree of 1630 called &quot;Statuta Valachorum&quot; (Vlach Statutes).

The territory of Military Frontier was initially subdivided into Slavonian Frontier (subsequently known as Varaždin Generalate), Croatian Frontier (subsequently known as Karlovac Generalate) and Žumberak District. The area between villages of Bović and Brkiševina was called Banska Krajina (or subsequently Banovina, Banija). The difference between latter and remaining Military Frontier was that Banska krajina (Ban&#x27;s Frontier) was under command and financing of ban of Croatia so its defense was basically the responsibility of Croatia. Unlike remaining Military Frontier which was under direct command of Imperial Military Authorities, Banska Krajina was not taken away from Croatia.

==== The Long War: Hasan Pasha&#x27;s Great Offensive ====

As Ottomans concluded their War against Safavid Persia in 1590, the belligerent Teli Hasan Pasha was appointed new governor of Ottoman Bosnian Eyalet. He launched his great offensive on Croatia, aimed at completely conquering Croatian &quot;Remnants of the Remnants&quot;. In order to do that, he mobilized all available troops from his Bosnian Eyalet. Although his offensive did achieve substantial success against Croatians and their allies, such as victories in Siege of Bihać (which Croatians never managed to retake again) or in Battle of Brest, his campaign was ultimately stopped in June 1593 Battle of Sisak. Not only the Ottomans lost this battle, but Hasan Pasha got killed in the fray. News of Bosnian Pasha&#x27;s defeat near Sisak caused outrage in Constantinople. Now, the Ottomans officially decided to declare war to Habsburg Monarchy, triggering the start of Long Turkish War. In strategic sense, the Ottoman defeat near Sisak led to stabilization of border between Croatia and the Ottoman Empire. Historian claims that this stability of Croatian-Ottoman border was a general characteristic of the 17th century, as Ottoman Empire&#x27;s might started declining.
=== Zrinski-Frankopan conspiracy ===
During the 17th century, distinguished Croatian noble Nikola Zrinski became one of the most prominent Croatian generals in the fight against the Ottomans. In 1663/1664 he led a successful incursion into Ottoman-controlled territory. The campaign ended in the destruction of the vital Osijek bridge, which served as a connection between the Pannonian plain and the Balkan territories. As a reward for his victory against the Ottomans, Zrinski was commended by French king Louis XIV, thereby establishing contact with the French court. Croatian nobility also constructed Novi Zrin castle which sought to protect Croatia and Hungary from further Ottoman advances. At the same time, emperor Leopold of Habsburg sought to impose absolute rule on the entire Habsburg territory, which meant a loss of authority for the Croatian parliament and Ban and caused dissatisfaction with Habsburg rule among Croats.

In July 1664, a large Ottoman army besieged and destroyed Novi Zrin. As this army marched on Austrian lands, its campaign ended at the Battle of St. Gotthard, where it was destroyed by the Habsburg imperial army. Given this victory, Croatians expected a decisive Habsburg counter-offensive to push the Ottomans back and relieve pressure on Croatian lands, but Leopold decided to conclude the unfavorable Vasvar peace treaty with the Ottomans because it solved problems he had on the Rhine with the French at the time. In Croatia, his decision caused outrage among leading nobles and sparked a conspiracy to replace the Habsburgs with different rulers. After Nikola Zrinski died under unusual circumstances while hunting, his relatives Fran Krsto Frankopan and Petar Zrinski supported the conspiracy.

The conspirators established contact with the French, Venetians, Poles, and eventually even the Ottomans, only to be discovered by Habsburg spies at the Ottoman court who served as the sultan&#x27;s translators. The conspirators were invited to reconcile with the emperor, to which they agreed. However, when they came to Austria, they were charged with high treason and sentenced to death. They were executed in Wiener Neustadt in April 1671. Their families, whose history was intertwined with centuries of Croatian history, were subsequently eradicated by imperial authorities, and all of their possessions were confiscated.

=== Great Turkish War: A revived Croatia ===
Despite the decline of Ottoman might in the 17th century, the Ottoman high command decided to attack the Habsburg capital of Vienna in 1683, as the Vasvár peace treaty was about to expire. Their attack, however, ended in disaster, and the Ottomans were ultimately routed near Vienna by joint Christian armies defending the city. Soon thereafter, the Holy League was formed and the Great Turkish War was launched. In the Croatian theater of operations, several commanders distinguished themselves, including friar Luka Ibrišimović, whose rebels defeated the Ottomans in Požega, and Marko Mesić, who led the anti-Ottoman uprising in Lika. Hajduk leader Stojan Janković distinguished himself by leading troops in Dalmatia. Croatian Ban Nikola (Miklos) Erdody led his troops in Siege of Virovitica, which was liberated from the Ottomans in 1684. Osijek was liberated by 1687, Kostajnica was liberated by 1688, and Slavonski Brod was liberated by 1691. An attempt to retake Bihać was also made in 1697 but was eventually called off due to lack a of cannons. In the same year, general Eugene of Savoy led a 6500-strong army from Osijek into Bosnia, where he raided the seat of Bosnia Eyalet, Sarajevo, burning it to the ground. After this raid, large groups of Christian refugees from Bosnia settled in what was then an almost empty Slavonia. After the decisive Ottoman defeat in the Battle of Zenta in 1697 by the forces of Eugene of Savoy, the Peace of Karlowitz was signed in 1699, confirming the liberation of all of Slavonia from the Ottomans. For Croatia, nonetheless, large chunks of its late medieval territories between the rivers Una and Vrbas were lost, as they remained part of the Ottoman Bosnia Eyalet. In the following years, the use of the German language spread in the new military borderland and proliferated over the next two centuries as German-speaking colonists settled in the borderlands.

===Enlightened despotism===

By the 18th century, the Ottoman Empire had been driven out of Hungary, and Austria brought the empire under central control. Since the emperor Charles VI had no male heirs, he wanted to leave the imperial throne to his daughter Maria Theresa of Austria, which eventually led to the War of Austrian Succession of 1741–1748. The Croatian Parliament decided to accept Maria Theresa as a legitimate ruler by drafting the Pragmatic Sanction of 1712, asking in return that whoever inherited the throne recognize and respect Croatian autonomy from Hungary. The king unwillingly granted this. The rule of Maria Theresa brought limited modernization in education and health care. Croatian Royal Council (&quot;Consilium Regni Croatiae&quot;), which served as the de facto Croatian government, was founded in Varaždin in 1767, but it was abolished in 1779 and its authority was passed to Hungary. The foundation of the Croatian Royal Council in Varaždin made this town the administrative capital of Croatia, however, a large fire in 1776 caused significant damage to the city, so these major Croatian administrative institutions moved to Zagreb.

Maria Theresa&#x27;s heir, Joseph II of Austria, also ruled in an enlightened absolutist manner, but his reforms were marked by attempts at centralization and Germanization. In this period, roads were built connecting Karlovac with Rijeka, and Jozefina connecting Karlovac with Senj. With the Treaty of Sistova, which ended the Austro-Turkish War (1788–1791), the Ottoman-held areas of Donji Lapac and Cetingrad, along with the villages of Drežnik Grad and Jasenovac, were ceded to the Habsburg monarchy and incorporated into the Croatian Military Frontier.

=== 19th century in Croatia ===

==== Napoleonic Wars ====

As Napoleon&#x27;s armies started to dominate Europe, Croatian lands came into contact with the French as well. When Napoleon abolished the Republic of Venice in 1797, former Venetian possessions in Dalmatia came under Habsburg rule. In 1809, as Napoleon defeated the Austrians in the Battle of Wagram, French-controlled territory eventually expanded to the Sava river. The French founded the &quot;Illyrian Provinces&quot; centered in Ljubljana and appointed Marshal Auguste de Marmont as their governor-general. The French presence brought the liberal ideas of the French Revolution to the Croats. The French founded Masonic lodges, built infrastructure, and printed the first newspapers in the local language in Dalmatia. Called &quot;Kraglski Datmatin/Il Regio Dalmata&quot;, it was printed in both Italian and Croatian. Croatian soldiers accompanied Napoleon in his conquests as far as Russia. In 1808, Napoleon abolished the Republic of Ragusa. Ottomans from Bosnia raided French Croatia and occupied the area of Cetingrad in 1809. Auguste de Marmont reacted by occupying Bihać on 5 May 1810. After the Ottomans promised to stop raiding French territories and withdraw from the Cetingrad, he withdrew from Bihać.

With the fall of Napoleon, the French-controlled Croatian lands came back under Austrian rule.

==== Croatian national revival and the Illyrian Movement ====

Under the influence of German romanticism, French political thought, and pan-Slavism, Croatian romantic nationalism emerged in the mid-19th century to counteract the Germanization and Magyarization of Croatia. Ljudevit Gaj emerged as a leader of the Croatian national movement. One of the important issues to be resolved was the question of language, where regional Croatian dialects had to be standardized. Since the Shtokavian dialect, widespread among Croats, was also common with Serbs, this movement likewise had a South-Slavic characteristic. At the time, &quot;Croatian&quot; only referred to the population in southwestern parts of what is today Croatia, while &quot;Illyrian&quot; was used throughout the south-Slavic world; wider masses of people were attempted to attract by using the Illyrian name. Illyrian activists chose the Shtokavian dialect over Kajkavian as the standardized version of Croatian language. The Illyrian movement was not accepted by the Serbs or the Slovenes, and it remained strictly a Croatian national movement. In 1832, Croatian count Janko Drašković wrote a manifesto of Croatian national revival called &quot;Disertacija&quot; (&quot;Dissertation&quot;). The manifesto called for the unification of Croatia with Slavonia, Dalmatia, Rijeka, the Military Frontier, Bosnia, and Slovene lands into a single unit inside the Hungarian part of the Austrian Empire. This unit would have Croatian as the official language and would be governed by Ban. The movement spread throughout Dalmatia, Istria and among Bosnian Francisian monks. It resulted in the emergence of the modern Croatian nation and eventually the formation of the first Croatian political parties. After the usage, the Illyrian name was banned in 1843; the proponents of Illyrianism changed their name to Croatian.

On 2 May 1843, Ivan Kukuljević Sakcinski held the first speech on Croatian language in the Croatian Sabor, requesting that the Croatian language be made the official language in public institutions. At this point, this was a significant step, because Latin was still in use in public institutions in Croatia. In the Sabor in 1847 Croatian was proclaimed as an official language in Croatia.

According to Croatian historian Nenad Moačanin, appearance of Romanticism also affected portion of Vlachs settled in Croatian depopulated areas who declared themselves as Serbs.

==== Croats in revolutions of 1848 ====
In the Revolutions of 1848, the Triune Kingdom of Croatia, Slavonia, and Dalmatia, driven by fear of Magyar nationalism, supported the Habsburg court against Hungarian revolutionary forces.

During a session of the Croatian Sabor held on 25 March 1848, colonel Josip Jelačić was elected as Ban of Croatia, and a petition called &quot;Demands of The People&quot; (&quot;Zahtjevanja naroda&quot;) was drafted to be handed over to the Austrian Emperor. These liberal demands asked for independence, unification of Croatian lands, a Croatian government responsible to the Croatian parliament and independent from Hungary, financial independence from Hungary, the introduction of the Croatian language in offices and schools, freedom of the press, religious freedom, abolishment of serfdom, abolishment of nobility privileges, the foundation of a people&#x27;s army, and equality before the law.

As the Hungarian government denied the existence of the Croatian name and nationhood and treated Croatian institutions like provincial authorities, Jelačić severed ties between Croatia and Hungary. In May 1848, Ban&#x27;s Council was formed which had all the executive powers of the Croatian government. The Croatian parliament abolished feudalism, serfdom and demanded that the Monarchy become a constitutional federal state of equal nations with independent national governments and one federal parliament in the capital of Vienna. The Croatian parliament also demanded the unification of the Military Frontier and Dalmatia with Croatia proper. Sabor also asked for an undefined alliance with Istria, Slovene lands and parts of southern Hungary inhabited with Croats and Serbs. Jelačić was also appointed the governor of Rijeka and Dalmatia as well as the &quot;Imperial Commander of Military Frontier&quot;, thus having most of the Croatian lands under his rule. The breakdown of negotiations between Croats and the Hungarians eventually led to war. Jelačić declared war on Hungary on 7 September 1848. On 11 September 1848, the Croatian army crossed the Drava river and annexed Međimurje. Upon crossing Drava, Jelačić ordered his army to switch Croatian national flags with Habsburg Imperial flags.

Despite the contributions of its Ban Josip Jelačić in quenching the Hungarian war of independence, in the aftermath, Croatia was not treated any more favorably by Vienna than the Hungarians and therefore lost its domestic autonomy.

==== Croatia in Dual Monarchy ====

The dual monarchy of Austria-Hungary was created in 1867 through the Austro-Hungarian Compromise. Croatian autonomy was restored in 1868 with the Croatian–Hungarian Settlement, which was comparatively favorable for the Croatians, but still problematic because of issues such as the unresolved status of Rijeka. In 1873, the territory of Military Frontier was demilitarized and in July 1871 a decision was made to incorporate it into Croatia with Croatian ban Ladislav Pejačević taking over the authority. Pejačević&#x27;s successor Károly Khuen-Héderváry caused further problems by violating the Croatian-Hungarian Settlement through his hardline Magyarization policies in period from 1883 to 1903. Héderváry&#x27;s Magyarization of Croatia led to massive riots in 1903, when Croatian protesters burnt Hungarian flags and clashed with the gendarmes and the military, resulting in the death of several protesters. As a consequence of these riots, Héderváry left his position as Ban of Croatia, but was appointed prime minister of Hungary.

A year earlier, in 1902, &quot;Srbobran&quot;, the newspaper of Zagreb Serbs, published an article titled &quot;Do istrage naše ili vaše&quot; (Until us, or you get exterminated). The article was filled with Greater Serbian ideology; its text denied the existence of the Croatian nation and the Croatian language and announced Serbian victory over &quot;servile Croats&quot;, who would, the article proclaimed, be exterminated.

The article sparked major anti-Serb riots in Zagreb, in which barricades were raised and Serb-owned properties were attacked. Serbs of Zagreb eventually distanced themselves from the opinions published in the article.

World War I brought an end to the Dual Monarchy. Croatia suffered a great loss of life in World War I. Late in the war, there were proposals to transform the dualist monarchy into a federalist one, with a separate Croatian/South Slavic section, however, these plans were never carried out, due to Woodrow Wilson&#x27;s announcement of a policy of self-determination for peoples of Austria-Hungary.

Shortly before the end of the war in 1918, the Croatian Parliament severed relations with Austria-Hungary after receiving the news that the Czechoslovak parts had also separated from Austria-Hungary. The Triune Kingdom of Croatia, Slavonia, and Dalmatia became a part of the newly created provisional State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs. This internationally unrecognized state was composed of all of the South Slavic territories of the old Austro-Hungarian Monarchy with a transitional government located in Zagreb. Its biggest issue, however, was the advancing Italian army that sought to capture the Croatian Adriatic territories promised to them by the Treaty of London in 1915. A solution was sought through unification with the Kingdom of Serbia, which had an army capable of confronting the Italians as well as the international legitimacy among the members of the Entente Cordiale, which was about to carve new European borders at the Paris Peace Conference.

== Croats inside the first Yugoslavia (1918–1941) ==
A new state was created in late 1918. Syrmia left Croatia-Slavonia and joined Serbia together with Vojvodina, shortly followed by a referendum to join Bosnia and Herzegovina to Serbia. The People&#x27;s Council of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs (&quot;Narodno vijeće&quot;), guided by what was by that time a half-century-long tradition of pan-Slavism and without the sanction of the Croatian Sabor, merged with the Kingdom of Serbia into the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes.

In the immediate aftermath of the war, the Allies of World War I occupied the eastern Adriatic within the framework of resolution of the Adriatic question. An attempt at resolution of the issue came in 1920 with the Treaty of Rapallo.

The Kingdom underwent a crucial change in 1921 to the dismay of Croatia&#x27;s largest political party, the Croatian Peasant Party (&quot;Hrvatska seljačka stranka&quot;). The new constitution abolished historical/political entities, including Croatia and Slavonia, centralizing authority in the capital of Belgrade. The Croatian Peasant Party boycotted the government of the Serbian People&#x27;s Radical Party throughout the period, except for a brief interlude between 1925 and 1927, when external Italian expansionism was at hand with her allies, Albania, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria, threatening Yugoslavia as a whole. Two differing concepts of how the new common state should be governed became the main source of conflict between Croatian elites led by the Croatian Peasant Party and Serbian elites. Leading Croatian politicians sought a federalized new state in which Croats would have certain autonomy (similar to what they had before in Austria-Hungary), while Serb-centered parties advocated unitarist policies, centralization, and assimilation. The new country&#x27;s military was also a predominately Serbian institution; by 1938 only about 10% of all Army officers were Croats. The new school system was Serb-centered with Croatian teachers being either retired, purged, or transferred. Serbs were also posted as high state officials. The replacement of old Austro-Hungarian krones was conducted through an unfair rate of four Krones for one Serbian Dinar.

In the early 1920s, the Yugoslav government of Serbian prime minister Nikola Pašić used police pressure on voters and ethnic minorities, confiscation of opposition pamphlets, and election-rigging to keep the opposition, mainly the Croatian Peasant Party and its allies, in the minority in the Yugoslav parliament. Pašić believed that Yugoslavia should be as centralized as possible, creating a Greater Serbian national concept of concentrated power in the hands of Belgrade in place of distinct regional governments and identities.
=== Murders of 1928 and royal dictatorship ===
During a Parliament session in 1928, Puniša Račić, a deputy of the Serbian Radical People&#x27;s Party, shot at Croatian deputies, resulting in the killing of Pavle Radić and Đuro Basariček and the wounding of Ivan Pernar and Ivan Granđa. Stjepan Radić, a Croatian political champion at the time, was wounded and later succumbed to his wounds. These multiple murders caused the outrage of the Croatian population and ignited violent demonstrations, strikes, and armed conflicts throughout Croatian parts of the country. The Greater Serbian-influenced Royal Yugoslav Court even considered &quot;amputation&quot; of Croatian parts of the country, while leaving Yugoslavia only inside Greater Serbian borders, however, Croatian Peasant Party leadership rejected this idea. While Račić was subsequently tried for multiple murders, he served his sentence in a luxurious villa in Požarevac, where he had several servants at his disposal and was allowed to leave and return at any time.

In response to the shooting at the National Assembly, King Alexander abolished the parliamentary system and proclaimed a royal dictatorship. He imposed a new constitution aimed at removing all existing national identities and imposing &quot;integral Yugoslavism&quot;. He also renamed the country from the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. The territory of Croatia was largely divided among the Sava Banovina and the Littoral Banovina. Political parties were banned and the royal dictatorship took on an increasingly harsh character. Vladko Maček, who had succeeded Radić as leader of the Croatian Peasant Party, the largest political party in Croatia, was imprisoned. Ante Pavelić was exiled from Yugoslavia and created the ultranationalist Ustaše Movement, with the ultimate goal of destroying Yugoslavia and making Croatia an independent country. According to the British historian Misha Glenny, the murder in March 1929 of Toni Schlegel, editor of the pro-Yugoslavian newspaper &quot;Novosti&quot;, brought a &quot;furious response&quot; from the regime. In Lika and west Herzegovina in particular, described as &quot;hotbeds of Croatian separatism&quot;, Glenny wrote that the majority-Serb police acted &quot;with no restraining authority whatsoever&quot;. In the words of a prominent Croatian writer, Schlegel&#x27;s death became the pretext for terror in all forms. Politics was soon &quot;indistinguishable from gangsterism&quot;. In 1931, the royal regime organized the assassination of Croatian scientist and intellectual Milan Šufflay on the streets of Zagreb. The assassination was condemned by globally renowned intellectuals such as Albert Einstein and Heinrich Mann. In 1932, the Ustaše Movement unsuccessfully planned the Velebit uprising in Lika. Despite the oppressive climate, few rallied to the Ustaša cause and the movement was never able to gain serious support among the Croatian population.

=== Banovina of Croatia ===
In 1934, King Aleksandar was assassinated during a state visit to Marseille by a coalition of the Ustaše and the Bulgarian Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO), thus ending the Royal dictatorship. The government of Serbian Radical Milan Stojadinović, which took power in 1935, distanced Yugoslavia from its former allies of France and the United Kingdom and moved the country closer to Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany. In 1937 Yugoslav gendarmes led by Radical Party member Jovo Koprivica killed dozens of youth members of the Croatian Peasant Party in Senj because they sang Croatian patriotic songs. With the rise of Nazis in Germany and the looming possibility of another European war, Serbian political elites decided that it was time to fix relations with the Croats, the second largest ethnic group in the country, so that in the event of a new war the country would be united and without ethnic divisions. Negotiations started, resulting in the Cvetković–Maček Agreement and the creation of Banovina of Croatia, an autonomous Croatian province inside Yugoslavia. Banovina of Croatia was created in 1939 out of the two Banates, as well as parts of the Zeta, Vrbas, Drina, and Danube Banates. It had a reconstructed Croatian Parliament which would choose a Croatian Ban and Viceban. This Croatia included a part of Bosnia, most of Herzegovina, and Dubrovnik and its surroundings.

==World War II and the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945)==


The Axis occupation of Yugoslavia in 1941 allowed the Croatian radical right Ustaše to come into power, forming the &quot;Independent State of Croatia&quot; (&quot;Nezavisna Država Hrvatska&quot;, NDH), led by Ante Pavelić, who assumed the role of &quot;Poglavnik&quot;. Following the pattern of other fascist regimes in Europe, the Ustaše enacted racial laws and formed eight concentration camps targeting minority Serbs, Romas, and Jewish populations, as well as Croatian and Bosnian Muslim opponents of the regime. The biggest concentration camp was Jasenovac in Croatia. The NDH had a program, formulated by Mile Budak, to purge Croatia of Serbs, by &quot;killing one third, expelling the other third and assimilating the remaining third&quot;. The main targets for persecution were the Serbs, of whom approximately 330,000 were killed.

Various Serbian nationalist Chetnik groups also committed atrocities against Croats across many areas of Lika and parts of northern Dalmatia. During World War II in Yugoslavia, the Chetniks killed an estimated 18,000-32,000 Croats.

The anti-fascist communist-led Partisan movement, based on a pan-Yugoslav ideology, emerged in early 1941 under the command of Croatian-born Josip Broz Tito, and spread quickly into many parts of Yugoslavia. The 1st Sisak Partisan Detachment, often hailed as the first armed anti-fascist resistance unit in occupied Europe, was formed in Croatia, in the Brezovica Forest near the town of Sisak. As the movement began to gain popularity, the Partisans gained strength from Croats, Bosniaks, Serbs, Slovenes, and Macedonians who believed in a unified, but federal, Yugoslav state.

By 1943, the Partisan resistance movement had gained the upper hand and in 1945, with help from the Soviet Red Army (passing only through small parts such as Vojvodina), expelled the Axis forces and local supporters. The State Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Croatia (ZAVNOH) functioned since 1942 and formed an interim civil government by 1943. NDH&#x27;s ministers of War and Internal Security Mladen Lorković and Ante Vokić tried to switch to the Allied side. Pavelić was, in the beginning, supporting them but when he found that he would need to leave his position he imprisoned them in Lepoglava prison where they were executed.

Following the defeat of the Independent State of Croatia at the end of the war, a large number of Ustaše, civilians supporting them (ranging from sympathizers, young conscripts or anti-communists), Chetniks and anti-Communists attempted to flee in the direction of Austria, hoping to surrender to British forces and to be given refuge. Following the Bleiburg repatriations, they were instead interned by British forces, and returned to the Partisans where they were subject to mass executions.

== Socialist Yugoslavia (1945–1991) ==

===Tito&#x27;s leadership of the LCY (1945–1980)===

Croatia was one of six constituent socialist republics of the Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia. Under the new communist system, privately owned factories and estates were nationalized, and the economy was based on a type of planned market socialism. The country underwent a rebuilding process, recovered from World War II, went through industrialization, and started developing tourism.

The country&#x27;s socialist system also provided free apartments from large companies, which with the workers&#x27; self-management investments paid for the living spaces. From 1963, the citizens of Yugoslavia were allowed to travel to almost any country because of the neutral politics. No visas were required to travel to eastern or western countries or capitalist or communist nations. Such free travel was unheard of at the time in the Eastern Bloc countries, and in some western countries as well (e.g., Spain or Portugal, both dictatorships at the time). This proved to be helpful for Croatia&#x27;s inhabitants who found working in foreign countries more financially rewarding. Upon retirement, a popular plan was to return to live in Croatia (then Yugoslavia) to buy more expensive property.

In Yugoslavia, the people of Croatia were guaranteed free healthcare, free dental care, and secure pensions. The older generation found this very comforting as pensions would sometimes exceed their former paychecks. Free trade and travel within the country also helped Croatian industries that imported and exported throughout all the former republics.

Students and military personnel were encouraged to visit other republics to learn more about the country, and all levels of education, including secondary education and higher education, were free. In reality, the housing was inferior with poor heat and plumbing, the medical care often lacking even in the availability of antibiotics, schools were propaganda machines and travel was a necessity to provide the country with hard currency. The propagandists, who want people to believe &quot;neutral policies&quot; equalized Serbs and Croats, severely restricted free speech and did not protect citizens from ethnic attacks.

Membership in the League of Communists of Yugoslavia was as much a prerequisite for admission to colleges and government jobs as in the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin or Nikita Khrushchev. Private sector businesses did not grow as the taxes on private enterprise were often prohibitive. Inexperienced management sometimes ruled policy and controlled decisions by brute force. Strikes were forbidden, and owners/managers were not permitted to make changes or decisions which would impact their productivity or profit.

The economy developed into a type of socialism called &quot;samoupravljanje&quot; (self-management), in which workers controlled socially-owned enterprises. This kind of market socialism created significantly better economic conditions than in the Eastern Bloc countries. Croatia went through intensive industrialization in the 1960s and 1970s with industrial output increasing several-fold and with Zagreb surpassing Belgrade in industry. Factories and other organizations were often named after Partisans who were declared national heroes. This practice also spread to street names, as well as the names of parks and buildings.

Before World War II, Croatia&#x27;s industry was not developed, with the vast majority of the people employed in agriculture. By 1991, the country was completely transformed into a modern industrialized state. At the same time, the Croatian Adriatic coast had become a popular tourist destination, and the coastal republics (but mostly SR Croatia) profited greatly from this, as tourist numbers reached levels still unsurpassed in modern Croatia. The government brought unprecedented economic and industrial growth, high levels of social security, and a very low crime rate. The country completely recovered from WWII and achieved a very high GDP and economic growth rate, significantly higher than those of the present-day republic.
The constitution of 1963 balanced power in the country between the Croats and the Serbs and alleviated the imbalance coming from the fact that the Croats were again in a minority position. Trends after 1965 (like the fall of OZNA and UDBA chief Aleksandar Ranković from power in 1966), however, led to the Croatian Spring of 1970–71, when students in Zagreb organized demonstrations to achieve greater civil liberties and greater Croatian autonomy. The regime stifled public protest and incarcerated the leaders, but this led to the ratification of a new constitution in 1974, giving more rights to the individual republics.

Radical Ustaše cells of Croatian émigrés based in Australia and Western Europe planned and attempted to carry out acts of sabotage within Yugoslavia, including an incursion from Austria of 19 armed men in June 1971, who unsuccessfully aimed to incite a popular Croatian uprising against what they called the &quot;Serbo-communist&quot; regime in Belgrade.

===Until the breakup of Yugoslavia (1980–1991)===

In 1980, after Tito&#x27;s death, economic, political, and religious difficulties started to mount and the federal government began to crumble. The crisis in Kosovo and, in 1986, the emergence of Slobodan Milošević in Serbia provoked a very negative reaction in Croatia and Slovenia; politicians from both republics feared that his motives would threaten their republics&#x27; autonomy. With the climate of change throughout Eastern Europe during the 1980s, the communist hegemony was challenged (at the same time, the Milošević government began to gradually concentrate Yugoslav power in Serbia, and calls for free multi-party elections were becoming louder).

In June 1989, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) was founded by Croatian nationalist dissidents led by Franjo Tuđman, a former fighter in Tito&#x27;s Partisan movement and a JNA General. At this time, Yugoslavia was still a one-party state and open manifestations of Croatian nationalism were considered dangerous, so a new party was founded in an almost conspiratorial manner. It was only on 13 December 1989 that the governing League of Communists of Croatia agreed to legalize opposition political parties and hold free elections in the spring of 1990.

On 23 January 1990, at its 14th Congress, the Communist League of Yugoslavia voted to remove its monopoly on political power. The same day, it effectively ceased to exist as a national party when the League of Communists of Slovenia walked out after SR Serbia&#x27;s President Slobodan Milošević blocked all their reformist proposals, which caused the League of Communists of Croatia to further distance themselves from the idea of a joint state.

==Republic of Croatia (1991–present)==

===Introduction of multi-party political system===

On 22 April and 7 May 1990, the first free multi-party elections were held in Croatia. Franjo Tuđman&#x27;s Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) won by a 42% margin against Ivica Račan&#x27;s reformed communist Party of Democratic Change (SDP) who won 26%. Croatia&#x27;s first-past-the-post election system enabled Tuđman to form the government relatively independently, as the win translated into 205 mandates (out of 351 total). The HDZ intended to secure independence for Croatia, contrary to the wishes of some ethnic Serbs in the republic and federal politicians in Belgrade. The excessively polarized climate soon escalated into complete estrangement between the two nations and spiraled into sectarian violence.

On 25 July 1990, a Serbian Assembly was established in Srb, north of Knin, as the political representation of the Serbian people in Croatia. The Serbian Assembly declared &quot;sovereignty and autonomy of the Serb people in Croatia&quot;. Their position was that if Croatia could secede from Yugoslavia, then the Serbs could secede from Croatia. Milan Babić, a dentist from the southern town of Knin, was elected president. The rebel Croatian Serbs established some paramilitary militias under the leadership of Milan Martić, the police chief in Knin.

On 17 August 1990, the Serbs of Croatia began what became known as the Log Revolution, where barricades of logs were placed across roads throughout the South as an expression of their secession from Croatia. This effectively cut Croatia in two, separating the coastal region of Dalmatia from the rest of the country. The Croatian government responded to the road blockades by sending special police teams in helicopters to the scene, but they were intercepted by SFR Yugoslav Air Force fighter jets and forced to turn back to Zagreb.

The Croatian constitution was passed in December 1990, categorizing Serbs as a minority group along with other ethnic groups. On 21 December 1990, Babić&#x27;s administration announced the creation of a Serbian Autonomous Oblast of Krajina (or &quot;SAO Krajina&quot;). Other Serb-dominated communities in eastern Croatia announced that they would also join SAO Krajina and ceased paying taxes to the Zagreb government.

On Easter Sunday, 31 March 1991, the first fatal clashes occurred when police from the Croatian Ministry of the Interior (MUP) entered the Plitvice Lakes National Park to expel rebel Serb forces. Serb paramilitaries ambushed a bus carrying Croatian police into the national park on the road north of Korenica, sparking a day-long gun battle between the two sides. During the fighting, one Croat and one Serb policeman were killed. Twenty other people were injured and twenty-nine Krajina Serb paramilitaries and policemen were taken prisoner by Croatian forces. Among the prisoners was Goran Hadžić, who would later become the President of the Republic of Serbian Krajina.

On 2 May 1991, the Croatian parliament voted to hold an independence referendum. On 19 May 1991, with a turnout of almost 80%, 93.24% voted for independence. Krajina boycotted the referendum. They had held their referendum a week earlier on 12 May 1991 in the territories they controlled and voted to remain in Yugoslavia. The Croatian government did not recognize their referendum as valid.

On 25 June 1991, the Croatian Parliament declared independence from Yugoslavia. Slovenia declared independence from Yugoslavia on the same day.

===War of Independence (1991–1995)===
During the Croatian War of Independence, the civilian population fled the areas of armed conflict &quot;en masse&quot;, with hundreds of thousands of Croats moving away from the Bosnian and Serbian border areas. In many places, masses of civilians were forced out by the Yugoslav National Army (JNA), which consisted mostly of conscripts from Serbia and Montenegro, and irregulars from Serbia, participating in what became known as ethnic cleansing.

The border city of Vukovar underwent a three-month siege during the Battle of Vukovar. It left most of the city destroyed and a majority of the population was forced to flee. The city was taken over by the Serbian forces on 18 November 1991 and the Vukovar massacre occurred.

Subsequent United Nations-sponsored cease fires followed, and the warring parties were mostly entrenched. The Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army retreated from Croatia into Bosnia and Herzegovina where a new cycle of tensions was escalating—the Bosnian War was about to start. During 1992 and 1993, Croatia also handled an estimated 700,000 refugees from Bosnia, mainly Bosnian Muslims.

Armed conflict in Croatia remained intermittent and mostly small-scale until 1995. In early August, Croatia embarked on Operation Storm, an attack that quickly reconquered most of the territories from the Republic of Serbian Krajina authorities, leading to a mass exodus of the Serbian population. Estimates of the number of Serbs who fled before, during and after the operation range from 90,000 to 200,000.

As a result of this operation, a few months later the Bosnian War ended with the negotiation of the Dayton Agreement. A peaceful integration of the remaining Serbian-controlled territories in eastern Slavonia was completed in 1998 under UN supervision. The majority of the Serbs who fled from former Krajina did not return due to fears of ethnic violence, discrimination, and property repossession problems; and the Croatian government has yet to achieve the conditions for full reintegration. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, around 125,000 ethnic Serbs who fled the 1991–1995 conflict are registered as having returned to Croatia, of whom around 55,000 remain permanently.

===Transition period===
Croatia became a member of the Council of Europe in 1996. Between 1995 and 1997 Franjo Tuđman became increasingly more authoritiarian and refused to formally acknowledge local election results in City of Zagreb, leading to the Zagreb crisis. In 1996 his government attempted to shut down Radio 101, a popular radio station which was critical towards HDZ and often made fun of HDZ and Tuđman himself. When Radio 101&#x27;s broadcasting rights were revoked in 1996, some 120,000 Croatian citizens protested in Ban Jelačić Square against the decision. Tuđman gave the order to suppress the protest with a riot police, but then-minister of the internal affairs Ivan Jarnjak disobeyed his order for which he was subsequently dismissed from his position. While the years 1996 and 1997 were a period of post-war recovery and improving economic conditions, in 1998 and 1999 Croatia experienced an economic depression resulting in the unemployment of thousands.

The remainder of former self-proclaimed Krajina, adjacent to the FR Yugoslavia, negotiated a peaceful reintegration process with the Croatian government. The so-called Erdut Agreement made the area a temporary protectorate of the UN Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium. The area was formally re-integrated into Croatia by 1998.

Franjo Tuđman&#x27;s government started to lose popularity as it was criticized for its involvement in suspicious privatization deals in the early 1990s, as well as for international isolation. The country experienced a mild recession in 1998 and 1999.

Tuđman died in 1999 and in the early 2000 parliamentary elections, the nationalist Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) government was replaced by a center-left coalition under the Social Democratic Party of Croatia, with Ivica Račan as prime minister. At the same time, presidential elections were held which were won by a moderate, Stjepan Mesić. The new Račan government amended the constitution, changing the political system from a presidential system to a parliamentary system, transferring most executive presidential powers from the president to the institutions of the parliament and the prime minister.

The new government also started several large building projects, including state-sponsored housing, more rebuilding efforts to enable refugee return, and the building of the A1 highway connenting Zagreb and Split - two of Croatia&#x27;s largest cities. The country achieved notable economic growth during these years, while the unemployment rate continued to rise until 2001 when it finally started falling. Croatia became a World Trade Organization (WTO) member in 2000 and started the Accession of Croatia to the European Union in 2003.

In late 2003, new parliamentary elections were held and a reformed HDZ party won under the leadership of Ivo Sanader, who became prime minister. European accession was delayed by controversies over the extradition of army generals to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), including the runaway Ante Gotovina.

Sanader was reelected in the closely contested 2007 parliamentary election. Other complications continued to stall the EU negotiating process, most notably Slovenia&#x27;s blockade of Croatia&#x27;s EU accession in 2008–2009. In June 2009, Sanader abruptly resigned from his post and named Jadranka Kosor in his place. Kosor introduced austerity measures to counter the economic crisis and launched an anti-corruption campaign aimed at public officials. In late 2009, Kosor signed an agreement with Borut Pahor, the premier of Slovenia, that allowed the EU accession to proceed.

In the Croatian presidential election, 2009–2010, Ivo Josipović, the candidate of the SDP won a landslide victory.
Sanader tried to come back into HDZ in 2010 but was then ejected, and USKOK soon had him arrested on several corruption charges.

In November 2012, a court in Croatia sentenced former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, in office from 2003 to 2009, to 10 years in prison for taking bribes. Sanader tried to argue that the case against him was politically motivated.

In 2011, the accession agreement was concluded, giving Croatia the all-clear to join.

The 2011 Croatian parliamentary election was held on 4 December 2011, and the Kukuriku coalition won. After the election, the center-left government was formed led by new prime minister Zoran Milanović.

=== the European Union membership (2013–present) ===
Following the ratification of the Treaty of Accession 2011 and the successful 2012 Croatian European Union membership referendum, Croatia joined the EU on 1 July 2013.

In the 2014–15 Croatian presidential election, Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović became the first Croatian female President.

The 2015 Croatian parliamentary election resulted in the victory of the Patriotic Coalition which formed a new government with the Bridge of Independent Lists. However, a vote of no confidence brought down the Cabinet of Tihomir Orešković. After the 2016 Croatian parliamentary election, the Cabinet of Andrej Plenković was formed.

In January 2020, the former prime minister Zoran Milanović of the Social Democrats (SDP) won the presidential election. He defeated center-right incumbent Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović of the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ). In March 2020, the Croatian capital Zagreb experienced a 5.3 magnitude earthquake which caused significant damage to the city. In July 2020, the ruling center-right party HDZ won the parliamentary election. On 12 October 2020 right-wing extremist Danijel Bezuk attempted an attack on the building of the Croatian government, wounded a police officer in the process, and then killed himself. In December 2020. Banovina, one of the less developed regions of Croatia was shaken by a 6.4 M earthquake which killed several people and destroyed the town of Petrinja. Throughout two and half years of the global COVID-19 pandemic, 16,103 Croatian citizens died from the disease. In March 2022, a Soviet-made Tu-141 drone crashed in Zagreb, most likely due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. On 26 July 2022, Croatian authorities opened Pelješac Bridge, thus connecting the southernmost part of Croatia with the rest of the country. On 1 January 2023 Croatia became a member of both the Eurozone and Schengen Area.

==See also==

* Bans of Croatia
* Croatian art
* Croatian History Museum
* Croatian Military Frontier
* Croatian nobility
* Culture of Croatia
* History of Dalmatia
* History of Hungary
* History of Istria
* Hundred Years&#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War
* Kingdom of Dalmatia
* Kingdom of Slavonia
* Kings of Croatia
* List of noble families of Croatia
* List of rulers of Croatia
* Military history of Croatia
* Timeline of Croatian history
* Turkish Croatia
* Twelve noble tribes of Croatia

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* Patterson, Patrick Hyder. &quot;The futile crescent? Judging the legacies of Ottoman rule in Croatian history&quot;. &quot;Austrian History Yearbook&quot;, vol. 40, 2009, p. 125+. online. 


==External links==

*Croatian Institute of History
*Museum Documentation Center
*The Croatian History Museum
*&quot;Journal of Croatian Studies&quot;
*Short History of Croatia
*Overview of History, Culture, and Science
*History of Croatia: Primary Documents
*Overview of History, Culture and Science of Croatia
*WWW-VL History:Croatia
*Dr. Michael McAdams: Croatia – Myth and Reality
*Historical Maps of Croatia
*Croatia under Tomislav -from Nada Klaic book
*The History Files: Croatia
*A brief history of Croatia
*The Early History of Croatia
*Croatia since Independence 1990-2018</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="19" end="31" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="52" end="59" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="91" end="99" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330965" start="104" end="112" title="Dalmatia (Roman province)" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="124" end="132" title="Fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="140" end="160" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="212" end="222" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="272" end="288" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="333" end="338" title="duchy" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576305" start="363" end="379" title="Duchy of Croatia" label="Duchy of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="397" end="427" title="Pannonian Slavs#Principality" label="Principality of Lower Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858841" start="465" end="483" title="Kingdom of Croatia (925–1102)" label="Kingdom of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="574" end="588" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="598" end="616" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="669" end="672" title="Ban of Croatia" label="Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="684" end="689" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Sabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="757" end="764" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="766" end="772" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="782" end="799" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="893" end="907" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="929" end="944" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="974" end="989" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q58672" start="998" end="1028" title="dissolution of Austria-Hungary" label="dissolution of Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="1080" end="1101" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="1124" end="1146" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="1179" end="1207" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="1212" end="1223" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q312388" start="1297" end="1319" title="Bleiburg repatriations" label="Bleiburg repatriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="1325" end="1354" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="Socialist Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1371" end="1391" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia#Federal units" label="constituent republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="1399" end="1439" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016257" start="1509" end="1532" title="Independence of Croatia" label="proclaimed independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="1544" end="1569" title="Breakup of Yugoslavia" label="dissolution of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="1671" end="1689" title="prehistoric period" label="prehistoric period"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="1702" end="1714" title="Neanderthals" label="Neanderthals"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="1736" end="1748" title="Paleolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221189" start="1845" end="1852" title="Krapina" label="Krapina"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1874" end="1883" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="1888" end="1900" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483547" start="2088" end="2096" title="Starčevo culture" label="Starčevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q922829" start="2098" end="2105" title="Vučedol culture" label="Vučedol"/>
<link wikidata="Q687230" start="2110" end="2123" title="Baden culture" label="Baden culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2130" end="2138" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="2164" end="2172" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202165" start="2173" end="2190" title="Hallstatt culture" label="Hallstatt culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2199" end="2205" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="2206" end="2221" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q242270" start="2267" end="2287" title="Hecataeus of Miletus" label="Hecataeus of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q87521" start="2383" end="2389" title="Histri" label="Histri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259473" start="2394" end="2404" title="Liburnians" label="Liburnians"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="2410" end="2419" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2487" end="2490" title="Vis (town)#History" label="Vis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13288" start="2510" end="2517" title="Korčula" label="Korčula"/>
<link wikidata="Q220383" start="2531" end="2548" title="Stari Grad, Croatia" label="Starigrad on Hvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189161" start="2600" end="2606" title="Trogir" label="Trogir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280557" start="2621" end="2628" title="Stobreč" label="Stobreč"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="2719" end="2733" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="2789" end="2808" title="Piracy" label="pirating activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q16084290" start="2856" end="2872" title="Illyrian kingdom" label="Illyrian kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="3088" end="3095" title="Illyria" label="Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154552" start="3136" end="3149" title="Illyrian Wars" label="Illyrian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="3181" end="3195" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="3238" end="3245" title="Neretva" label="Neretva"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="3339" end="3360" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="province of Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="3451" end="3460" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267428" start="3503" end="3511" title="Dalmatae" label="Dalmatae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265861" start="3577" end="3598" title="Bellum Batonianum" label="Great Illyrian revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="3682" end="3690" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330965" start="3709" end="3729" title="province of Dalmatia" label="province of Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="3764" end="3776" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="3866" end="3876" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q322287" start="3929" end="3941" title="Diocletian&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="large palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258998" start="3947" end="3953" title="Salona" label="Salona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="3978" end="3983" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351" start="4021" end="4037" title="Theodore Mommsen" label="Theodore Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4042" end="4056" title="Bernard Bavant" label="Bernard Bavant"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4108" end="4113" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304023" start="4159" end="4179" title="Aleksandar Stipčević" label="Aleksandar Stipčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="4207" end="4219" title="Romanization" label="Romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="4451" end="4457" title="Vlachs" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="4632" end="4652" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="4697" end="4713" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q103860" start="4715" end="4727" title="Julius Nepos" label="Julius Nepos"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="4860" end="4870" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="4886" end="4897" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4925" end="4941" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071751" start="4976" end="4993" title="Theme of Dalmatia" label="Theme of Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="5076" end="5080" title="Avars (Carpathians)" label="Avar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="5085" end="5090" title="Croats" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="5277" end="5283" title="Dubrovnik" label="Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989678" start="5314" end="5323" title="Epidaurum" label="Epidaurum"/>
<link wikidata="Q463903" start="5353" end="5377" title="De Administrando Imperio" label="De Administrando Imperio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="5431" end="5446" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390" start="5497" end="5512" title="Lesser Poland" label="southern Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729457" start="5517" end="5532" title="Western Ukraine" label="Western Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576305" start="6034" end="6050" title="Duchy of Croatia" label="Duchy of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840813" start="6055" end="6085" title="Principality of Lower Pannonia" label="Principality of Lower Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="6101" end="6108" title="dukedom (administrative division)" label="dukedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576305" start="6125" end="6141" title="Duchy of Croatia" label="Duchy of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q893940" start="6152" end="6157" title="Borna of Croatia" label="Borna"/>
<link wikidata="Q154526" start="6188" end="6195" title="Einhard" label="Einhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="6282" end="6294" title="vassal state" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="6299" end="6306" title="Francia" label="Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q725901" start="6367" end="6384" title="Ljudevit (Lower Pannonia)" label="Ljudevit Posavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="6409" end="6415" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q913524" start="6533" end="6539" title="Mislav of Croatia" label="Mislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q470713" start="6588" end="6600" title="Duke Trpimir" label="Duke Trpimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259999" start="6621" end="6640" title="Trpimirović dynasty" label="Trpimirović dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6678" end="6687" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="6700" end="6708" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151306" start="6740" end="6752" title="Domagoj of Croatia" label="Duke Domagoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="6962" end="6978" title="Christianization" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q898531" start="7123" end="7131" title="Branimir of Croatia" label="Branimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576305" start="7154" end="7171" title="Dalmatian Croatia" label="Dalmatian Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170504" start="7215" end="7229" title="Pope John VIII" label="Pope John VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q319638" start="7329" end="7337" title="Tomislav of Croatia" label="Tomislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q12642515" start="7416" end="7440" title="Councils of Split" label="Church Councils of Split"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7449" end="7455" title=":s:hr:Pismo pape Ivana X. kralju Tomislavu i knezu Mihajlu" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q227976" start="7459" end="7470" title="Pope John X" label="Pope John X"/>
<link wikidata="Q589567" start="7529" end="7548" title="Michael Krešimir II of Croatia" label="Mihajlo Krešimir II"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="7573" end="7579" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20527239" start="7699" end="7708" title="Domaslava" label="Domaslava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283638" start="7731" end="7745" title="Helen of Zadar" label="Helen of Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q642828" start="7778" end="7783" title="Solin" label="Solin"/>
<link wikidata="Q566768" start="7866" end="7877" title="Frane Bulić" label="Frane Bulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q370256" start="7916" end="7932" title="Stephen Držislav of Croatia" label="Stjepan Držislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="7957" end="7966" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="7984" end="7993" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q270740" start="8002" end="8008" title="Samuel of Bulgaria" label="Samuil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8038" end="8052" title="Croatian–Bulgarian wars#Third war" label="raided Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="8078" end="8083" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41833" start="8135" end="8143" title="Basil II" label="Basil II"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="8316" end="8323" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q208514" start="8327" end="8331" title="Knin" label="Knin"/>
<link wikidata="Q281316" start="8505" end="8522" title="Peter Krešimir IV of Croatia" label="Petar Krešimir IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="8606" end="8622" title="East–West Schism" label="The Great Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q56724036" start="9354" end="9374" title="Amicus of Giovinazzo" label="Amicus of Giovinazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q470647" start="9404" end="9422" title="Demetrius Zvonimir of Croatia" label="Demetrius Zvonimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q267792" start="9454" end="9459" title="Helena of Hungary, Queen of Croatia" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208514" start="9475" end="9479" title="Knin" label="Knin"/>
<link wikidata="Q299612" start="9881" end="9900" title="Raymond IV, Count of Toulouse" label="Raymond of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060057" start="10316" end="10326" title="Stephen II of Croatia" label="Stjepan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259999" start="10356" end="10367" title="House of Trpimirović" label="Trpimirović"/>
<link wikidata="Q267792" start="10465" end="10479" title="Helena of Hungary, Queen of Croatia" label="Jelena (Helen)"/>
<link wikidata="Q311351" start="10520" end="10526" title="Béla I of Hungary" label="Béla I"/>
<link wikidata="Q26486" start="10548" end="10570" title="Ladislaus I of Hungary" label="Ladislaus I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q741354" start="10645" end="10657" title="Petar Snačić" label="Petar Snačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q842361" start="10747" end="10771" title="Battle of Gvozd Mountain" label="Battle of Gvozd Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="10882" end="10924" title="Croatia in personal union with Hungary" label="personal union between Croatia and Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q271104" start="11376" end="11385" title="Andrew II of Hungary" label="Andrew II"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="11420" end="11444" title="Ban of Croatia" label="ban (viceroy) of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="11962" end="11975" title="feudalism" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="12092" end="12098" title="Second Crusade" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="12103" end="12116" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="12118" end="12133" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="12139" end="12151" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Hospitallers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="12395" end="12409" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="12666" end="12678" title="Zadar" label="Zadar (Zara)"/>
<link wikidata="Q604739" start="13036" end="13095" title="Siege of Zara" label="launched an attack on Zadar, captured it and then looted it"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="13115" end="13129" title="Excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q86953" start="13152" end="13182" title="Emeric, King of Hungary" label="Hungarian-Croatian king Emeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="13252" end="13264" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q271104" start="13375" end="13384" title="Andrew II of Hungary" label="Andrew II"/>
<link wikidata="Q623692" start="13394" end="13411" title="sign of the cross" label="sign of the cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q51659" start="13435" end="13448" title="Fifth Crusade" label="Fifth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640" start="13594" end="13604" title="Koprivnica" label="Koprivnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718" start="13626" end="13634" title="Križevci" label="Križevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="13636" end="13642" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457438" start="13644" end="13651" title="Topusko" label="Topusko"/>
<link wikidata="Q204434" start="13653" end="13658" title="Bihać" label="Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q208514" start="13668" end="13672" title="Knin" label="Knin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="13702" end="13707" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="14155" end="14168" title="Holy Land" label="the Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="14422" end="14427" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14465" end="14493" title="Zagreb Cathedral#Treasury" label="treasury of Zagreb Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q152370" start="14514" end="14526" title="Béla IV of Hungary" label="King Béla IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301654" start="14575" end="14607" title="first Mongol invasion of Hungary" label="first Mongol invasion of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q705874" start="14647" end="14671" title="Battle of Mohi" label="Battle of the Sajó River"/>
<link wikidata="Q189161" start="14884" end="14890" title="Trogir" label="Trogir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712312" start="15045" end="15058" title="Fortress of Klis" label="Klis fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519" start="15560" end="15571" title="Ögedei Khan" label="Ögedei Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q913358" start="15769" end="15775" title="Bribir, Šibenik-Knin County" label="Bribir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291568" start="15863" end="15885" title="Paul I Šubić of Bribir" label="Paul I Šubić of Bribir"/>
<link wikidata="Q943292" start="15932" end="15941" title="Frankopan" label="Frankopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q378793" start="15951" end="15956" title="Šubić" label="Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="16203" end="16211" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291568" start="16303" end="16313" title="Paul I Šubić of Bribir" label="Paul Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q156147" start="16489" end="16512" title="Ladislaus IV of Hungary" label="Ladislaus IV of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="16591" end="16614" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles Robert of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="16630" end="16648" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181293" start="16778" end="16795" title="Battle of Rozgony" label="Battle of Rozgony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048627" start="17056" end="17062" title="Mladen II Šubić of Bribir" label="Mladen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870499" start="17268" end="17284" title="Battle of Bliska" label="Battle of Bliska"/>
<link wikidata="Q15093669" start="17394" end="17410" title="Dalmatian city-states" label="Dalmatian cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="17551" end="17559" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="17561" end="17575" title="Croatian Parliament" label="hrvatski Sabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q397443" start="17626" end="17634" title="Benkovac" label="Benkovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="17665" end="17679" title="ban of Croatia" label="ban of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16111100" start="17717" end="17747" title="Twelve noble tribes of Croatia" label="twelve Croatian noble families"/>
<link wikidata="Q208514" start="17828" end="17832" title="Knin" label="Knin"/>
<link wikidata="Q53998" start="17861" end="17876" title="Louis the Great" label="Louis the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345536" start="18082" end="18097" title="Treaty of Zadar" label="Treaty of Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="18140" end="18158" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Republic of Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348385" start="18347" end="18365" title="War of succession" label="dynastic struggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q154412" start="18502" end="18506" title="Mary, Queen of Hungary" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q231166" start="18519" end="18534" title="Elizabeth of Bosnia" label="queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="18551" end="18573" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund of Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q311861" start="18659" end="18677" title="Charles III of Naples" label="Charles of Durazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275575" start="18758" end="18773" title="John of Palisna" label="John of Palisna"/>
<link wikidata="Q716784" start="18779" end="18794" title="John Horvat" label="Horvat brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q311861" start="18962" end="18980" title="Charles III of Naples" label="Charles of Durazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q130212" start="19050" end="19064" title="Székesfehérvár" label="Szekezfehervar"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="19199" end="19203" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064901" start="19407" end="19422" title="Novigrad Castle" label="Novigrad Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="19428" end="19433" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q212220" start="19883" end="19902" title="Battle of Nicopolis" label="Battle of Nicopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q877256" start="19985" end="20002" title="Stephen II Lackfi" label="Stephen II Lackfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q317593" start="20014" end="20033" title="Ladislaus of Naples" label="Ladislaus of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514236" start="20130" end="20154" title="Bloody Sabor of Križevci" label="diet in Križevci in 1397"/>
<link wikidata="Q317593" start="20332" end="20351" title="Ladislaus of Naples" label="Ladislaus of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20422" end="20442" title="1408 Battle of Dobor" label="1408 Battle of Dobor"/>
<link wikidata="Q695364" start="20460" end="20469" title="anti-king" label="anti-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="20586" end="20604" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="20617" end="20622" title="Ducat" label="Ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="20811" end="20823" title="Republic of Venice" label="The Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206752" start="20827" end="20849" title="Treaty of Campo Formio" label="Treaty of Campo Formio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980623" start="20945" end="20962" title="Kingdom of Bosnia" label="Kingdom of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042828" start="21002" end="21025" title="Hrvoje Vukčić Hrvatinić" label="Hrvoje Vukčić Hrvatinić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980623" start="21290" end="21296" title="Kingdom of Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="21408" end="21414" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="21519" end="21527" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081211" start="21728" end="21750" title="Pavao Ritter Vitezović" label="Pavao Ritter Vitezović"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630289" start="21815" end="21847" title="Plorantis Croatiae saecula duo" label="two centuries of weeping Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q424785" start="21931" end="21937" title="akinji" label="akinji"/>
<link wikidata="Q21404076" start="21942" end="21950" title="martolos" label="martolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="22109" end="22123" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q108659295" start="22348" end="22359" title="James Tracy (historian)" label="James Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502774" start="22737" end="22759" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War" label="Frequent Ottoman raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q694379" start="22787" end="22809" title="Battle of Krbava field" label="Battle of Krbava field"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="22865" end="22881" title="Matthias Corvinus" label="Mathias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843507" start="22898" end="22919" title="War of the Hungarian Succession" label="succession war ensued"/>
<link wikidata="Q155599" start="22941" end="22961" title="Vladislaus II of Hungary" label="Vladislaus Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="22986" end="23005" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155599" start="23445" end="23458" title="Vladislaus II of Hungary" label="Vladislaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564163" start="23704" end="23717" title="Lujo Margetić" label="Lujo Margetić"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="24091" end="24118" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Ottomans occurred on Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q157092" start="24149" end="24157" title="Louis II of Hungary" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q32607" start="24278" end="24293" title="John Zápolya" label="János Szapolyai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436757" start="24578" end="24618" title="1527 election in Cetin" label="assembled in Cetingrad in 1527 and chose"/>
<link wikidata="Q150611" start="24619" end="24630" title="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="24638" end="24655" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q606632" start="24741" end="24755" title="Nikola Jurišić" label="Nikola Jurišić"/>
<link wikidata="Q859811" start="24784" end="24793" title="Cetin Castle" label="Cetingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="24815" end="24828" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530625" start="25572" end="25587" title="Turkish Croatia" label="Turkish Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="25594" end="25598" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811008" start="25644" end="25658" title="Rumelia Eyalet" label="Rumelia Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q580460" start="25686" end="25698" title="Budin Eyalet" label="Budin Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055400" start="25700" end="25713" title="Bosnia Eyalet" label="Bosnia Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078820" start="25719" end="25732" title="Kanije Eyalet" label="Kanije Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027699" start="26301" end="26309" title="Pitomača" label="Pitomača"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287626" start="26319" end="26328" title="Moslavina" label="Moslavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="26404" end="26409" title="Sisak" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q396512" start="26412" end="26420" title="Petrinja" label="Petrinja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="26423" end="26431" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="26468" end="26476" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="26505" end="26513" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q215659" start="26518" end="26524" title="Styria (Slovenia)" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q211046" start="26537" end="26541" title="Kupa" label="Kupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q516459" start="26546" end="26551" title="Sutla" label="Sutla"/>
<link wikidata="Q204040" start="26559" end="26563" title="Mur (river)" label="Mura"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="26568" end="26573" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="26715" end="26719" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="26724" end="26729" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q516459" start="26760" end="26765" title="Sutla" label="Sutla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514521" start="26770" end="26783" title="Požega Valley" label="Požega valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q155599" start="27083" end="27103" title="Vladislaus II of Hungary" label="Vladislaus Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27357" end="27370" title=":hr:Ivan Jurković" label="Ivan Jurković"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="27627" end="27635" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27843" end="27862" title="Slavonia#Middle Ages" label="Kingdom of Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623573" start="27867" end="27885" title="Kingdom of Croatia (Habsburg)" label="Kingdom of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="28104" end="28110" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q221242" start="28419" end="28436" title="Military Frontier" label="Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q877258" start="28564" end="28584" title="Hofkriegsrat" label="Imperial War Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="28704" end="28709" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="28711" end="28717" title="Vlachs" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="28731" end="28738" title="Ethnic German" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604551" start="29244" end="29262" title="Statuta Valachorum" label="Statuta Valachorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q311948" start="29395" end="29414" title="Varaždin Generalate" label="Varaždin Generalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q701644" start="30063" end="30095" title="Ottoman–Safavid War (1578–1590)" label="their War against Safavid Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755483" start="30121" end="30137" title="Telli Hasan Pasha" label="Teli Hasan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055400" start="30176" end="30190" title="Bosnia Eyalet" label="Bosnian Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20526199" start="30506" end="30520" title="Siege of Bihać (1592)" label="Siege of Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515442" start="30575" end="30590" title="Battle of Brest (1592)" label="Battle of Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q701335" start="30631" end="30657" title="Battle of Sisak" label="June 1593 Battle of Sisak."/>
<link wikidata="Q690361" start="30917" end="30933" title="Long Turkish War" label="Long Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q329803" start="31311" end="31325" title="Miklós Zrínyi" label="Nikola Zrinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="31541" end="31547" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="31728" end="31737" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q658968" start="31826" end="31842" title="Novi Zrin" label="Novi Zrin castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q150494" start="31944" end="31963" title="Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14566201" start="32193" end="32225" title="Siege of Novi Zrin (1664)" label="besieged and destroyed Novi Zrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170113" start="32293" end="32315" title="Battle of Saint Gotthard (1664)" label="Battle of St. Gotthard"/>
<link wikidata="Q681401" start="32562" end="32581" title="Peace of Vasvár" label="Vasvar peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q329803" start="32816" end="32830" title="Miklós Zrínyi" label="Nikola Zrinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q559980" start="32893" end="32913" title="Fran Krsto Frankopan" label="Fran Krsto Frankopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q508799" start="32918" end="32931" title="Petar Zrinski" label="Petar Zrinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="33005" end="33011" title="Kingdom of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="33013" end="33022" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="33024" end="33029" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131612" start="33372" end="33387" title="Wiener Neustadt" label="Wiener Neustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q200855" start="33726" end="33763" title="Siege of Vienna (1683)" label="attack the Habsburg capital of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q681401" start="33780" end="33799" title="Peace of Vasvár" label="Vasvár peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q702316" start="33982" end="33993" title="Holy League (1684)" label="Holy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q74623" start="34013" end="34030" title="Great Turkish War" label="Great Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645337" start="34145" end="34161" title="Luka Ibrišimović" label="Luka Ibrišimović"/>
<link wikidata="Q273114" start="34201" end="34207" title="Požega, Croatia" label="Požega"/>
<link wikidata="Q362892" start="34213" end="34224" title="Marko Mesić (priest)" label="Marko Mesić"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="34263" end="34267" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q217731" start="34269" end="34275" title="Hajduk" label="Hajduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618393" start="34283" end="34298" title="Stojan Janković" label="Stojan Janković"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="34342" end="34350" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19704781" start="34365" end="34387" title="Miklós Erdődy" label="Nikola (Miklos) Erdody"/>
<link wikidata="Q112221369" start="34406" end="34425" title="Siege of Virovitica (1684)" label="Siege of Virovitica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="34474" end="34480" title="Osijek" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q396575" start="34504" end="34514" title="Hrvatska Kostajnica" label="Kostajnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686" start="34542" end="34556" title="Slavonski Brod" label="Slavonski Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q112683437" start="34591" end="34606" title="Siege of Bihać (1697)" label="to retake Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="34711" end="34726" title="Prince Eugene of Savoy" label="Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055400" start="34803" end="34816" title="Bosnia Eyalet" label="Bosnia Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="34818" end="34826" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q517486" start="35010" end="35025" title="Battle of Zenta" label="Battle of Zenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="35051" end="35066" title="Prince Eugene of Savoy" label="Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192303" start="35072" end="35090" title="Treaty of Karlowitz" label="Peace of Karlowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q212927" start="35266" end="35269" title="Una (Sava)" label="Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q126712" start="35274" end="35279" title="Vrbas (river)" label="Vrbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055400" start="35328" end="35341" title="Bosnia Eyalet" label="Bosnia Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="35712" end="35722" title="Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="35797" end="35821" title="Maria Theresa of Austria" label="Maria Theresa of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="35851" end="35877" title="War of Austrian Succession" label="War of Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789629" start="35986" end="36012" title="Pragmatic Sanction of 1712" label="Pragmatic Sanction of 1712"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420" start="36504" end="36512" title="Varaždin" label="Varaždin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="36733" end="36753" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="36924" end="36932" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="36938" end="36944" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708388" start="36950" end="36958" title="Josephina (road)" label="Jozefina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="36970" end="36978" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q259466" start="36984" end="36988" title="Senj" label="Senj"/>
<link wikidata="Q697368" start="36999" end="37016" title="Treaty of Sistova" label="Treaty of Sistova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542740" start="37034" end="37052" title="Austro-Turkish War (1788–1791)" label="Austro-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018626" start="37092" end="37103" title="Donji Lapac" label="Donji Lapac"/>
<link wikidata="Q85018476" start="37108" end="37117" title="Relief of Cetingrad" label="Cetingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q909870" start="37146" end="37158" title="Drežnik Grad" label="Drežnik Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q605889" start="37163" end="37172" title="Jasenovac, Sisak-Moslavina County" label="Jasenovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q699015" start="37236" end="37262" title="Croatian Military Frontier" label="Croatian Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="37328" end="37336" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="37465" end="37483" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="37524" end="37532" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467777" start="37610" end="37626" title="Battle of Wagram" label="Battle of Wagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="37683" end="37687" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="37724" end="37742" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="37761" end="37770" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q312676" start="37793" end="37811" title="Auguste de Marmont" label="Auguste de Marmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="37892" end="37909" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454597" start="37944" end="37957" title="Masonic lodge" label="Masonic lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792902" start="38063" end="38097" title="Il Regio Dalmata – Kraglski Dalmatin" label="Kraglski Datmatin/Il Regio Dalmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="38256" end="38274" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Republic of Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q262362" start="38344" end="38353" title="Cetingrad" label="Cetingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="38734" end="38745" title="romanticism" label="romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182267" start="38777" end="38788" title="pan-Slavism" label="pan-Slavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="38799" end="38819" title="romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="38870" end="38883" title="Germanization" label="Germanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q843725" start="38888" end="38901" title="Magyarization" label="Magyarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q352617" start="38914" end="38926" title="Ljudevit Gaj" label="Ljudevit Gaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="39122" end="39140" title="Shtokavian" label="Shtokavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q838165" start="39568" end="39577" title="Kajkavian" label="Kajkavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285032" start="39776" end="39791" title="Janko Drašković" label="Janko Drašković"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39852" end="39863" title="Disertacija" label="Disertacija"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="40084" end="40099" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="40181" end="40184" title="Ban of Croatia" label="Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="40252" end="40268" title="Franciscans" label="Francisian monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q697783" start="40532" end="40557" title="Ivan Kukuljević Sakcinski" label="Ivan Kukuljević Sakcinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="40583" end="40600" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="40768" end="40773" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="41007" end="41013" title="Vlachs" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q690959" start="41134" end="41153" title="the Revolutions of 1848 in Habsburg areas" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q15136979" start="41228" end="41246" title="Hungarian nationalism" label="Magyar nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154418" start="41388" end="41401" title="Josip Jelačić" label="Josip Jelačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645510" start="41461" end="41482" title="Demands of the Nation" label="Demands of The People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="42545" end="42551" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q221242" start="42614" end="42631" title="Military Frontier" label="Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="42636" end="42644" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190665" start="42650" end="42664" title="Croatia proper" label="Croatia proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="42714" end="42720" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962798" start="42722" end="42735" title="Slovene Lands" label="Slovene lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="42740" end="42797" title="Slavonia" label="parts of southern Hungary inhabited with Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="42842" end="42848" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="42853" end="42861" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="43177" end="43182" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q58330" start="43201" end="43210" title="Međimurje County" label="Međimurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q154418" start="43360" end="43373" title="Josip Jelačić" label="Josip Jelačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="43391" end="43420" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="43613" end="43628" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="43661" end="43688" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="Austro-Hungarian Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q195384" start="43738" end="43767" title="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement" label="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473814" start="43874" end="43901" title="Corpus separatum (Fiume)" label="unresolved status of Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q221242" start="43929" end="43946" title="Military Frontier" label="Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q504566" start="44051" end="44069" title="Ladislav Pejačević" label="Ladislav Pejačević"/>
<link wikidata="Q561716" start="44124" end="44146" title="Károly Khuen-Héderváry" label="Károly Khuen-Héderváry"/>
<link wikidata="Q843725" start="44239" end="44252" title="Magyarization" label="Magyarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="44695" end="44701" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q746607" start="44839" end="44853" title="Greater Serbia" label="Greater Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="45279" end="45290" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16112921" start="45328" end="45380" title="Croatia during World War I" label="Croatia suffered a great loss of life in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q871942" start="45493" end="45522" title="Trialism in Austria-Hungary" label="Croatian/South Slavic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="45576" end="45590" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="45626" end="45644" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="45725" end="45744" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508048" start="45818" end="45855" title="Czechoslovak declaration of independence" label="Czechoslovak parts had also separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057076" start="45878" end="45931" title="Triune Kingdom" label="The Triune Kingdom of Croatia, Slavonia, and Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="45979" end="46014" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="46119" end="46144" title="Austro-Hungarian Monarchy" label="Austro-Hungarian Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="46187" end="46193" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q824165" start="46335" end="46351" title="Treaty of London (1915)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="46412" end="46429" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464399" start="46550" end="46566" title="Entente Cordiale" label="Entente Cordiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="46621" end="46643" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985477" start="46701" end="46710" title="creation of Yugoslavia" label="new state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="46737" end="46743" title="Syrmia" label="Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="46888" end="46939" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="People&amp;#x27;s Council of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q182267" start="47035" end="47046" title="pan-Slavism" label="pan-Slavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="47079" end="47093" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Sabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="47111" end="47128" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="47138" end="47180" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="47226" end="47247" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131400125" start="47248" end="47277" title="Occupation of the eastern Adriatic" label="occupied the eastern Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485114" start="47320" end="47337" title="Adriatic question" label="Adriatic question"/>
<link wikidata="Q871407" start="47399" end="47416" title="Treaty of Rapallo (1920)" label="Treaty of Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q638194" start="47527" end="47549" title="Croatian Peasant Party" label="Croatian Peasant Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="47726" end="47734" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282536" start="47803" end="47830" title="People&amp;#x27;s Radical Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="47970" end="47977" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="47979" end="47986" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="47988" end="47995" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="48001" end="48009" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q303713" start="48794" end="48816" title="Austro-Hungarian krone" label="Austro-Hungarian krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q373429" start="48878" end="48891" title="Yugoslav dinar" label="Serbian Dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q313843" start="48964" end="48976" title="Nikola Pašić" label="Nikola Pašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="49073" end="49089" title="Electoral fraud" label="election-rigging"/>
<link wikidata="Q638194" start="49125" end="49147" title="Croatian Peasant Party" label="Croatian Peasant Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q746607" start="49288" end="49302" title="Greater Serbia" label="Greater Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274634" start="49510" end="49522" title="Puniša Račić" label="Puniša Račić"/>
<link wikidata="Q12639435" start="49632" end="49643" title="Pavle Radić" label="Pavle Radić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253869" start="49648" end="49662" title="Đuro Basariček" label="Đuro Basariček"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259935" start="49683" end="49694" title="Ivan Pernar (politician, born 1889)" label="Ivan Pernar"/>
<link wikidata="Q347471" start="49712" end="49725" title="Stjepan Radić" label="Stjepan Radić"/>
<link wikidata="Q746607" start="50155" end="50169" title="Greater Serbia" label="Greater Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q638194" start="50189" end="50211" title="Croatian Peasant Party" label="Croatian Peasant Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q199942" start="50347" end="50356" title="Požarevac" label="Požarevac"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="50508" end="50522" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="King Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436252" start="50575" end="50593" title="6 January Dictatorship" label="royal dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269459" start="50608" end="50624" title="1931 Yugoslav Constitution" label="new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464080" start="50883" end="50896" title="Sava Banovina" label="Sava Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044862" start="50905" end="50922" title="Littoral Banovina" label="Littoral Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q254114" start="51022" end="51034" title="Vladko Maček" label="Vladko Maček"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="51213" end="51229" title="Ultranationalism" label="ultranationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="51230" end="51245" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859025" start="51373" end="51385" title="Misha Glenny" label="Misha Glenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="51550" end="51554" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="51564" end="51575" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280614" start="52021" end="52034" title="Milan Šufflay" label="Milan Šufflay"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="52136" end="52151" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q76480" start="52156" end="52169" title="Heinrich Mann" label="Heinrich Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q832295" start="52227" end="52243" title="Velebit uprising" label="Velebit uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="52499" end="52508" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q650723" start="52556" end="52602" title="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization" label="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q648570" start="52681" end="52699" title="Milan Stojadinović" label="Milan Stojadinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q259466" start="53002" end="53006" title="Senj" label="Senj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382617" start="53401" end="53426" title="Cvetković–Maček Agreement" label="Cvetković–Maček Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q601252" start="53447" end="53466" title="Banovina of Croatia" label="Banovina of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419985" start="53613" end="53618" title="Vrbas Banovina" label="Vrbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259126" start="53620" end="53625" title="Drina Banovina" label="Drina"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="53720" end="53723" title="Ban (title)" label="Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="53769" end="53775" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="53785" end="53796" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="53802" end="53811" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="53907" end="53936" title="Axis occupation of Yugoslavia" label="Axis occupation of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="53980" end="53986" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="54025" end="54053" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36965" start="54113" end="54125" title="Ante Pavelić" label="Ante Pavelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048318" start="54157" end="54166" title="Poglavnik" label="Poglavnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="54280" end="54298" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="54326" end="54330" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="54368" end="54376" title="Croatians" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="54381" end="54395" title="Bosnian Muslim" label="Bosnian Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="54456" end="54465" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q701960" start="54515" end="54525" title="Mile Budak" label="Mile Budak"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="54547" end="54552" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="54612" end="54624" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilating"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097756" start="54753" end="54772" title="Serbian nationalist" label="Serbian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="54773" end="54780" title="Chetnik" label="Chetnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565489" start="54803" end="54813" title="Chetnik war crimes in World War II" label="atrocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="54850" end="54854" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158060" start="54868" end="54885" title="Dalmatian Hinterland" label="northern Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="54894" end="54920" title="World War II in Yugoslavia" label="World War II in Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="55009" end="55017" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="55119" end="55134" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="55174" end="55184" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858769" start="55190" end="55219" title="1st Sisak Partisan Detachment" label="1st Sisak Partisan Detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="55277" end="55281" title="Military unit" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55332" end="55348" title="Brezovica Forest" label="Brezovica Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="55665" end="55673" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="55716" end="55725" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="55741" end="55752" title="Axis forces" label="Axis forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q135915" start="55779" end="55844" title="State Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Croatia" label="State Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263175" start="55974" end="55989" title="Mladen Lorković" label="Mladen Lorković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134160" start="55994" end="56004" title="Ante Vokić" label="Ante Vokić"/>
<link wikidata="Q312388" start="56563" end="56585" title="Bleiburg repatriations" label="Bleiburg repatriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="56836" end="56854" title="socialist republic" label="socialist republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="56863" end="56906" title="Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="56983" end="56995" title="nationalization" label="nationalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q268919" start="57044" end="57060" title="market socialism" label="market socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981562" start="57303" end="57332" title="workers&amp;#x27; self-management" label="workers&amp;#x27; self-management"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="57641" end="57653" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="57719" end="57727" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="58999" end="59033" title="League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="League of Communists of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="59136" end="59149" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="59153" end="59170" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="59998" end="60007" title="Partisans (Yugoslavia)" label="Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262166" start="60026" end="60041" title="People&amp;#x27;s Hero of Yugoslavia" label="national heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="60373" end="60387" title="Adriatic coast" label="Adriatic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271759" start="61091" end="61095" title="OZNA" label="OZNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q124454477" start="61100" end="61104" title="UDBA" label="UDBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q164756" start="61111" end="61130" title="Aleksandar Ranković" label="Aleksandar Ranković"/>
<link wikidata="Q616146" start="61172" end="61187" title="Croatian Spring" label="Croatian Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285081" start="61417" end="61441" title="1974 Yugoslav Constitution" label="new constitution in 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="61500" end="61506" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437508" start="61655" end="61693" title="Bugojno group" label="incursion from Austria of 19 armed men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565426" start="61915" end="61932" title="Death and state funeral of Josip Broz Tito" label="Tito&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="62058" end="62064" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="62096" end="62114" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="62174" end="62182" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574965" start="62459" end="62495" title="Anti-bureaucratic revolution" label="concentrate Yugoslav power in Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="62580" end="62605" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q183703" start="62666" end="62679" title="Franjo Tuđman" label="Franjo Tuđman"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="62737" end="62740" title="Yugoslav National Army" label="JNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268048" start="62992" end="63023" title="League of Communists of Croatia" label="League of Communists of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268112" start="63320" end="63352" title="League of Communists of Slovenia" label="League of Communists of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="63397" end="63415" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268048" start="63472" end="63503" title="League of Communists of Croatia" label="League of Communists of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286953" start="63692" end="63724" title="1990 Croatian parliamentary election" label="first free multi-party elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q183703" start="63747" end="63760" title="Franjo Tuđman" label="Franjo Tuđman"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="63768" end="63793" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q315467" start="63828" end="63839" title="Ivica Račan" label="Ivica Račan"/>
<link wikidata="Q830323" start="63866" end="63892" title="Social Democratic Party of Croatia" label="Party of Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="63927" end="63946" title="first-past-the-post" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q916402" start="64431" end="64434" title="Srb" label="Srb"/>
<link wikidata="Q314295" start="64722" end="64733" title="Milan Babić" label="Milan Babić"/>
<link wikidata="Q208514" start="64771" end="64775" title="Knin" label="Knin"/>
<link wikidata="Q352249" start="64888" end="64900" title="Milan Martić" label="Milan Martić"/>
<link wikidata="Q811629" start="65000" end="65014" title="Log Revolution" label="Log Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="65207" end="65215" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331387" start="65392" end="65414" title="SFR Yugoslav Air Force" label="SFR Yugoslav Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="65455" end="65461" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276230" start="65468" end="65489" title="Constitution of Croatia" label="Croatian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4416712" start="65667" end="65703" title="SAO Krajina" label="Serbian Autonomous Oblast of Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="65865" end="65871" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="65888" end="65901" title="Easter Sunday" label="Easter Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607663" start="65981" end="66005" title="Ministry of the Interior (Croatia)" label="Ministry of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q189849" start="66024" end="66052" title="Plitvice Lakes National Park" label="Plitvice Lakes National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q852157" start="66056" end="66079" title="Plitvice Lakes incident" label="expel rebel Serb forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269156" start="66185" end="66193" title="Korenica" label="Korenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q295043" start="66471" end="66483" title="Goran Hadžić" label="Goran Hadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q211853" start="66529" end="66556" title="Republic of Serbian Krajina" label="Republic of Serbian Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="66578" end="66597" title="Croatian parliament" label="Croatian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786352" start="66717" end="66724" title="Krajina" label="Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="66973" end="66992" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="67146" end="67174" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="67406" end="67428" title="Yugoslav National Army" label="Yugoslav National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="67567" end="67583" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867" start="67605" end="67612" title="Vukovar" label="Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q505939" start="67654" end="67671" title="Battle of Vukovar" label="Battle of Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q520741" start="67835" end="67851" title="Vukovar massacre" label="Vukovar massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="67874" end="67888" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="68029" end="68051" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="68101" end="68112" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="68226" end="68241" title="Bosnian Muslims" label="Bosnian Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q769377" start="68364" end="68379" title="Operation Storm" label="Operation Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q211853" start="68449" end="68476" title="Republic of Serbian Krajina" label="Republic of Serbian Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190315" start="68754" end="68770" title="Dayton Agreement" label="Dayton Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q65362" start="68812" end="68862" title="SAO Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Syrmia" label="Serbian-controlled territories in eastern Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786352" start="68954" end="68961" title="Krajina" label="Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="69416" end="69433" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261410" start="69612" end="69625" title="Zagreb crisis" label="Zagreb crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514191" start="69673" end="69682" title="Radio 101 (Croatia)" label="Radio 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q377002" start="69893" end="69911" title="Ban Jelačić Square" label="Ban Jelačić Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825410" start="69987" end="69998" title="riot police" label="riot police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607663" start="70009" end="70041" title="Ministry of the Interior (Croatia)" label="minister of the internal affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q211853" start="70379" end="70386" title="Republic of Serbian Krajina" label="Krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="70404" end="70417" title="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q321885" start="70507" end="70522" title="Erdut Agreement" label="Erdut Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257607" start="70569" end="70649" title="UN Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium" label="UN Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183703" start="70710" end="70723" title="Franjo Tuđman" label="Franjo Tuđman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187204" start="70813" end="70843" title="Croatian privatization controversy" label="suspicious privatization deals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285120" start="71001" end="71029" title="2000 Croatian parliamentary election" label="2000 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="71047" end="71072" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q830323" start="71140" end="71174" title="Social Democratic Party of Croatia" label="Social Democratic Party of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q315467" start="71181" end="71192" title="Ivica Račan" label="Ivica Račan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278351" start="71230" end="71252" title="2000 Croatian presidential election" label="presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q146496" start="71293" end="71306" title="Stjepan Mesić" label="Stjepan Mesić"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="71396" end="71415" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="71421" end="71441" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q429165" start="71747" end="71757" title="A1 (Croatia)" label="A1 highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="71998" end="72022" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q748162" start="72060" end="72102" title="Accession of Croatia to the European Union" label="Accession of Croatia to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278811" start="72127" end="72154" title="2003 Croatian parliamentary election" label="new parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q56220" start="72218" end="72229" title="Ivo Sanader" label="Ivo Sanader"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="72351" end="72408" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q297318" start="72439" end="72452" title="Ante Gotovina" label="Ante Gotovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266665" start="72502" end="72529" title="2007 Croatian parliamentary election" label="2007 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q476210" start="72611" end="72666" title="Slovenia&amp;#x27;s blockade of Croatia&amp;#x27;s EU accession" label="Slovenia&amp;#x27;s blockade of Croatia&amp;#x27;s EU accession"/>
<link wikidata="Q57611" start="72745" end="72759" title="Jadranka Kosor" label="Jadranka Kosor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="72791" end="72800" title="austerity" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q206471" start="72954" end="72965" title="Borut Pahor" label="Borut Pahor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="72982" end="72990" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128936" start="73042" end="73083" title="Croatian presidential election, 2009–2010" label="Croatian presidential election, 2009–2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q57258" start="73085" end="73098" title="Ivo Josipović" label="Ivo Josipović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737756" start="73220" end="73225" title="USKOK" label="USKOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q426752" start="73600" end="73636" title="2011 Croatian parliamentary election" label="2011 Croatian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q96785149" start="73674" end="73692" title="Kukuriku coalition" label="Kukuriku coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q57687" start="73782" end="73797" title="Zoran Milanović" label="Zoran Milanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526639" start="73887" end="73911" title="Treaty of Accession 2011" label="Treaty of Accession 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259139" start="73931" end="73981" title="2012 Croatian European Union membership referendum" label="2012 Croatian European Union membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353155" start="74029" end="74067" title="2014–15 Croatian presidential election" label="2014–15 Croatian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176299" start="74069" end="74093" title="Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović" label="Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020969" start="74143" end="74179" title="2015 Croatian parliamentary election" label="2015 Croatian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q21286560" start="74211" end="74230" title="Patriotic Coalition (Croatia)" label="Patriotic Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16116415" start="74270" end="74297" title="Bridge of Independent Lists" label="Bridge of Independent Lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q22227945" start="74349" end="74377" title="Cabinet of Tihomir Orešković" label="Cabinet of Tihomir Orešković"/>
<link wikidata="Q24705379" start="74389" end="74425" title="2016 Croatian parliamentary election" label="2016 Croatian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468682" start="74431" end="74458" title="Cabinet of Andrej Plenković" label="Cabinet of Andrej Plenković"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401314" start="74569" end="74590" title="2019–20 Croatian presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q88259708" start="74742" end="74780" title="2020 Zagreb earthquake" label="experienced a 5.3 magnitude earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401353" start="74882" end="74904" title="2020 Croatian parliamentary election" label="parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q104863677" start="74960" end="75022" title="2020 Zagreb shooting" label="attempted an attack on the building of the Croatian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q806922" start="75108" end="75116" title="Banovina (region)" label="Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q104535090" start="75163" end="75195" title="2020 Petrinja earthquake" label="was shaken by a 6.4 M earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q396512" start="75250" end="75258" title="Petrinja" label="Petrinja"/>
<link wikidata="Q87250732" start="75304" end="75321" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Croatia" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111195201" start="75400" end="75430" title="2022 Zagreb Tu-141 crash" label="Tu-141 drone crashed in Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="75455" end="75487" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155248" start="75534" end="75549" title="Pelješac Bridge" label="Pelješac Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="75684" end="75692" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="75697" end="75710" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="75729" end="75744" title="Bans of Croatia" label="Bans of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510323" start="75747" end="75759" title="Croatian art" label="Croatian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353812" start="75762" end="75785" title="Croatian History Museum" label="Croatian History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q699015" start="75788" end="75814" title="Croatian Military Frontier" label="Croatian Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914903" start="75817" end="75834" title="Croatian nobility" label="Croatian nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748196" start="75837" end="75855" title="Culture of Croatia" label="Culture of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271625" start="75858" end="75877" title="History of Dalmatia" label="History of Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199960" start="75880" end="75898" title="History of Hungary" label="History of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865007" start="75901" end="75918" title="History of Istria" label="History of Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502774" start="75921" end="75961" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War"/>
<link wikidata="Q698248" start="75964" end="75983" title="Kingdom of Dalmatia" label="Kingdom of Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623589" start="75986" end="76005" title="Kingdom of Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252619" start="76008" end="76024" title="Kings of Croatia" label="Kings of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862546" start="76027" end="76060" title="List of noble families of Croatia" label="List of noble families of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252619" start="76063" end="76088" title="List of rulers of Croatia" label="List of rulers of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857574" start="76091" end="76118" title="Military history of Croatia" label="Military history of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805702" start="76121" end="76149" title="Timeline of Croatian history" label="Timeline of Croatian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530625" start="76152" end="76167" title="Turkish Croatia" label="Turkish Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16111100" start="76170" end="76200" title="Twelve noble tribes of Croatia" label="Twelve noble tribes of Croatia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5575" wikidata="Q215923" url="?curid=5575" title="Geography of Croatia">
<text>The geography of Croatia is defined by its location—it is described as located at the crossroads of Central Europe and Southeast Europe, or within the wider region of Southern Europe. Croatia&#x27;s territory covers , making it the 127th largest country in the world. Bordered by Slovenia in the northwest, Hungary in the northeast, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia in the east, Montenegro in the southeast and the Adriatic Sea in the south, it lies mostly between latitudes 42° and 47° N and longitudes 13° and 20° E. Croatia&#x27;s territorial waters encompass in a wide zone, and its internal waters located within the baseline cover an additional .

The Pannonian Plain and the Dinaric Alps, along with the Adriatic Basin, represent major geomorphological parts of Croatia. Lowlands make up the bulk of Croatia, with elevations of less than above sea level recorded in 53.42% of the country. Most of the lowlands are found in the northern regions, especially in Slavonia, itself a part of the Pannonian Basin plain. The plains are interspersed with horst and graben structures, believed to have broken the Pliocene Pannonian Sea&#x27;s surface as islands. The greatest concentration of ground at relatively high elevations is found in the Lika and Gorski Kotar areas in the Dinaric Alps, but high areas are found in all regions of Croatia to some extent. The Dinaric Alps contain the highest mountain in Croatia— Dinara—as well as all other mountains in Croatia higher than . Croatia&#x27;s Adriatic Sea mainland coast is long, while its 1,246 islands and islets encompass a further of coastline—the most indented coastline in the Mediterranean. Karst topography makes up about half of Croatia and is especially prominent in the Dinaric Alps, as well as throughout the coastal areas and the islands.

62% of Croatia&#x27;s territory is encompassed by the Adriatic Sea. The area includes the largest rivers flowing in the country: the Danube, Sava, Drava, Mur and Kupa. The remainder belongs to the Adriatic Sea drainage basin, where the largest river by far is the Neretva. Most of Croatia has a moderately warm and rainy continental climate as defined by the Köppen climate classification. The mean monthly temperature ranges between and . Croatia has a number of ecoregions because of its climate and geomorphology, and the country is consequently among the most biodiverse in Europe. There are four types of biogeographical regions in Croatia: Mediterranean along the coast and in its immediate hinterland; Alpine in the elevated Lika and Gorski Kotar; Pannonian along the Drava and Danube; and Continental in the remaining areas. There are 444 protected natural areas in Croatia, encompassing 8.5% of the country; there are about 37,000 known species in Croatia, and the total number of species is estimated to be between 50,000 and 100,000.

The permanent population of Croatia by the 2011 census reached 4.29 million. The population density was 75.8 inhabitants per square kilometre, and the overall life expectancy in Croatia at birth was 75.7 years. The country is inhabited mostly by Croats (89.6%), while minorities include Serbs (4.5%), and 21 other ethnicities (less than 1% each) recognised by the constitution. Since the counties were re-established in 1992, Croatia is divided into 20 counties and the capital city of Zagreb. The counties subdivide into 127 cities and 429 municipalities. The average urbanisation rate in Croatia stands at 56%, with a growing urban population and shrinking rural population. The largest city and the nation&#x27;s capital is Zagreb, with an urban population of 797,952 in the city itself and a metropolitan area population of 978,161. The populations of Split and Rijeka exceed 100,000, and five more cities in Croatia have populations over 50,000.

==Area and borders==
Croatia&#x27;s territory covers , making it the 127th largest country in the world. The physical geography of Croatia is defined by its location—it is described as a part of Southeast Europe. Croatia borders Bosnia–Herzegovina (for 1,009.1 km), Slovenia for 667.8 km in the northwest, in the east, Hungary for 355.5 km in the north, Serbia (for 317.6 km) in the east, Montenegro (for 22.6 km) in the southeast and the Adriatic Sea in the west, south and southwest. It lies mostly between latitudes 42° and 47° N and longitudes 13° and 20° E. Part of the extreme south of Croatia is separated from the rest of the mainland by a short coastline strip around Neum belonging to Bosnia–Herzegovina. The country&#x27;s shape is described as a &#x27;horseshoe&#x27; (), and it arose as a result of medieval geopolitics.

Croatia&#x27;s border with Hungary was inherited from Yugoslavia. Much of the border with Hungary follows the Drava River or its former river bed; that part of the border dates from the Middle Ages. The border in Međimurje and Baranya was defined as a border between the Kingdom of Hungary and the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, later renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, pursuant to the Treaty of Trianon of 1920. The present outline of the border with Bosnia–Herzegovina and border with Montenegro is largely the result of the Ottoman conquest and subsequent recapture of territories in the Great Turkish War of 1667–1698 formally ending with the Treaty of Karlowitz, as well as the Fifth and Seventh Ottoman–Venetian Wars. This border had minor modifications in 1947 when all borders of the former Yugoslav constituent republics were defined by demarcation commissions implementing the AVNOJ decisions of 1943 and 1945 regarding the federal organisation of Yugoslavia. The commissions also defined Baranya and Međimurje as Croatian territories, and moreover set up the present-day border between Serbia and Croatia in Syrmia and along the Danube River between Ilok and the Drava river&#x27;s mouth and further north to the Hungarian border; the Ilok/Drava section matched the border between the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia and Bács-Bodrog County that existed until 1918 (the end of World War I). Most of the border with Slovenia was also defined by the commissions, matching the northwestern border of the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia, and establishing a new section of Croatian border north of the Istrian peninsula according to the ethnic composition of the territory previously belonging to the Kingdom of Italy.

Pursuant to the 1947 Treaty of Peace with Italy the islands of Cres, Lastovo and Palagruža and the cities of Zadar and Rijeka and most of Istria went to communist Yugoslavia and Croatia, while carving out the Free Territory of Trieste (FTT) as a city-state. The FTT was partitioned in 1954 as Trieste itself and the area to the north of it were placed under Italian control, and the rest under Yugoslav control. The arrangement was made permanent by the Treaty of Osimo in 1975. The former FTT&#x27;s Yugoslav part was partitioned between Croatia and Slovenia, largely conforming to the area population&#x27;s ethnic composition.

In the late 19th century, Austria-Hungary established a geodetic network, for which the elevation benchmark was determined by the Adriatic Sea&#x27;s average level at the Sartorio pier in Trieste. This benchmark was subsequently retained by Austria, adopted by Yugoslavia, and kept by the states that emerged after its dissolution, including Croatia.

===Extreme points===

The geographical extreme points of Croatia are Žabnik in Međimurje County as the northernmost point, Rađevac near Ilok in Vukovar-Syrmia County as the easternmost point, Cape Lako near Bašanija in Istria County as the westernmost point and the islet of Galijula in Palagruža archipelago in Split-Dalmatia County as the southernmost point. On the mainland, Cape Oštra of the Prevlaka peninsula in Dubrovnik-Neretva County is the southernmost point.

===Maritime claims===
Italy and Yugoslavia defined their delineation of the continental shelf in the Adriatic Sea in 1968, with an additional agreement on the boundary in the Gulf of Trieste signed in 1975 in accordance with the Treaty of Osimo. All the successor states of former Yugoslavia accepted the agreements. Prior to Yugoslavia&#x27;s break-up, Albania, Italy and Yugoslavia initially proclaimed territorial waters, subsequently reduced to the international-standard ; all sides adopted baseline systems. Croatia also declared its Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone (ZERP)—a part of its Exclusive Economic Zone—as extending to the continental shelf boundary. Croatia&#x27;s territorial waters encompass ; its internal waters located within the baseline cover an additional .

===Border disputes===
====Maritime border disputes====
Croatia and Slovenia started negotiations to define maritime borders in the Gulf of Piran in 1992 but failed to agree, resulting in a dispute. Both countries also declared their economic zones, which partially overlap. Croatia&#x27;s application to become an EU member state was initially suspended pending resolution of its border disputes with Slovenia. These were eventually settled with an agreement to accept the decision of an international arbitration commission set up via the UN, enabling Croatia to progress towards EU membership. The dispute has caused no major practical problems in areas other than the EU membership negotiations progress, even before the arbitration agreement.

The maritime boundary between Bosnia–Herzegovina and Croatia was formally settled in 1999, but a few issues are still contested—the Klek peninsula and two islets in the border area. The Croatia–Montenegro maritime boundary is disputed in the Bay of Kotor, at the Prevlaka peninsula. The situation was exacerbated by the peninsula&#x27;s occupation by the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army and later by the Serbian-Montenegrin army, which in turn was replaced by a United Nations observer mission that lasted until 2002. Croatia took over the area with an agreement that allowed Montenegrin presence in Croatian waters in the bay, and the dispute has become far less contentious since the independence of Montenegro in 2006.

====Land border disputes====
The land border disputes pertain to comparatively small strips of land. The Croatia–Slovenia border disputes are: along the Dragonja River&#x27;s lower course where Slovenia claims three hamlets on the river&#x27;s left bank; the Sveta Gera peak of Žumberak where exact territorial claims were never made and appear to be limited to a military barracks on the peak itself; and along the Mura River where Slovenia wants the border to be along the current river bed instead of along a former one and claims a (largely if not completely uninhabited) piece of land near Hotiza. These claims are likewise in the process of being settled by binding arbitration.

There are also land border disputes between Croatia and Serbia. The two countries presently control one bank of the present-day river each, but Croatia claims that the border line should follow the cadastral borders between the former municipalities of SR Croatia and SR Serbia along the Danube, as defined by a Yugoslav commission in 1947 (effectively following a former river bed); borders claimed by Croatia also include the Vukovar and Šarengrad islands in the Danube as its territory. There is also a border dispute with Bosnia–Herzegovina, specifically Croatia claims Unčica channel on the right bank of Una as the border at Hrvatska Kostajnica, while Bosnia and Herzegovina claims Una River course as the border there.

==Physical geography==
===Geology===

The geology of Croatia has some Precambrian rocks mostly covered by younger sedimentary rocks and deformed or superimposed by tectonic activity. The country is split into two main onshore provinces, a smaller part of the Pannonian Basin and the Karst Region in the Dinarides. The carbonate platform karst landscape of Croatia helped to create the weathering conditions to form bauxite, gypsum, clay, amphibolite, granite, spilite, gabbro, diabase and limestone.

===Topography===

Most of Croatia is lowlands, with elevations of less than above sea level recorded in 53.42% of the country. Most of the lowlands are found in the country&#x27;s northern regions, especially in Slavonia, representing a part of the Pannonian Basin. Areas with elevations of above sea level encompass 25.61% of Croatia&#x27;s territory, and the areas between above sea level cover 17.11% of the country. A further 3.71% of the land is above sea level, and only 0.15% of Croatia&#x27;s territory is elevated greater than above sea level. The greatest concentration of ground at relatively high elevations is found in the Lika and Gorski Kotar areas in the Dinaric Alps, but such areas are found in all regions of Croatia to some extent. The Pannonian Basin and the Dinaric Alps, along with the Adriatic Basin, represent major geomorphological parts of Croatia.

====Adriatic Basin====
Croatia&#x27;s Adriatic Sea mainland coast is long, while its 1,246 islands and islets have a further of coastline. The distance between the extreme points of Croatia&#x27;s coastline is . The number of islands includes all islands, islets, and rocks of all sizes, including ones emerging only at low tide. The largest islands in the Adriatic are Cres and Krk, each covering ; the tallest is Brač, reaching above sea level. The islands include 47 permanently inhabited ones, the most populous among them being Krk and Korčula.

The shore is the most indented coastline in the Mediterranean. The majority of the coast is characterised by a karst topography, developed from the Adriatic Carbonate Platform. Karstification there largely began after the final raising of the Dinarides in the Oligocene and Miocene epochs, when carbonate rock was exposed to atmospheric effects such as rain; this extended to below the present sea level, exposed during the Last Glacial Maximum&#x27;s sea level drop. It is estimated that some karst formations are related to earlier drops of sea level, most notably the Messinian salinity crisis. The eastern coast&#x27;s largest part consists of carbonate rocks, while flysch rock is significantly represented in the Gulf of Trieste coast, on the Kvarner Gulf coast opposite Krk, and in Dalmatia north of Split. There are comparably small alluvial areas of the Adriatic coast in Croatia—most notably the Neretva river delta. Western Istria is gradually subsiding, having sunk about in the past 2,000 years.

In the Middle Adriatic Basin, there is evidence of Permian volcanism in the area of Komiža on the island of Vis, in addition to the volcanic islands of Jabuka and Brusnik. Earthquakes are frequent in the area around the Adriatic Sea, although most are too faint to be felt; an earthquake doing significant damage happens every few decades, with major earthquakes every few centuries.

====Dinaric Alps====

The Dinaric Alps are linked to a Late Jurassic to recent times fold and thrust belt, itself part of the Alpine orogeny, extending southeast from the southern Alps. The Dinaric Alps in Croatia encompass the entire Gorski Kotar and Lika regions, as well as considerable parts of Dalmatia, with their northeastern edge running from Žumberak to the Banovina region, along the Sava River, and their westernmost landforms being Ćićarija and Učka mountains in Istria. The Dinaric Alps contain the highest mountain in Croatia— Dinara—as well as all other mountains in Croatia higher than : Biokovo, Velebit, Plješivica, Velika Kapela, Risnjak, Svilaja and Snježnik.

Karst topography makes up about half of Croatia and is especially prominent in the Dinaric Alps. There are numerous caves in Croatia, 49 of which are deeper than , 14 deeper than and 3 deeper than . The longest cave in Croatia, Kita Gaćešina, is at the same time the longest cave in the Dinaric Alps at .

====Pannonian Basin====
The Pannonian Basin took shape through Miocenian thinning and subsidence of crust structures formed during the Late Paleozoic Variscan orogeny. The Paleozoic and Mesozoic structures are visible in Papuk and other Slavonian mountains. The processes also led to the formation of a stratovolcanic chain in the basin 12–17 Mya; intensified subsidence was observed until 5 Mya as well as flood basalts at about 7.5 Mya. The contemporary tectonic uplift of the Carpathian Mountains severed water flow to the Black Sea and the Pannonian Sea formed in the basin. Sediments were transported to the basin from the uplifting Carpathian and Dinaric mountains, with particularly deep fluvial sediments being deposited in the Pleistocene epoch during the Transdanubian Mountains&#x27; formation. Ultimately, up to of sediment was deposited in the basin, and the sea eventually drained through the Iron Gate gorge.

The results are large plains in the area bound by the rivers of Danube, Sava, Drava, and Kupa (including Slavonia, Baranya, and Syrmia). The plains are interspersed by isolated mountains. The tallest among such landforms are Ivanšćica and Medvednica north of Zagreb—both are also at least partially in Hrvatsko Zagorje—as well as Psunj and Papuk that are the tallest among the Slavonian mountains surrounding Požega. Psunj, Papuk and adjacent Krndija consist mostly of Paleozoic rocks from 300 to 350 Mya. Požeška gora, adjacent to Psunj, consists of much more recent Neogene rocks, but there are also Upper Cretaceous sediments and igneous rocks forming the main, ridge of the hill; these represent the largest igneous landform in Croatia. A smaller piece of igneous terrain is also present on Papuk, near Voćin. The two, as well as the Moslavačka gora mountains, are possibly remnants of a volcanic arc from the same tectonic plate collision that caused the Dinaric Alps.

===Hydrography===
The largest part of Croatia—62% of its territory—is encompassed by the Black Sea drainage basin. The area includes the largest rivers flowing in the country: the Danube, Sava, Drava, Mura and Kupa. The rest belongs to the Adriatic Sea drainage basin, where the largest river by far is the Neretva. The longest rivers in Croatia are the Sava, Drava, Kupa and a section of the Danube. The longest rivers emptying into the Adriatic Sea are the Cetina and an only section of the Neretva.

The largest lakes in Croatia are Lake Vrana located in the northern Dalmatia, Lake Dubrava near Varaždin, Peruća Lake (reservoir) on the Cetina River, Lake Prokljan near Skradin and Lake Varaždin reservoir through which the Drava River flows near Varaždin. Croatia&#x27;s most famous lakes are the Plitvice lakes, a system of 16 lakes with waterfalls connecting them over dolomite and limestone cascades. The lakes are renowned for their distinctive colours, ranging from turquoise to mint green, grey or blue. Croatia has a remarkable wealth in terms of wetlands. Four of those are included in the Ramsar list of internationally important wetlands: Lonjsko Polje along the Sava and Lonja rivers near Sisak, Kopački Rit at the confluence of the Drava and Danube, the Neretva Delta and Crna Mlaka near Jastrebarsko.

Average annual precipitation and evaporation rates are and , respectively. Taking into consideration the overall water balance, the total Croatian water resources amount to per year per capita, including per year per capita from sources inside Croatia.

===Climate===

Most of Croatia has a moderately warm and rainy subtropical highland climate (Cfb) as defined by the Köppen climate classification. The northern Adriatic coast and islands, as well as the Dalmatian coast&#x27;s hinterland are characterised by the warm temperate climate (Cfa) climate and most of the central and southern Adriatic coast and islands have the Mediterranean climate (mostly Csb) climate. The highest elevations are characterised by the Df climate.

Mean monthly temperatures range between and in the coldest month (January) except in the coldest parts of the country are Lika and Gorski Kotar at elevations above where that metric is lower. Temperature peaks are more pronounced in the continental areas: the lowest temperature of was recorded on 3 February 1919 in Čakovec, and the highest temperature of was recorded on 5 July 1950 in Karlovac.

The mean annual precipitation is depending on the geographic region and prevailing climate type. The least precipitation is recorded in the outer islands (Vis, Lastovo, Biševo, and Svetac) and in the eastern parts of Slavonia; however, in the latter case the precipitation mostly occurs during the growing season. The prevailing winds in the interior are light to moderate northeast or southwest. Higher wind velocities are more often recorded in cooler months along the coast, generally as cool northeasterly bora (sometimes exceeding and southerly sirocco. The sunniest parts of the country are the outer islands, Hvar and Korčula, where more than 2,700 hours of sunshine are recorded per year, followed by the southern Adriatic Sea area in general, northern Adriatic coast, and Slavonia, all with more than 2,000 hours of sunshine per year.

==== Climate change ====
===Biodiversity===
Croatia can be subdivided between a number of ecoregions because of its climate and geomorphology, and the country is consequently one of the richest in Europe in terms of biodiversity. There are four types of biogeographical regions in Croatia: Mediterranean along the coast and in its immediate hinterland, Alpine in most of Lika and Gorski Kotar, Pannonian along the Drava and Danube, and continental in the remaining areas. Among the most significant are karst habitats; these include submerged karst, such as Zrmanja and Krka canyons and tufa barriers, as well as underground habitats. The karst geology has produced approximately 7,000 caves and pits, many of which are inhabited by troglobitic (exclusively cave-dwelling) animals such as the olm, a cave salamander and the only European troglobitic vertebrate. Forests are also significant in the country, as they cover representing 46.8% of Croatia&#x27;s land surface. The other habitat types include wetlands, grasslands, bogs, fens, scrub habitats, coastal and marine habitats. In terms of phytogeography, Croatia is part of the Boreal Kingdom; specifically, it is part of the Illyrian and Central European provinces of the Circumboreal Region and the Adriatic province of the Mediterranean Region. The World Wide Fund for Nature divides land in Croatia into three ecoregions—Pannonian mixed forests, Dinaric Mountains mixed forests and Illyrian deciduous forests. Biomes in Croatia include temperate broadleaf/mixed forest and Mediterranean forests, woodlands and scrub; all are in the Palearctic realm.
Croatia has 38,226 known taxa, 2.8% of which are endemic; the actual number (including undiscovered species) is estimated to be between 50,000 and 100,000. The estimate is supported by nearly 400 new taxa of invertebrates discovered in Croatia in 2000–2005 alone. There are more than a thousand endemic species, especially in the Velebit and Biokovo mountains, Adriatic islands and karst rivers. Legislation protects 1,131 species. Indigenous cultivars of plants and breeds of domesticated animals are also numerous; they include five breeds of horses, five breeds of cattle, eight breeds of sheep, two breeds of pigs and a poultry breed. Even the indigenous breeds include nine endangered or critically endangered ones.

There are 444 Croatian protected areas, encompassing 8.5% of the country. These include 8 national parks, 2 strict reserves and 11 nature parks, accounting for 78% of the total protected area. The most famous protected area and the oldest national park in Croatia is the Plitvice Lakes National Park, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Velebit Nature Park is a part of the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Programme. The strict and special reserves, as well as the national and nature parks, are managed and protected by the central government, while other protected areas are managed by counties. In 2005, the National Ecological Network was set up as the first step in preparation for EU membership and joining the Natura 2000 network.

Habitat destruction represents a threat to biodiversity in Croatia, as developed and agricultural land is expanded into previous natural habitats, while habitat fragmentation occurs as roads are created or expanded. A further threat to biodiversity is the introduction of invasive species, with &quot;Caulerpa racemosa&quot; and &quot;C. taxifolia&quot; identified as especially problematic ones. The invasive algae are monitored and regularly removed to protect the benthic habitat. Agricultural monocultures have also been identified as a threat to biodiversity.

===Ecology===

The ecological footprint of Croatia&#x27;s population and industry varies significantly between the country&#x27;s regions since 50% of the population resides in 26.8% of the nation&#x27;s territory, with a particularly high impact made by the city of Zagreb and Zagreb County areas—their combined area comprises 6.6% of Croatia&#x27;s territory while encompassing 25% of the population. The ecological footprint is most notably from the increased development of settlements and the sea coast leading to habitat fragmentation. Between 1998 and 2008, the greatest changes of land use pertained to artificially developed areas, but the scale of development is negligible compared to EU member states.

The Croatian Environment Agency (CEA), a public institution established by the Government of Croatia to collect and analyse information on the environment, has identified further ecological problems as well as various degrees of progress in terms of curbing their environmental impact. These problems include inadequate legal landfills as well as the presence of illegal landfills; between 2005 and 2008, 62 authorised and 423 illegal landfills were rehabilitated. In the same period, the number of issued waste management licences doubled, while the annual municipal solid waste volume increased by 23%, reaching per capita. The processes of soil acidification and organic matter degradation are present throughout Croatia, with increasing soil salinity levels in the Neretva river plain and spreading areas of alkali soil in Slavonia.

Croatian air pollution levels reflect the drop in industrial production recorded in 1991 at the onset of the Croatian War of Independence—pre-war emission levels were only reached in 1997. The use of desulfurised fuels has led to a 25% reduction of sulphur dioxide emissions between 1997 and 2004, and a further 7.2% drop by 2007. The rise in NOx emissions halted in 2007 and reversed in 2008. The use of unleaded petrol reduced emissions of lead into the atmosphere by 91.5% between 1997 and 2004. Air quality measurements indicate that the air in rural areas is essentially clean, and in urban centres it generally complies with legal requirements. The most significant sources of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in Croatia are energy production (72%), industry (13%) and agriculture (11%). The average annual increase of GHG emissions is 3%, remaining within the Kyoto Protocol limits. Between 1990 and 2007, the use of ozone depleting substances was reduced by 92%; their use is expected to be abolished by 2015.

Even though Croatia has sufficient water resources at its disposal, these are not uniformly distributed and public water supply network losses remain high—estimated at 44%. Between 2004 and 2008, the number of stations monitoring surface water pollution increased by 20%; the CEA reported 476 cases of water pollution in this period. At the same time organic waste pollution levels decreased slightly, which is attributed to the completion of new sewage treatment plants; their number increased 20%, reaching a total of 101. Nearly all of Croatia&#x27;s groundwater aquifers are top quality, unlike the available surface water; the latter&#x27;s quality varies in terms of biochemical oxygen demand and bacteriological water analysis results. As of 2008, 80% of the Croatian population are served by the public water supply system, but only 44% of the population have access to the public sewerage network, with septic systems in use. Adriatic Sea water quality monitoring between 2004 and 2008 indicated very good, oligotrophic conditions along most of the coast, while areas of increased eutrophication were identified in the Bay of Bakar, the Bay of Kaštela, the Port of Šibenik and near Ploče; other areas of localised pollution were identified near the larger coastal cities. In the period between 2004 and 2008, the CEA identified 283 cases of marine pollution (including 128 from vessels), which was a drop of 15% relative to the period encompassed by the previous report, 1997 to August 2005.

===Land use===

As of 2006, 46.8% of Croatia was occupied by of forest and shrub, while a further or 40.4% of the land was used for diverse agricultural uses including , or 7.8% of the total, for permanent crops. Bush and grass cover was present on or 8.4% of the territory, inland waters took up or 1.0% and marshes covered or 0.4% of the country. Artificial surfaces (primarily consisting of urban areas, roads, non-agricultural vegetation, sports areas and other recreational facilities) took up or 3.1% of the country&#x27;s area. The greatest impetus for land use changes is the expansion of settlements and road construction.

Because of the Croatian War of Independence, there are numerous leftover minefields in Croatia, largely tracing former front lines. As of 2006, suspected minefields covered . As of 2012, 62% of the remaining minefields are situated in forests, 26% of them are found in agricultural land, and 12% are found in other land. Even though it was expected that mine clearance will be complete by 2019, of land remain suspected of containing land mines in 2025.

===Regions===

Croatia is traditionally divided into numerous, often overlapping geographic regions, whose borders are not always clearly defined. The largest and most readily recognisable ones throughout the country are Central Croatia (also described as the Zagreb macro-region), Eastern Croatia (largely corresponding with Slavonia), and Mountainous Croatia (Lika and Gorski Kotar; to the west of Central Croatia). These three comprise the inland or continental part of Croatia. Coastal Croatia consists of a further two regions: Dalmatia or the southern littoral, between the general area of the city of Zadar and the southernmost tip of the country; and the northern littoral located north of Dalmatia, encompassing the Croatian Littoral and Istria. The geographical regions generally do not conform to county boundaries or other administrative divisions, and all of them encompass further, more specific, geographic regions.

==Human geography==

===Demographics===
The demographic features of the Croatian population are known through censuses, normally conducted in ten-year intervals and analysed by various statistical bureaus since the 1850s. The Croatian Bureau of Statistics has performed this task since the 1990s. The latest census in Croatia was performed in April 2011. The permanent population of Croatia at the 2011 census had reached 4.29 million. The population density was 75.8 inhabitants per square kilometre, and the overall life expectancy in Croatia at birth is 75.7 years. The population rose steadily (with the exception of censuses taken following the two world wars) from 2.1 million in 1857 until 1991, when it peaked at 4.7 million. Since 1991, Croatia&#x27;s death rate has continuously exceeded its birth rate; the natural growth rate of the population is thus currently negative. Croatia is currently in the demographic transition&#x27;s fourth or fifth stage. In terms of age structure, the population is dominated by the 15‑ to 64‑year‑old segment. The median age of the population is 41.4, and the gender ratio of the total population is 0.93 males per 1 female.

Croatia is inhabited mostly by Croats (89.6%), while minorities include Serbs (4.5%) and 21 other ethnicities (less than 1% each) recognised by the Constitution of Croatia. The demographic history of Croatia is marked by significant migrations, including: the Croats&#x27; arrival in the area; the growth of the Hungarian and German speaking population after the personal union of Croatia and Hungary; joining of the Habsburg Empire; migrations set off by the Ottoman conquests; and the growth of the Italian-speaking population in Istria and Dalmatia during the Venetian rule there. After Austria-Hungary&#x27;s collapse, the Hungarian population declined, while the German-speaking population was forced out or fled during the last part of and after World War II, and a similar fate was suffered by the Italian population. The late 19th century and the 20th century were marked by large scale economic migrations abroad. The 1940s and the 1950s in Yugoslavia were marked by internal migrations in Yugoslavia, as well as by urbanisation. The most recent significant migrations came as a result of the Croatian War of Independence when hundreds of thousands were displaced.

The Croatian language is Croatia&#x27;s official language, but the languages of constitutionally-recognised minorities are officially used in some local government units. Croatian is the native language identified by 96% of the population. A 2009 survey revealed that 78% of Croatians claim knowledge of at least one foreign language—most often English. The largest religions of Croatia are Roman Catholicism (86.3%), Orthodox Christianity (4.4%) and Islam (1.5%). Literacy in Croatia stands at 98.1%. The proportion of the population aged 15 and over attaining academic degrees has grown rapidly since 2001, doubling and reaching 16.7% by 2008. An estimated 4.5% of GDP is spent for education. Primary and secondary education are available in Croatian and in the languages of recognised minorities. Croatia has a universal health care system and in 2010, the nation spent 6.9% of its GDP on healthcare. The net monthly income in September 2011 averaged 5,397 kuna ( ). The most significant sources of employment in 2008 were wholesale and retail trade, the manufacturing industry and construction. In October 2011, the unemployment rate was 17.4%. Croatia&#x27;s median equivalent household income tops the average Purchasing Power Standard of the ten countries which joined the EU in 2004, while trailing the EU average. The 2011 census recorded a total of 1.5 million private households; most owned their own housing.

===Political geography===
Croatia was first subdivided into counties in the Middle Ages. The divisions changed over time to reflect losses of territory to Ottoman conquest and subsequent liberation of the same territory, in addition to changes in the political status of Dalmatia, Dubrovnik and Istria. The traditional division of the country into counties was abolished in the 1920s, when the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes and the subsequent Kingdom of Yugoslavia introduced oblasts and banovinas respectively. Communist-ruled Croatia, as a constituent part of post-WWII Yugoslavia, abolished earlier divisions and introduced (mostly rural) municipalities, subdividing Croatia into approximately one hundred municipalities. Counties were reintroduced in 1992 by legislation, significantly altered in terms of territory relative to the pre-1920s subdivisions—for instance, in 1918 the Transleithanian part of Croatia was divided into eight counties with their seats in Bjelovar, Gospić, Ogulin, Požega, Vukovar, Varaždin, Osijek and Zagreb, while the 1992 legislation established 14 counties in the same territory. Međimurje County was established in the eponymous region acquired through the 1920 Treaty of Trianon. (The 1990 Croatian Constitution provided for a Chamber of the Counties as part of the government, and for counties themselves without specifying their names or number. However, the counties were not actually re-established until 1992, and the first Chamber of the Counties was elected in 1993.)

Since the counties were re-established in 1992, Croatia has been divided into 20 counties and the capital city of Zagreb, the latter having the authority and legal status of a county and a city at the same time (Zagreb County outside the city is administratively separate as of 1997). The county borders have changed in some instances since (for reasons such as historical ties and requests by cities), with the latest revision taking place in 2006. The counties subdivide into 127 cities and 429 municipalities.

The EU Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS) division of Croatia is performed in several tiers. NUTS 1 level places the entire country in a single unit, while there are three NUTS 2 regions; these are Central and Eastern (Pannonian) Croatia, Northwest Croatia and Adriatic Croatia. The last encompasses all counties along the Adriatic coast. Northwest Croatia includes the city of Zagreb and Krapina-Zagorje, Varaždin, Koprivnica-Križevci, Međimurje and Zagreb counties, and the Central and Eastern (Pannonian) Croatia includes the remaining areas—Bjelovar-Bilogora, Virovitica-Podravina, Požega-Slavonia, Brod-Posavina, Osijek-Baranja, Vukovar-Syrmia, Karlovac and Sisak-Moslavina counties. Individual counties and the city of Zagreb represent NUTS 3 level subdivision units in Croatia. The NUTS Local administrative unit divisions are two-tiered. The LAU 1 divisions match the counties and the city of Zagreb—in effect making these the same as NUTS 3 units—while the LAU 2 subdivisions correspond to the cities and municipalities of Croatia.


===Urbanisation===

The average urbanisation rate in Croatia stands at 56%, with a growing urban population and shrinking rural population. The largest city and the nation&#x27;s capital is Zagreb, with an urban population of 686,568 in the city itself. Zagreb&#x27;s metropolitan area encompasses 341 additional settlements and, by the year 2001, the population of the area had reached 978,161; approximately 60% of Zagreb County&#x27;s residents live in Zagreb&#x27;s metropolitan area, as does about 41% of Croatia&#x27;s urban population. The cities of Split and Rijeka are the largest settlements on the Croatian Adriatic coast, with each city&#x27;s population being over 100,000. There are four other Croatian cities exceeding 50,000 people: Osijek, Zadar, Pula and Slavonski Brod; the Zagreb district of Sesvete, which has the status of a standalone settlement but not a city, also has such a large population. A further eleven cities are populated by more than 20,000.


==See also==

* Geography of Europe
==References==
==Works cited==
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215923" start="4" end="24" title="Geography of Croatia" label="geography of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="100" end="114" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="119" end="135" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="167" end="182" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="280" end="288" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="307" end="314" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="333" end="355" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="360" end="366" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="380" end="390" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317511" start="476" end="479" title="42nd parallel north" label="42°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256610" start="484" end="489" title="47th parallel north" label="47° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704721" start="505" end="508" title="13th meridian east" label="13°"/>
<link wikidata="Q796502" start="513" end="518" title="20th meridian east" label="20° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="520" end="527" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="535" end="553" title="territorial waters" label="territorial waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663988" start="588" end="603" title="internal waters" label="internal waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q810247" start="623" end="631" title="Baseline (sea)" label="baseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="659" end="674" title="Pannonian Plain" label="Pannonian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="683" end="695" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="744" end="760" title="Geomorphology" label="geomorphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="967" end="975" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212136" start="1054" end="1059" title="Horst (geology)" label="horst"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="1064" end="1070" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="1111" end="1119" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705990" start="1120" end="1133" title="Pannonian Sea" label="Pannonian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230249" start="1152" end="1159" title="Pannonian island mountains" label="islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="1244" end="1248" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538487" start="1253" end="1265" title="Gorski Kotar" label="Gorski Kotar"/>
<link wikidata="Q646054" start="1543" end="1556" title="List of islands of Croatia" label="1,246 islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="1651" end="1667" title="Karst topography" label="Karst topography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1677" end="1698" title="List of notable karst areas#Croatia" label="about half of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="1860" end="1872" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1939" end="1945" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="1953" end="1958" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q204040" start="1960" end="1963" title="Mur (river)" label="Mur"/>
<link wikidata="Q211046" start="1968" end="1972" title="Kupa" label="Kupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="2070" end="2077" title="Neretva" label="Neretva"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="2127" end="2146" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2165" end="2194" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="2270" end="2279" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="2416" end="2431" title="biogeographical" label="biogeographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643677" start="2529" end="2537" title="altitudinal zonation" label="elevated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501229" start="2653" end="2687" title="protected areas of Croatia" label="protected natural areas in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2933" end="2951" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="3011" end="3037" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="life expectancy in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="3098" end="3104" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="3120" end="3130" title="Ethnic minorities in Croatia" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="3139" end="3144" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276230" start="3216" end="3228" title="Constitution of Croatia" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q57053" start="3305" end="3313" title="Counties of Croatia" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="3330" end="3344" title="city of Zagreb" label="city of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744" start="3378" end="3384" title="List of cities in Croatia" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q57058" start="3393" end="3407" title="Municipalities of Croatia" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="3421" end="3433" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="3568" end="3575" title="capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="3579" end="3585" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="3648" end="3665" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="3708" end="3713" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="3718" end="3724" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="3999" end="4015" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="4033" end="4051" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia–Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="4070" end="4078" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="4123" end="4130" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="4158" end="4164" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="4193" end="4203" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="4243" end="4255" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317511" start="4323" end="4326" title="42nd parallel north" label="42°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256610" start="4331" end="4336" title="47th parallel north" label="47° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704721" start="4352" end="4355" title="13th meridian east" label="13°"/>
<link wikidata="Q796502" start="4360" end="4365" title="20th meridian east" label="20° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q320623" start="4481" end="4485" title="Neum" label="Neum"/>
<link wikidata="Q124010370" start="4568" end="4577" title="horseshoe shape" label="horseshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4616" end="4624" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="4693" end="4703" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="4749" end="4754" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4825" end="4836" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q58330" start="4852" end="4861" title="Međimurje" label="Međimurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q790230" start="4866" end="4873" title="Baranya (region)" label="Baranya"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="4910" end="4928" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="4937" end="4975" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5034" end="5051" title="Treaty of Trianon#Borders of Hungary" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502774" start="5175" end="5191" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War" label="Ottoman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q74623" start="5239" end="5256" title="Great Turkish War" label="Great Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q192303" start="5295" end="5314" title="Treaty of Karlowitz" label="Treaty of Karlowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q699602" start="5331" end="5336" title="Cretan War (1645–1669)" label="Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q694835" start="5341" end="5370" title="Ottoman–Venetian War (1714–1718)" label="Seventh Ottoman–Venetian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q311464" start="5535" end="5540" title="AVNOJ" label="AVNOJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="5767" end="5773" title="Syrmia" label="Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="5788" end="5794" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882" start="5809" end="5813" title="Ilok" label="Ilok"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="5944" end="5971" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q852564" start="5976" end="5994" title="Bács-Bodrog County" label="Bács-Bodrog County"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6031" end="6042" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="6247" end="6253" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="6346" end="6362" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314717" start="6381" end="6412" title="Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947" label="1947 Treaty of Peace with Italy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6428" end="6432" title="Cres#History" label="Cres"/>
<link wikidata="Q216878" start="6434" end="6441" title="Lastovo" label="Lastovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q378556" start="6446" end="6455" title="Palagruža" label="Palagruža"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6474" end="6479" title="Zadar#History" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="6484" end="6490" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="6518" end="6538" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="communist Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q391980" start="6574" end="6599" title="Free Territory of Trieste" label="Free Territory of Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="6658" end="6665" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q933745" start="6819" end="6834" title="Treaty of Osimo" label="Treaty of Osimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="7022" end="7037" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175911" start="7052" end="7068" title="geodetic network" label="geodetic network"/>
<link wikidata="Q23202" start="7084" end="7103" title="Metres above the Adriatic" label="elevation benchmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="7237" end="7244" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="7257" end="7267" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="7405" end="7412" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q263868" start="7417" end="7423" title="Žabnik, Međimurje County" label="Žabnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q58330" start="7427" end="7443" title="Međimurje County" label="Međimurje County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7471" end="7478" title="Rađevac" label="Rađevac"/>
<link wikidata="Q58225" start="7492" end="7513" title="Vukovar-Syrmia County" label="Vukovar-Syrmia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446" start="7555" end="7563" title="Bašanija" label="Bašanija"/>
<link wikidata="Q58268" start="7567" end="7580" title="Istria County" label="Istria County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445191" start="7623" end="7631" title="Galijula" label="Galijula"/>
<link wikidata="Q58253" start="7660" end="7681" title="Split-Dalmatia County" label="Split-Dalmatia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109394" start="7744" end="7752" title="Prevlaka" label="Prevlaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q58289" start="7766" end="7790" title="Dubrovnik-Neretva County" label="Dubrovnik-Neretva County"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="7895" end="7912" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="8224" end="8242" title="territorial waters" label="territorial waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q810247" start="8315" end="8323" title="Baseline (sea)" label="baseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q940125" start="8359" end="8399" title="Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone" label="Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="8421" end="8444" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663988" start="8543" end="8558" title="internal waters" label="internal waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046045" start="8741" end="8754" title="Gulf of Piran" label="Gulf of Piran"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="8924" end="8939" title="Member state of the European Union" label="EU member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187201" start="9098" end="9123" title="international arbitration" label="international arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="9150" end="9152" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q748162" start="9174" end="9204" title="Accession of Croatia to the European Union" label="progress towards EU membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279786" start="9490" end="9504" title="Klek (peninsula)" label="Klek peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q207468" start="9600" end="9612" title="Bay of Kotor" label="Bay of Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="9713" end="9740" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q32526" start="9758" end="9782" title="Military of Serbia and Montenegro" label="Serbian-Montenegrin army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618168" start="9816" end="9847" title="United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka" label="United Nations observer mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q476210" start="10182" end="10214" title="Croatia–Slovenia border disputes" label="Croatia–Slovenia border disputes"/>
<link wikidata="Q788452" start="10230" end="10238" title="Dragonja" label="Dragonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="10293" end="10300" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047978" start="10336" end="10346" title="Sveta Gera" label="Sveta Gera"/>
<link wikidata="Q204040" start="10493" end="10503" title="Mur (river)" label="Mura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q908128" start="10672" end="10678" title="Hotiza" label="Hotiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098118" start="10783" end="10825" title="Croatia-Serbia border dispute" label="border disputes between Croatia and Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191072" start="10961" end="10970" title="cadastral" label="cadastral"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="11016" end="11026" title="SR Croatia" label="SR Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q269864" start="11031" end="11040" title="SR Serbia" label="SR Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q560385" start="11191" end="11198" title="Island of Vukovar" label="Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q391205" start="11203" end="11212" title="Island of Šarengrad" label="Šarengrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="11344" end="11351" title="meander" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212927" start="11373" end="11376" title="Una (Sava)" label="Una"/>
<link wikidata="Q396575" start="11394" end="11413" title="Hrvatska Kostajnica" label="Hrvatska Kostajnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="11543" end="11550" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="11749" end="11764" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="11793" end="11802" title="Dinarides" label="Dinarides"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="11905" end="11912" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="11914" end="11920" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q335239" start="11928" end="11939" title="amphibolite" label="amphibolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274602" start="11950" end="11957" title="spilite" label="spilite"/>
<link wikidata="Q46947" start="11959" end="11965" title="gabbro" label="gabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q753016" start="11967" end="11974" title="diabase" label="diabase"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="11979" end="11988" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="12203" end="12211" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="12240" end="12255" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="12627" end="12631" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538487" start="12636" end="12648" title="Gorski Kotar" label="Gorski Kotar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="12662" end="12674" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="12832" end="12848" title="Geomorphology" label="geomorphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q646054" start="12953" end="12966" title="List of islands of Croatia" label="1,246 islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="13188" end="13196" title="low tide" label="low tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q13280" start="13238" end="13242" title="Cres" label="Cres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059" start="13247" end="13250" title="Krk" label="Krk"/>
<link wikidata="Q922" start="13283" end="13287" title="Brač" label="Brač"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195459" start="13338" end="13364" title="List of inhabited islands of Croatia" label="permanently inhabited ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q13288" start="13409" end="13416" title="Korčula" label="Korčula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="13530" end="13546" title="karst topography" label="karst topography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13567" end="13594" title="Adriatic Carbonate Platform" label="Adriatic Carbonate Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="13662" end="13671" title="Dinarides" label="Dinarides"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="13679" end="13688" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="13693" end="13700" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="13701" end="13707" title="Epoch (geology)" label="epochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q777913" start="13714" end="13728" title="carbonate rock" label="carbonate rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="13843" end="13863" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q605948" start="13990" end="14015" title="Messinian salinity crisis" label="Messinian salinity crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q756914" start="14090" end="14096" title="flysch" label="flysch"/>
<link wikidata="Q938838" start="14168" end="14180" title="Kvarner Gulf" label="Kvarner Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="14260" end="14268" title="alluvial" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="14325" end="14332" title="Neretva" label="Neretva"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="14333" end="14344" title="river delta" label="river delta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14354" end="14360" title="Istria#Geography" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="14480" end="14487" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q396590" start="14513" end="14519" title="Komiža" label="Komiža"/>
<link wikidata="Q203767" start="14537" end="14540" title="Vis (island)" label="Vis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638935" start="14581" end="14587" title="Jabuka (island)" label="Jabuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453650" start="14592" end="14599" title="Brusnik (island)" label="Brusnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="14874" end="14882" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464261" start="14899" end="14919" title="fold and thrust belt" label="fold and thrust belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q661478" start="14940" end="14954" title="Alpine orogeny" label="Alpine orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="14994" end="14998" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="15113" end="15121" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q394286" start="15165" end="15173" title="Žumberak" label="Žumberak"/>
<link wikidata="Q806922" start="15181" end="15196" title="Banovina (region)" label="Banovina region"/>
<link wikidata="Q336413" start="15258" end="15266" title="Ćićarija" label="Ćićarija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257749" start="15271" end="15275" title="Učka" label="Učka"/>
<link wikidata="Q736047" start="15355" end="15361" title="Dinara" label="Dinara"/>
<link wikidata="Q864456" start="15418" end="15425" title="Biokovo" label="Biokovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223275" start="15427" end="15434" title="Velebit" label="Velebit"/>
<link wikidata="Q657786" start="15436" end="15446" title="Plješivica" label="Plješivica"/>
<link wikidata="Q781166" start="15448" end="15461" title="Velika Kapela" label="Velika Kapela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519978" start="15463" end="15470" title="Risnjak" label="Risnjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702343" start="15472" end="15479" title="Svilaja" label="Svilaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q631183" start="15484" end="15492" title="Snježnik" label="Snježnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694749" start="15527" end="15542" title="List of karst areas" label="half of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609084" start="15602" end="15627" title="list of caves in Croatia" label="numerous caves in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15723" end="15736" title="Kita Gaćešina" label="Kita Gaćešina"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="15887" end="15897" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="15941" end="15950" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q840828" start="15951" end="15967" title="Variscan orogeny" label="Variscan orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="15987" end="15995" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778649" start="16022" end="16027" title="Papuk" label="Papuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="16104" end="16118" title="Stratovolcano" label="stratovolcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="16144" end="16147" title="Mya (unit)" label="Mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410264" start="16208" end="16220" title="flood basalt" label="flood basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="16257" end="16272" title="tectonic uplift" label="tectonic uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="16280" end="16300" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="16327" end="16336" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705990" start="16345" end="16358" title="Pannonian Sea" label="Pannonian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16380" end="16389" title="Sedimentation#Geology" label="Sediments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434465" start="16496" end="16503" title="fluvial" label="fluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="16537" end="16548" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q911639" start="16566" end="16589" title="Transdanubian Mountains" label="Transdanubian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q207376" start="16708" end="16717" title="Iron Gate (Danube)" label="Iron Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="16798" end="16802" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q211046" start="16815" end="16819" title="Kupa" label="Kupa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16841" end="16848" title="Baranya (region)#Geography" label="Baranya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16854" end="16860" title="Syrmia#Geography" label="Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447461" start="16951" end="16960" title="Ivanšćica" label="Ivanšćica"/>
<link wikidata="Q743452" start="16965" end="16975" title="Medvednica" label="Medvednica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16985" end="16991" title="Zagreb#Surroundings" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q743502" start="17028" end="17044" title="Hrvatsko Zagorje" label="Hrvatsko Zagorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269402" start="17056" end="17061" title="Psunj" label="Psunj"/>
<link wikidata="Q273114" start="17135" end="17141" title="Požega, Croatia" label="Požega"/>
<link wikidata="Q136911" start="17169" end="17176" title="Krndija" label="Krndija"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514528" start="17232" end="17244" title="Požeška gora" label="Požeška gora"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="17294" end="17301" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="17334" end="17344" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="17359" end="17372" title="igneous rocks" label="igneous rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q740445" start="17391" end="17396" title="ridge" label="ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q271669" start="17446" end="17454" title="landform" label="landform"/>
<link wikidata="Q780950" start="17533" end="17538" title="Voćin" label="Voćin"/>
<link wikidata="Q136916" start="17564" end="17579" title="Moslavačka gora" label="Moslavačka gora"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426043" start="17618" end="17630" title="volcanic arc" label="volcanic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="17645" end="17659" title="plate tectonics" label="tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="17800" end="17814" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17881" end="17887" title="Danube#Geology" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17902" end="17906" title="Mur (river)#River course" label="Mura"/>
<link wikidata="Q522100" start="18160" end="18166" title="Cetina" label="Cetina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625342" start="18237" end="18247" title="Lake Vrana (Dalmatia)" label="Lake Vrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q820542" start="18282" end="18294" title="Lake Dubrava" label="Lake Dubrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420" start="18300" end="18308" title="Varaždin" label="Varaždin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668261" start="18310" end="18321" title="Peruća Lake" label="Peruća Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="18323" end="18332" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q694089" start="18355" end="18368" title="Lake Prokljan" label="Lake Prokljan"/>
<link wikidata="Q400036" start="18374" end="18381" title="Skradin" label="Skradin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4103545" start="18386" end="18399" title="Lake Varaždin" label="Lake Varaždin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189849" start="18502" end="18516" title="Plitvice Lakes National Park" label="Plitvice lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="18576" end="18584" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="18589" end="18598" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734015" start="18803" end="18852" title="list of Ramsar wetlands of international importance" label="Ramsar list of internationally important wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933800" start="18854" end="18867" title="Lonjsko Polje" label="Lonjsko Polje"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657446" start="18887" end="18892" title="Lonja" label="Lonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="18905" end="18910" title="Sisak" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118811" start="18912" end="18923" title="Kopački Rit" label="Kopački Rit"/>
<link wikidata="Q677753" start="18971" end="18984" title="Neretva Delta" label="Neretva Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q849665" start="18989" end="18999" title="Crna Mlaka" label="Crna Mlaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q396491" start="19005" end="19017" title="Jastrebarsko" label="Jastrebarsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="19337" end="19371" title="Oceanic climate" label="subtropical highland climate (Cfb)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="19390" end="19419" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354" start="19500" end="19510" title="hinterland" label="hinterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="19536" end="19564" title="Humid subtropical climate" label="warm temperate climate (Cfa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="19646" end="19680" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate (mostly Csb)"/>
<link wikidata="Q167839" start="20068" end="20075" title="Čakovec" label="Čakovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="20139" end="20147" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20310" end="20317" title="Lastovo#Climate" label="Lastovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q879332" start="20319" end="20325" title="Biševo" label="Biševo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263995" start="20331" end="20337" title="Svetac" label="Svetac"/>
<link wikidata="Q732240" start="20448" end="20462" title="growing season" label="growing season"/>
<link wikidata="Q190825" start="20660" end="20664" title="Bora (wind)" label="bora"/>
<link wikidata="Q180372" start="20700" end="20707" title="sirocco" label="sirocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="21085" end="21094" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="21249" end="21264" title="biogeography" label="biogeographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="21498" end="21503" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q227187" start="21553" end="21560" title="Zrmanja" label="Zrmanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q591224" start="21565" end="21569" title="Krka (Croatia)" label="Krka"/>
<link wikidata="Q193685" start="21582" end="21586" title="tufa" label="tufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644014" start="21728" end="21739" title="troglobite" label="troglobitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15856" start="21788" end="21791" title="olm" label="olm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054968" start="21795" end="21810" title="cave salamander" label="cave salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="21845" end="21855" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q771220" start="22090" end="22104" title="phytogeography" label="phytogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092732" start="22129" end="22143" title="Boreal Kingdom" label="Boreal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q968104" start="22224" end="22243" title="Circumboreal Region" label="Circumboreal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="22277" end="22297" title="Mediterranean Region" label="Mediterranean Region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22303" end="22329" title="Biome#WWF system" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q771194" start="22376" end="22399" title="Pannonian mixed forests" label="Pannonian mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845967" start="22401" end="22432" title="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests" label="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269041" start="22437" end="22463" title="Illyrian deciduous forests" label="Illyrian deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="22465" end="22470" title="Biome" label="Biome"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="22491" end="22523" title="temperate broadleaf and mixed forest" label="temperate broadleaf/mixed forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q144012" start="22528" end="22570" title="Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub" label="Mediterranean forests, woodlands and scrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="22587" end="22603" title="Palearctic realm" label="Palearctic realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="22630" end="22634" title="Taxon" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="22654" end="22661" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="22705" end="22712" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="22813" end="22825" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="23048" end="23056" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38829" start="23072" end="23077" title="breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501229" start="23341" end="23365" title="Croatian protected areas" label="Croatian protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501229" start="23417" end="23431" title="List of national parks of Croatia" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="23442" end="23450" title="Nature reserve" label="reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q728904" start="23458" end="23469" title="nature park" label="nature park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="23566" end="23579" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="23630" end="23636" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="23637" end="23656" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="23702" end="23733" title="Man and the Biosphere Programme" label="Man and the Biosphere Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="24035" end="24046" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="24057" end="24076" title="Habitat destruction" label="Habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="24194" end="24201" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q913302" start="24210" end="24231" title="habitat fragmentation" label="habitat fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="24329" end="24345" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147907" start="24358" end="24375" title="Caulerpa racemosa" label="Caulerpa racemosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q310961" start="24392" end="24404" title="Caulerpa taxifolia" label="C. taxifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="24524" end="24539" title="Benthic zone" label="benthic habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="24554" end="24565" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="24642" end="24662" title="ecological footprint" label="ecological footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q913302" start="25142" end="25163" title="habitat fragmentation" label="habitat fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="25212" end="25220" title="land use" label="land use"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="25417" end="25438" title="Government of Croatia" label="Government of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="25664" end="25672" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491670" start="25788" end="25801" title="Land rehabilitation" label="rehabilitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="25844" end="25860" title="waste management" label="waste management"/>
<link wikidata="Q18538" start="25896" end="25917" title="municipal solid waste" label="municipal solid waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152039" start="25981" end="25999" title="soil acidification" label="soil acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154759" start="26004" end="26018" title="soil organic matter" label="organic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="26079" end="26092" title="soil salinity" label="soil salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q190777" start="26107" end="26114" title="Neretva" label="Neretva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189711" start="26150" end="26161" title="alkali soil" label="alkali soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="26165" end="26173" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="26185" end="26198" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="26285" end="26313" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q899016" start="26376" end="26388" title="Hydrodesulfurization" label="desulfurised"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="26425" end="26440" title="sulphur dioxide" label="sulphur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="26519" end="26522" title="NOx" label="NOx"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="26581" end="26596" title="unleaded petrol" label="unleaded petrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="26618" end="26622" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="26675" end="26686" title="Air quality" label="Air quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="26859" end="26889" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q25584060" start="26905" end="26922" title="energy production" label="energy production"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="27041" end="27055" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="27098" end="27124" title="Ozone depletion" label="ozone depleting substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049799" start="27228" end="27243" title="water resources" label="water resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q625083" start="27308" end="27328" title="water supply network" label="water supply network"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="27431" end="27446" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q864214" start="27544" end="27557" title="organic waste" label="organic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="27640" end="27656" title="sewage treatment" label="sewage treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="27747" end="27758" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="27759" end="27766" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q625376" start="27776" end="27783" title="water quality" label="quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q215624" start="27866" end="27891" title="biochemical oxygen demand" label="biochemical oxygen demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407592" start="27896" end="27926" title="bacteriological water analysis" label="bacteriological water analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="28004" end="28016" title="water supply" label="water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q156849" start="28082" end="28090" title="sewerage" label="sewerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047095" start="28105" end="28118" title="septic system" label="septic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q45279" start="28209" end="28219" title="oligotroph" label="oligotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="28283" end="28297" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q998910" start="28321" end="28333" title="Bay of Bakar" label="Bay of Bakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q396579" start="28346" end="28353" title="Kaštela" label="Kaštela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549" start="28367" end="28374" title="Šibenik" label="Šibenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q115117" start="28384" end="28389" title="Ploče" label="Ploče"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058325" start="28543" end="28559" title="marine pollution" label="marine pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q259130" start="28575" end="28587" title="ship pollution" label="from vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q362087" start="28891" end="28905" title="permanent crop" label="permanent crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="29255" end="29270" title="land use change" label="land use change"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="29343" end="29371" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864145" start="29401" end="29422" title="minefields in Croatia" label="minefields in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345044" start="29682" end="29696" title="Demining" label="mine clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q190665" start="30004" end="30019" title="Central Croatia" label="Central Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190665" start="30124" end="30143" title="Mountainous Croatia" label="Mountainous Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="30391" end="30396" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789654" start="30508" end="30525" title="Croatian Littoral" label="Croatian Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="30759" end="30806" title="Demographics of Croatia" label="demographic features of the Croatian population"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513788" start="30941" end="30970" title="Croatian Bureau of Statistics" label="Croatian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="31155" end="31173" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="31233" end="31259" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="life expectancy in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="31476" end="31486" title="death rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="31517" end="31527" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="31627" end="31649" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="31917" end="31923" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="31939" end="31949" title="ethnic minorities in Croatia" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="31958" end="31963" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276230" start="32034" end="32057" title="Constitution of Croatia" label="Constitution of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="32249" end="32286" title="Croatia in personal union with Hungary" label="personal union of Croatia and Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="32303" end="32318" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q74740" start="32346" end="32363" title="Growth of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman conquests"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32418" end="32424" title="Istria#History" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271625" start="32429" end="32437" title="History of Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="32449" end="32457" title="Venetian Republic" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32476" end="32507" title="Austria-Hungary#Dissolution" label="Austria-Hungary&amp;#x27;s collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714904" start="32658" end="32670" title="Istrian exodus" label="similar fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q851965" start="32836" end="32846" title="Demographics of SFR Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="32911" end="32923" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="32988" end="33016" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="33065" end="33082" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="33406" end="33413" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="33452" end="33469" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="33479" end="33500" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="33512" end="33517" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="33623" end="33638" title="academic degree" label="academic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="33875" end="33896" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q26360" start="34021" end="34025" title="Croatian kuna" label="kuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="34277" end="34302" title="Purchasing Power Standard" label="Purchasing Power Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="34306" end="34351" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="the ten countries which joined the EU in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34559" end="34570" title="Kingdom of Croatia (medieval)#Establishment" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="34967" end="34973" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998182" start="34979" end="34988" title="Subdivisions of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="banovinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q57058" start="35133" end="35147" title="Municipalities of Croatia" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="35376" end="35390" title="Transleithania" label="Transleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="35646" end="35655" title="eponymous" label="eponymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="35689" end="35706" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35755" end="35778" title="Parliament of Croatia#Chamber of Counties" label="Chamber of the Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="36118" end="36124" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27038" start="36216" end="36229" title="Zagreb County" label="Zagreb County"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744" start="36486" end="36492" title="List of cities in Croatia" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q193083" start="36525" end="36573" title="Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics" label="Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313890" start="36581" end="36600" title="NUTS of Croatia" label="division of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193083" start="37333" end="37358" title="Local administrative unit" label="Local administrative unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="37850" end="37867" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656" start="38346" end="38350" title="Pula" label="Pula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38382" end="38390" title="Zagreb#City districts" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017892" start="38394" end="38401" title="Sesvete" label="Sesvete"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845841" start="38429" end="38450" title="naselje" label="standalone settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q119716" start="38578" end="38597" title="Geography of Europe" label="Geography of Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5576" wikidata="Q2047394" url="?curid=5576" title="Demographics of Croatia">
<text>The demographic characteristics of the population of Croatia are known through censuses, normally conducted in ten-year intervals and analysed by various statistical bureaus since the 1850s. The Croatian Bureau of Statistics has performed this task since the 1990s. The latest census in Croatia was performed in autumn of 2021. According to final results published on 22 September 2022 the permanent population of Croatia at the 2021 census (31st Aug) had reached 3.87 million. The population density is 68.7 inhabitants per square kilometre, and the overall life expectancy in Croatia at birth was 78,2 years in 2018. The population rose steadily (with the exception of censuses taken following the two world wars) from 2.1 million in 1857 until 1991, when it peaked at 4.7 million. Since 1991, Croatia&#x27;s death rate has continuously exceeded its birth rate; the natural growth rate of the population is negative. Croatia is in the fourth (or fifth) stage of the demographic transition. In terms of age structure, the population is dominated by the 15 to 64 year‑old segment. The median age of the population is 43.4, and the gender ratio of the total population is 0.93 males per 1 female.

Croatia is inhabited mostly by Croats (91.63%), while minorities include Serbs (3.2%), and 21 other ethnicities (less than 1% each). The demographic history of Croatia is marked by significant migrations, including the arrival of the Croats in the area growth of Hungarian and German-speaking population since the union of Croatia and Hungary, and joining of the Habsburg Empire, migrations set off by Ottoman conquests and growth of Italian speaking population in Istria and in Dalmatia during Venetian rule there. After the collapse of Austria-Hungary, the Hungarian population declined, while the German-speaking population was forced or compelled to leave after World War II and similar fate was suffered by the Italian population. Late 19th century and the 20th century were marked by large scale economic migrations abroad. The 1940s and the 1950s in Yugoslavia were marked by internal migrations in Yugoslavia, as well as by urbanisation. Recently, significant migrations came as a result of the Croatian War of Independence when hundreds of thousands were displaced, while the 2010s brought a new wave of emigration which strengthened after Croatia&#x27;s accession to the EU in 2013.

Croatian is the official language, but minority languages are officially used in some local government units. Croatian is declared as the native language by 95.60% of the population. A 2009 survey revealed that 78% of Croatians claim knowledge of at least one foreign language—most often English. The main religions of Croatia are Roman Catholic (86.28%), Eastern Orthodoxy (4.44%) and Islam (1.47%). Literacy in Croatia stands at 98.1%. The proportion of the population aged 15 and over attaining academic degrees grew rapidly since 2001, doubling and reaching 16.7% by 2008. An estimated 4.5% of the GDP is spent for education. Primary and secondary education are available in Croatian and in languages of recognised minorities. Croatia has a universal health care system and in 2010, the nation spent 6.9% of its GDP on healthcare. Net monthly income in August 2023 averaged 1,163 euro. The most significant sources of employment in 2023 were manufacturing industry, wholesale and retail trade and construction. In August 2023, the unemployment rate was 6.9%. Croatia&#x27;s median equivalent household income tops average Purchasing Power Standard of the ten countries which joined the EU in 2004, while trailing the EU average. 2011 census recorded a total of 1.5 million private households, which predominantly owned their own housing. The average urbanisation rate in Croatia stands at 56%, with an augmentation of the urban population and a reduction of the rural population.

==Population==

With a population of 3,871,833 in 2021, Croatia ranks 128th in the world by population. Its population density is 75.8 inhabitants per square kilometre. The overall life expectancy in Croatia at birth is 78 years.

The total fertility rate of 1.50 children per mother is one of the lowest in the world. Since 1991, Croatia&#x27;s death rate has nearly continuously exceeded its birth rate. The Croatian Bureau of Statistics forecast that the population may even shrink to 3.1 million by 2051, depending on the actual birth rate and the level of net migration. The population of Croatia rose steadily from 2.1 million in 1857 until 1991, when it peaked at 4.7 million, with the exception of censuses taken in 1921 and 1948, i.e. following two world wars. The natural growth rate of the population is negative. Croatia started advancing from the first stage of the demographic transition in the late 18th and early 19th centuries (depending on where in Croatia is being discussed). Croatia is in the fourth or fifth stage of the demographic transition.

An explanation for the population decrease in the 1990s is the Croatian War of Independence. During the war, large sections of the population were displaced and emigration increased. In 1991, in predominantly Serb areas, more than 400,000 Croats and other non-Serbs were either removed from their homes by the Croatian Serb forces or fled the violence. In 1995, during the final days of the war, more than 120,000 and perhaps as many as 200,000 Serbs fled the country before the arrival of Croatian forces during Operation Storm. Within a decade following the end of the war, only 117,000 Serb refugees returned out of the 300,000 displaced during the entire war. According to 2001 Croatian census there were 201,631 Serbs in Croatia, compared to the census from 1991 when the number was 581,663. Most of Croatia&#x27;s remaining Serbs never lived in areas occupied in the Croatian War of Independence. Serbs have been only partially re-settled in the regions they previously inhabited, while some of the settlements previously inhabited by Serbs were settled by Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, mostly from Republika Srpska.

In 2014, there were 39,566 live births in Croatia, comprising 20,374 male and 19,192 female children. Virtually all of those were performed in medical facilities; only 19 births occurred elsewhere. Out of the total number, 32,677 children were born in wedlock or within 300 days after the end of the marriage, and the average age of mothers at the birth of their first child was 28.4 years. General fertility rate, i.e. number of births per 1,000 women aged 15–49 is 42.9, with the age specific rate peaking at 101.0 per million for women aged 25–29. In 2009, 52,414 persons died in Croatia, 48.5% of whom died in medical facilities and 90.0% of whom were receiving medical treatment at the time. Cardiovascular disease and cancer were the primary causes of death in the country, with 26,235 and 13,280 deaths respectively. In the same year, there were 2,986 violent deaths, including 2,121 due to accidents. The latter figure includes 616 deaths in traffic accidents. In 2014, the birth rate was 9.3 per mille, exceeded by the mortality rate of 12.0 per mille. The infant mortality rate was 5.0 per mille in 2014. In terms of age structure, the population of Croatia is dominated by the 15–64 year older segment (68.1%), while the size of the population younger than 15 and older than 64 is relatively small (15.1% and 16.9% respectively). The median age of the population is 41.4. The sex ratio of the population is 1.06 males per 1 female at birth and up to 14 years of age, and 0.99 males per 1 female between the ages of 15 and 64. But at ages over 64 the ratio is 0.64 males per 1 female. The ratio for the total population is 0.93 males per 1 female.

In contrast to the shrinking native population, since the late 1990s there has been a positive net migration into Croatia, reaching a level of more than 7,000 net immigrants in 2006. In accordance with its immigration policy, Croatia is also trying to entice emigrants to return. Croatian citizenship is acquired in a multitude of ways, based on origin, place of birth, naturalization and international treaties. In recent years, the Croatian government has been pressured each year to add 40% to work permit quotas for foreign workers.

There were 8,468 immigrants to Croatia in 2009, more than half of them (57.5%) coming from Bosnia and Herzegovina, a sharp decline from the previous year&#x27;s 14,541. In the same year, there were 9,940 emigrants from the country, 44.8% of them leaving to Serbia. The number of emigrants represents a substantial increase compared to the figure of 7,488 recorded in 2008. In 2009, the net migration to and from abroad peaked in the Sisak-Moslavina County (−1,093 persons) and the city of Zagreb (+830 persons).

In 2009, a total of 22,382 marriages were performed in Croatia as well as 5,076 divorces. The 2001 census recorded 1.47 million households in the country.


===Census data===

The first modern population census in the country was conducted in 1857, and 15 more have been performed since then. Since 1961 the censuses are conducted in regular ten-year intervals, with the latest one in 2011. The first institution set up in the country specifically for the purposes of maintaining population statistics was the State Statistical Office, founded in 1875. Since its founding, the office changed its name and structure several times and was alternately subordinated to other institutions and independent, until the most recent changes in 1992, when the institution became the Croatian Bureau of Statistics. The 2011 census was performed on 1–28 April 2011, recording situation as of 31 March 2011. The first census results, containing the number of the population by settlement, were published on 29 June 2011, and the final comprehensive set of data was published in December 2012. The 2011 census and processing of the data gathered by the census was expected to cost 171.9 million kuna (23.3 million euro). The 2011 census was performed using new methodology: the permanent population was determined as the enumerated population who lived in the census area for at least 12 months prior to the census, or plans to live in the same area for at least 12 months after the census. This method was also retroactively applied to the 2001 census data.

===Total Fertility Rate from 1880 to 1899===
The total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World in Data and Gapminder Foundation.


===Total Fertility Rate from 1915 to 1940===


==Vital statistics==

===Births and deaths before WWI===
===Births and deaths after WWII===
Source: Croatian Bureau of Statistics

===Current vital statistics===


===Structure of the population===



==Marriages and divorces==

==Ethnic groups==

Ethnic map of Croatia by municipalities (2021)

Croatia is inhabited mostly by Croats (91.63%), while minority groups include: Serbs (3.2%), Bosniaks, Hungarians, Italians, Albanians, Slovenes, Germans, Czechs, Roma and others (less than 1% each). The Constitution of the Republic of Croatia explicitly identifies 22 minorities. Those are Serbs, Czechs, Slovaks, Italians, Istro-Romanians (&quot;Vlachs&quot;), Hungarians, Jews, Germans, Austrians, Ukrainians, Romanians, Ruthenians, Macedonians, Bosniaks, Slovenes, Montenegrins, Russians, Bulgarians, Poles, Roma, Turks and Albanians.

===1900–1931===
===1948–2021===
==Significant migrations==
The demographic history of Croatia is characterised by significant migrations, starting with the arrival of the Croats in the area. According to the work &quot;De Administrando Imperio&quot; written by the 10th-century Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII, the Croats arrived in the area of modern-day Croatia in the early 7th century. However, that claim is disputed, and competing hypotheses date the event between the 6th and the 9th centuries. Following the establishment of a personal union of Croatia and Hungary in 1102, and the joining of the Habsburg Empire in 1527, the Hungarian and German-speaking population of Croatia began gradually increasing in number. The processes of Magyarization and Germanization varied in intensity but persisted to the 20th century. The Ottoman conquests initiated a westward migration of parts of the Croatian population; the Burgenland Croats are direct descendants of some of those settlers. To replace the fleeing Croats the Habsburgs called on the Orthodox populations of Bosnia and Serbia to provide military service in the Croatian Military Frontier. Serb migration into this region peaked during the Great Serb Migrations of 1690 and 1737–39. Similarly, Venetian Republic rule in Istria and in Dalmatia, following the Fifth and the Seventh Ottoman–Venetian Wars ushered gradual growth of Italian speaking population in those areas. Following the collapse of Austria-Hungary in 1918, the Hungarian population declined, especially in the areas north of the Drava river, where they represented the majority before World War I.

The period between 1890 and World War I was marked by large economic emigration from Croatia to the United States, and particularly to the areas of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Cleveland, Ohio, and Chicago, Illinois. Besides the United States, the main destination of the migrants was South America, especially Argentina, Chile, Bolivia and Peru. It is estimated that 500,000 people left Croatia during this period. After World War I, the main focus of emigration shifted to Canada, where about 15,000 people settled before the onset of World War II. During World War II and in the period immediately following the war, there were further significant demographic changes as the German-speaking population, the Volksdeutsche, were either forced or otherwise compelled to leave—reducing their number from the prewar German population of Yugoslavia of 500,000, living in parts of present-day Croatia and Serbia, to the figure of 62,000 recorded in the 1953 census.

After the fall of Napoleon (1814), Istria, Kvarner and Dalmatia were annexed to the Austrian Empire. Many Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians looked with sympathy towards the Risorgimento movement that fought for the unification of Italy. However, after the Third Italian War of Independence (1866), when the Veneto and Friuli regions were ceded by the Austrians to the newly formed Kingdom Italy, Istria and Dalmatia remained part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, together with other Italian-speaking areas on the eastern Adriatic. This triggered the gradual rise of Italian irredentism among many Italians in Istria, Kvarner and Dalmatia, who demanded the unification of the Julian March, Kvarner and Dalmatia with Italy. The Italians in Istria, Kvarner and Dalmatia supported the Italian Risorgimento: as a consequence, the Austrians saw the Italians as enemies and favored the Slav communities of Istria, Kvarner and Dalmatia.

During the meeting of the Council of Ministers of 12 November 1866, Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria outlined a wide-ranging project aimed at the Germanization or Slavization of the areas of the empire with an Italian presence:

Istrian Italians were more than 50% of the total population of Istria for centuries, while making up about a third of the population in 1900. while making up about a third of the population in 1900. Dalmatia, especially its maritime cities, once had a substantial local ethnic Italian population (Dalmatian Italians), making up 33% of the total population of Dalmatia in 1803, but this was reduced to 20% in 1816. Bartoli&#x27;s evaluation was followed by other claims that Auguste de Marmont, the French Governor General of the Napoleonic Illyrian Provinces commissioned a census in 1809 which found that Dalmatian Italians comprised 29% of the total population of Dalmatia. In Dalmatia, there was a constant decline in the Italian population, in a context of repression that also took on violent connotations. During this period, Austrians carried out an aggressive anti-Italian policy through a forced Slavization of Dalmatia. According to Austrian census, the Dalmatian Italians formed 12.5% of the population in 1865. In the 1910 Austro-Hungarian census, Istria had a population of 57.8% Slavic-speakers (Croat and Slovene), and 38.1% Italian speakers. For the Austrian Kingdom of Dalmatia, (i.e. Dalmatia), the 1910 numbers were 96.2% Slavic speakers and 2.8% Italian speakers. In Rijeka the Italians were the relative majority in the municipality (48.61% in 1910), and in addition to the large Croatian community (25.95% in the same year), there was also a fair Hungarian minority (13.03%). According to the official Croatian census of 2011, there are Italians in Rijeka (equal to 1.9% of the total population).

The Italian population in Dalmatia was concentrated in the major coastal cities. In the city of Split in 1890 there were Dalmatian Italians (12.5% of the population), in Zadar (64.6%), in Šibenik (14.5%), in Kotor (18.7%) and in Dubrovnik (4.6%). In other Dalmatian localities, according to Austrian censuses, Dalmatian Italians experienced a sudden decrease: in the twenty years 1890–1910, in Rab they went from 225 to 151, in Vis from 352 to 92, in Pag from 787 to 23, completely disappearing in almost all the inland locations.

The Istrian–Dalmatian exodus (; ; ) was the post-World War II exodus and departure of local ethnic Italians (Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians) as well as ethnic Croats from Yugoslavia. The emigrants, who had lived in the now Yugoslav territories of the Julian March (Karst Region and Istria), Kvarner and Dalmatia, largely went to Italy, but some joined the Italian diaspora in the Americas, Australia and South Africa. According to various sources, the exodus is estimated to have amounted to between 230,000 and 350,000 Italians (the others being ethnic Slovenes and Croats who chose to maintain Italian citizenship) leaving the areas in the aftermath of the conflict. According to the census organized in Croatia in 2001 and that organized in Slovenia in 2002, the Italians who remained in the former Yugoslavia amounted to 21,894 people (2,258 in Slovenia and 19,636 in Croatia). The number of speakers of Italian is larger if taking into account non-Italians who speak it as a second language. 

In addition, since the dissolution of Yugoslavia, a significant portion of the population of Istria opted for a regional declaration in the census instead of a national one. As such, more people have Italian as a first language than those having declared Italian. In 2001, about 500 Dalmatian Italians were counted in Dalmatia. In particular, according to the official Croatian census of 2011, there are 83 Dalmatian Italians in Split (equal to 0.05% of the total population), 16 in Šibenik (0.03%) and 27 in Dubrovnik (0.06%). According to the official Croatian census of 2021, there are 63 Dalmatian Italians in Zadar (equal to 0.09% of the total population). According to the official Montenegrin census of 2011, there are 31 Dalmatian Italians in Kotor (equal to 0.14% of the total population).
The 1940s and the 1950s in Yugoslavia were marked by colonisation of settlements where the displaced Germans used to live by people from the mountainous parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro, and migrations to larger cities spurred on by the development of industry. In the 1960s and 1970s, another wave of economic migrants left Croatia. They largely moved to Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Western Europe. During this period, 65,000 people left for Canada, and by the mid-1970s there were 150,000 Croats who moved to Australia. Particularly large European emigrant communities of Croats exist in Germany, Austria and Switzerland, which largely stem from the 1960s and 1970s migrations.

A series of significant migrations came as a result of the 1991–1995 Croatian War of Independence. In 1991, more than 400,000 Croats and other non-Serbs were displaced by the Croatian Serb forces or fled the violence in areas with significant Serb populations. During the final days of the war, in 1995, between 120,000 and 200,000 Serbs fled the country following the Operation Storm. Ten years after the war, only a small portion of Serb refugees returned out of the 400,000 displaced during the entire war. Most of the Serbs in Croatia who remained never lived in areas occupied during the Croatian War of Independence. Serbs have been only partially re-settled in the regions they previously inhabited; some of these areas were later settled by Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Significant migrations have been happening after the accession of Croatia to the European Union, with a persistent growth since 2013, and the population leaving is largely younger and more educated.

===Demographic losses in the 20th century wars and pandemics===
In addition to demographic losses through significant migrations, the population of Croatia suffered significant losses due to wars and epidemics. In the 20th century alone, there were several such events. The first was World War I, when the loss of the population of Croatia amounted to an estimated 190,000 persons, or about 5.5% of the total population recorded by the 1910 census. The 1918 flu pandemic started to take its toll in Croatia in July 1918, with peaks of the disease occurring in October and November. Available data is scarce, but it is estimated that the pandemic caused at least 15,000–20,000 deaths. Around 295,000 people were killed on the territory of present-day Croatia during World War II, according to the demographer Bogoljub Kočović. The demise of the armed forces of the Independent State of Croatia and of the civilians accompanying the troops at the end of World War II was followed by the Yugoslav death march of Nazi collaborators. A substantial number of people were executed, but the exact number is disputed. The claims range from 12,000 to 15,000 to as many as 80,000 killed in May 1945. Finally, approximately 20,000 were killed or went missing during the 1991–1995 Croatian War of Independence. The figure pertains only to those persons who would have been recorded by the 1991 census as living in Croatia.

==Migration==

===International migration data of Croatia, 2014–present===

==Other demographic statistics==

Demographic statistics according to the World Population Review.

*One birth every 14 minutes
*One death every 10 minutes
*Net loss of one person every 22 minutes
*One net migrant every 72 minutes

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook.

;Population:
:4,270,480 (July 2018 est.)

;Age structure:

:&quot;0-14 years:&quot; 14.21% (male 312,805 /female 293,931)
:&quot;15-24 years:&quot; 11.09% (male 242,605 /female 230,853)
:&quot;25-54 years:&quot; 40.15% (male 858,025 /female 856,455)
:&quot;55-64 years:&quot; 14.65% (male 304,054 /female 321,543)
:&quot;65 years and over:&quot; 19.91% (male 342,025 /female 508,184) (2018 est.)

;Median age:
:total: 44.4 years
:male: 42.6 years
:female: 46.1 years (2018 est.)

;Birth rate:
:8.3 births/1,000 population (2023 est.)

;Death rate:
:13.3 deaths/1,000 population (2023 est.)

;Total fertility rate:
:1.53 children born/woman (2023 est.)

;Net migration rate:
:-1.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 150th

;Population growth rate:
:-0.51% (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 221st

;Mother&#x27;s mean age at first birth:
:28 years (2014 est.)

;Life expectancy at birth:
:total population: 76.3 years (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 87th
:male: 73.2 years (2018 est.)
:female: 79.6 years (2018 est.)

;Ethnic groups:
:Croat 90.4%, Serb 4.4%, other 4.4% (including Bosniak, Hungarian, Slovene, Czech, and Romani), unspecified 0.8% (2011 est.)

;Languages:
:Croatian (official) 95.6%, Serbian 1.2%, other 3% (including Hungarian, Czech, Slovak, and Albanian), unspecified 0.2% (2011 est.)

;Religions:
:Roman Catholic 86.3%, Orthodox 4.4%, Muslim 1.5%, other 1.5%, unspecified 2.5%, not religious or atheist 3.8% (2011 est.)

;Nationality:
:noun: Croat(s), Croatian(s)
:adjective: Croatian
:note: the French designation of &quot;Croate&quot; to Croatian mercenaries in the 17th century eventually became &quot;Cravate&quot; and later came to be applied to the soldiers&#x27; scarves – the cravat; Croatia celebrates Cravat Day every 18 October

;Dependency ratios:
:total dependency ratio: 50.9 (2015 est.)
:youth dependency ratio: 22.4 (2015 est.)
:elderly dependency ratio: 28.5 (2015 est.)
:potential support ratio: 3.5 (2015 est.)

;Urbanization:
:urban population: 56.9% of total population (2018)
:rate of urbanization: -0.08% annual rate of change (2015–20 est.)

;Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write (2015 est.)
:total population: 99.3%
:male: 99.7%
:female: 98.9% (2015 est.)

;School life expectancy (primary to tertiary education):
:total: 15 years
:male: 14 years
:female: 16 years (2016)

;Unemployment, youth ages 15–24:
:total: 31.3% (2016 est.) Country comparison to the world: 26th
:male: 31.2% (2016 est.)
:female: 31.3% (2016 est.)

==Languages==


Croatian is the official language of Croatia, and one of 24 official languages of the European Union since 2013. Minority languages are in official use in local government units where more than a third of the population consists of national minorities or where local legislation mandates their use. These languages are Czech, German, Hungarian, Italian, Ruthenian, Serbian, Slovene, and Slovak. Besides these, the following languages are also recognised: Albanian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, German, Hebrew, Macedonian, Montenegrin, Polish, Romanian, Romani, Russian, Rusyn, Slovenian, Turkish and Ukrainian. According to the 2021 Census, 95.25% of citizens of Croatia declared Croatian as their native language, 1.16% declared Serbian as their native language, while no other language is represented in Croatia by more than 0.5% of native speakers among the population of Croatia.

In the region of Dalmatia, each city historically spoke a variant of the Dalmatian language. It developed from Latin like all Romance languages, but became heavily influenced by Venetian and Croatian. The language fell out of use in the region by the 16th century and went extinct when the last speaker died in 1898.

Croatian replaced Latin as the official language of the Croatian government in 1847. The Croatian lect is generally viewed as one of the four standard varieties of the Shtokavian dialect of Serbo-Croatian, a South Slavic language. Croatian is written using the Latin alphabet and there are three major dialects spoken on the territory of Croatia, with the Shtokavian idiom used as the literary standard. The Chakavian and Kajkavian dialects are distinguished by their lexicon, phonology, and syntax.

From 1961 to 1991, the official language was formally designated as Serbo-Croatian or Croato-Serbian. Even during socialist rule, Croats often referred to their language as Croato-Serbian (instead of Serbo-Croatian) or as Croatian. Croatian and Serbian variants of the language were not officially recognised as separate at the time, but referred to as the &quot;West&quot; and &quot;East&quot; versions, and preferred different alphabets: the Gaj&#x27;s Latin alphabet and Karadžić&#x27;s Cyrillic alphabet. Croats are protective of their language from foreign influences, as the language was under constant change and threats imposed by previous rulers (i.e. Austrian German, Hungarian, Italian and Turkish words were changed and altered to &quot;Slavic&quot; looking/sounding ones).

A 2009 survey revealed that 78% of Croats claim knowledge of at least one foreign language. According to a survey ordered by the European Commission in 2005, 49% of Croats speak English as their second language, 34% speak German, and 14% speak Italian. French and Russian are spoken by 4% each, and 2% of Croats speak Spanish. A substantial proportion of Slovenes (59%) have a certain level of knowledge of Croatian.

==Religions==

The main religions of Croatia are Roman Catholicism 83.04%, no religion 6.39%, other Christianity 0.73%, undeclared 3.86%, Eastern Orthodoxy 3.35%, Islam 1.32%, Protestantism 0.26%, others 1.87%. In the Eurostat Eurobarometer Poll of 2005, 67% of the population of Croatia responded that &quot;they believe there is a God&quot; and 7% said they do not believe &quot;there is any sort of spirit, God, or life force&quot;, while 25% expressed a belief in &quot;some sort of spirit or life force&quot;. In a 2009 Gallup poll, 70% answered affirmatively when asked &quot;Is religion an important part of your daily life?&quot; Significantly, a 2008 Gallup survey of the Balkans indicated church and religious organisations as the most trusted institutions in the country. The survey revealed that 62% of the respondents assigned &quot;a lot&quot; or &quot;some&quot; trust to those institutions, ranking them ahead of all types of governmental, international or non-governmental institutions.

Public schools allow religious education, in cooperation with religious communities that have agreements with the government, but attendance is not mandatory. The classes are organized widely in public elementary and secondary schools. In 2009, 92% of elementary school pupils and 87% of secondary school students attended the religious education classes. Public holidays in Croatia also include the religious festivals of Epiphany, Easter Monday, Feast of Corpus Christi, Assumption Day, All Saints&#x27; Day, Christmas, and St. Stephen&#x27;s or Boxing Day. The religious festival public holidays are based on the Catholic liturgical year, but citizens of the Republic of Croatia who celebrate different religious holidays have the right not to work on those dates. This includes Christians who celebrate Christmas on 7 January per the Julian calendar, Muslims on the days of Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha, and Jews on the days of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. Marriages performed by the religious communities having agreements with the state are officially recognized, eliminating the need to register the marriages in a registrar office.

The legal position of religious communities is defined by special legislation, specifically regarding government funding, tax benefits, and religious education in schools. Other matters are left to each religious community to negotiate separately with the government. Registration of the communities is not mandatory, but registered communities become legal persons and enjoy tax and other benefits. The law stipulates that to be eligible for registration, a religious group must have at least 500 believers and be registered as a civil association for 5 years. Religious groups based abroad must submit written permission for registration from their country of origin.

==Education==
Literacy in Croatia is 98.1 percent. The 2001 census reported that 15.7% of the population over the age of 14 has an incomplete elementary education, and 21.9% has only an elementary school education. 42.8% of the population over the age of 14 has a vocational education and 4.9% completed gymnasium. 4.2% of the same population received an undergraduate degree, while 7.5% received an academic degree, and 0.5% received a postgraduate or a doctoral degree. Croatia recorded a substantial growth of the population attaining academic degrees and by 2008, this population segment was estimated to encompass 16.7% of the total population of Croatians 15 and over. A worldwide study about the quality of living in different countries published by &quot;Newsweek&quot; in August 2010 ranked the Croatian education system at 22nd, a position shared with Austria. In 2004, it was estimated that 4.5% of the GDP is spent for education, while schooling expectancy was estimated to 14 years on average. Primary education in Croatia starts at the age of six or seven and consists of eight grades. In 2007 a law was passed to increase free, noncompulsory education until 18 years of age. Compulsory education consists of eight grades of elementary school. Secondary education is provided by gymnasiums and vocational schools. As of 2010, there are 2,131 elementary schools and 713 schools providing various forms of secondary education. Primary and secondary education are also available in languages of recognised minorities in Croatia, where classes are held in Czech, Hungarian, Italian, Serbian and German languages.
There are 84 elementary level and 47 secondary level music and art schools, as well as 92 schools for disabled children and youth and 74 schools for adults. Nationwide leaving exams () were introduced for secondary education students in the 2009–2010 school year. It comprises three compulsory subjects (Croatian language, mathematics, and a foreign language) and optional subjects and is a prerequisite for a university education.

Croatia has eight public universities, the University of Zagreb, University of Split, University of Rijeka, University of Osijek, University of Zadar, University of Dubrovnik, University of Pula and Dubrovnik International University.
The University of Zadar, the first university in Croatia, was founded in 1396 and remained active until 1807, when other institutions of higher education took over. It was reopened in 2002. The University of Zagreb, founded in 1669, is the oldest continuously operating university in Southeast Europe. There are also 11 polytechnics and 23 higher education institutions, of which 19 are private. In total, there are 132 institutions of higher education in Croatia, attended by more than 145 thousand students.

There are 205 companies, government or education system institutions and non-profit organizations in Croatia pursuing scientific research and the development of technology. Combined, they spent more than 3 billion kuna (400 million euro) and employed 10,191 full-time research staff in 2008. Among the scientific institutes operating in Croatia, the largest is the Ruđer Bošković Institute in Zagreb. The Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts in Zagreb is a learned society promoting language, culture, arts and science since its inception in 1866. Scientists from Croatia include inventors and Nobel Prize winners.

==Health==
Croatia has a universal health care system, the roots of which can be traced back to the Hungarian-Croatian Parliament Act of 1891, providing a form of mandatory insurance for all factory workers and craftsmen. The population is covered by a basic health insurance plan provided by statute and optional insurance. In 2014, the annual compulsory healthcare related expenditures reached 21.8 billion kuna (2.9 billion euro). Healthcare expenditures comprise only 0.6% of private health insurance and public spending. In 2010, Croatia spent 6.9% of its GDP on healthcare, representing a decline from approximately 8% estimated in 2008, when 84% of healthcare spending came from public sources. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), Croatia ranks around the 50th in the world in terms of life expectancy.

There are hundreds of healthcare institutions in Croatia, including 79 hospitals and clinics with 23,967 beds. The hospitals and clinics care for more than 700 thousand patients per year and employ 5,205 medical doctors, including 3,929 specialists. There are 6,379 private practice offices, and a total of 41,271 health workers in the country. There are 63 emergency medical service units, responding to more than a million calls. The principal cause of death in 2008 was cardiovascular disease at 43.5% for men and 57.2% for women, followed by tumours, at 29.4% for men and 21.4% for women. Other significant causes of death are injuries, poisonings and other external causes (7.7% men/3.9% women), digestive system diseases (5.7% men/3.6% women), respiratory system diseases (5.1% men/3.5% women) and endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (2.1% men/3.0% women). There is no other cause of disease affecting more than 3% of the population. In 2014 only 22 Croatians had been infected with HIV/AIDS and 4 had died from the disease. In 2008 it was estimated by the WHO that 27.4% of Croatians over age of 15 were smokers. According to 2003 WHO data, 22% of the Croatian adult population is obese.



==Economic indicators ==
===Personal income, jobs and unemployment===
Net monthly income in September 2011 averaged 5,397 kuna ( 729 euro), dropping 2.1% relative to the previous month. In the same month, gross monthly income averaged 7,740 kuna ( 1,046 euro), and it includes the net salary along with income tax, retirement pension insurance, healthcare insurance, occupational safety and health insurance and employment promotion tax. The average net monthly income grew compared to 5,311 kuna ( 717 euro) in 2009 or 3,326 kuna ( 449 euro) in 2000. The highest net salaries were paid in financial services sector, and in April 2011 those averaged 10,041 kuna ( 1,356 euro), while the lowest ones, paid in the same month, were in the manufacturing and leather processing industries, averaging at 2,811 kuna ( 380 euro). Since January 2016, the minimum wage in Croatia is 3,120 kuna before tax ( 400 euro).

Number of employed persons recorded steady growth between 2000 and 2008 when it peaked, followed by 4% decline in 2009. That year, there were 1.499 million employed persons, with 45% of that number pertaining to women. The total number of employed persons includes 252,000 employed in crafts and freelance professionals and 35,000 employed in agriculture. The most significant sources of employment in 2008 were manufacturing industry and wholesale and retail trade (including motor vehicle repair services) employing 278,640 and 243,640 respectively. Further significant employment sector was construction industry comprising 143,336 jobs that year. In the same year, more than 100,000 were employed in public administration, defence and compulsory social insurance sector as well as in education. Since 2009, negative trends persisted in Croatia with jobs in the industry declined further by 3.5%. Number of unemployed and retired persons combined exceeded number of employed in August 2010, as it fell to 1.474 million. In 2009, labour force consisted of 1.765 million persons out of 3.7 million working age population—aged 15 and over. In October 2011, unemployment rate stood at 17.4%. 7.2% of employed persons hold a second job.

In comparison with the member states of the European Union (EU), Croatia&#x27;s median equivalent household income in terms of the Purchasing Power Standard (PPS) stands at 470, topping average PPS of the ten countries which joined the EU in 2004 (EU10), as well as Romania and Bulgaria, while significantly lagging behind the EU average. Within Croatia, the highest PPS is recorded in Istria County (769), the City of Zagreb (640) and the Primorje-Gorski Kotar County (576). The lowest PPS is observed in the Bjelovar-Bilogora County and the Virovitica-Podravina County (267).

===Urbanisation and housing===
2011 census recorded a total of 1,534,148 private households in Croatia as well as 1,487 other residential communities such as retirement homes, convents etc. At the same time, there were 1,923,522 permanent housing units—houses and apartments. 2001 census recorded 1.66 million permanent housing units, including 196 thousand intermittently occupied and 42 thousand abandoned ones. Average size of a permanently used housing unit is . The intermittently used housing units include 182 thousand vacation houses and 8 thousand houses used during agricultural works. The same census also recorded 25 thousand housing units used for business purposes only. As of 2007, 71% of the households owned their own housing and had no mortgage or other loans to repay related to the housing, while further 9% were repaying loans for their housing. The households vary by type and include single households (13%), couples (15%), single parent households (4%), couples with children (27%) and extended family households (20%). There are approximately 500 homeless persons in Croatia, largely living in Zagreb.

Average urbanisation rate in Croatia stands at 56%, with the maximum rate recorded within the territory of the City of Zagreb, where it reached 94.5% and Zagreb metropolitan area comprising the City of Zagreb and the Zagreb County, where it stands at 76.4%. Very significant rate of urbanisation was observed in the second half of the 20th century. 1953 census recorded 57% of population which was active in agriculture, while a census performed in 1991
noted only 9.1% of population active in that field. This points to augmentation of urban population and reduction of rural population.

==See also==

* Croats
* Croatian diaspora
* Croatian Bureau of Statistics
** Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia
** Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

==External links==

* Human Rights Watch Report &quot;Broken Promises: Impediments to Refugee Return to Croatia&quot;
* United Nations Statistics Division Millennium Indicators for Croatia
* Population of Croatia 1931–2001</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="4" end="60" title="Demographics of Croatia" label="demographic characteristics of the population of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="79" end="85" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513788" start="195" end="224" title="Croatian Bureau of Statistics" label="Croatian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="287" end="294" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="400" end="410" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q116973880" start="429" end="440" title="2021 Croatian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="482" end="500" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="559" end="585" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="life expectancy in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="811" end="821" title="death rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="852" end="862" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="968" end="990" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="1228" end="1234" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="1270" end="1275" title="Serbs of Croatia" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="1334" end="1345" title="demographic" label="demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="1511" end="1539" title="Croatia in the union with Hungary" label="union of Croatia and Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1560" end="1575" title="Habsburg Empire" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502774" start="1599" end="1616" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War" label="Ottoman conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="1662" end="1668" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="1676" end="1684" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1692" end="1700" title="Venetian Republic" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1735" end="1750" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714904" start="1880" end="1892" title="Istrian exodus" label="similar fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="2054" end="2064" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="2129" end="2141" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="2200" end="2228" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="2391" end="2399" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="2529" end="2544" title="native language" label="native language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191920" start="2722" end="2736" title="Catholic Church in Croatia" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376184" start="2747" end="2764" title="Eastern Orthodoxy in Croatia" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501164" start="2777" end="2782" title="Islam in Croatia" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="2889" end="2904" title="academic degree" label="academic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="3136" end="3157" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="3275" end="3279" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="3517" end="3542" title="Purchasing Power Standard" label="Purchasing Power Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="3546" end="3591" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="the ten countries which joined the EU in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="3745" end="3757" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="3940" end="3978" title="List of countries by population" label="ranks 128th in the world by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="3984" end="4002" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="4057" end="4083" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="life expectancy in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="4111" end="4131" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075150" start="4174" end="4193" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by fertility rate" label="lowest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="4222" end="4232" title="death rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="4270" end="4280" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513788" start="4286" end="4315" title="Croatian Bureau of Statistics" label="Croatian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="4755" end="4777" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="5007" end="5035" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="5204" end="5209" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q769377" start="5457" end="5472" title="Operation Storm" label="Operation Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="5621" end="5641" title="2001 Croatian census" label="2001 Croatian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586796" start="5695" end="5711" title="1991 Croatian census" label="census from 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196" start="6063" end="6079" title="Republika Srpska" label="Republika Srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="6779" end="6801" title="Cardiovascular disease" label="Cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="6806" end="6812" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="7148" end="7164" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187194" start="8021" end="8041" title="Croatian citizenship" label="Croatian citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="8370" end="8392" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="8536" end="8542" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57060" start="8712" end="8734" title="Sisak-Moslavina County" label="Sisak-Moslavina County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="8768" end="8774" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513788" start="9564" end="9593" title="Croatian Bureau of Statistics" label="Croatian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q26360" start="9972" end="9976" title="Croatian kuna" label="kuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="9991" end="9995" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="10386" end="10406" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680080" start="10513" end="10530" title="Our World in Data" label="Our World in Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790593" start="10535" end="10555" title="Gapminder Foundation" label="Gapminder Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="10868" end="10875" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="10933" end="10939" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="10981" end="10986" title="Serbs of Croatia" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947386" start="10995" end="11003" title="Bosniaks of Croatia" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q837094" start="11005" end="11015" title="Hungarians of Croatia" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503479" start="11017" end="11025" title="Italians of Croatia" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709238" start="11027" end="11036" title="Albanians of Croatia" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503182" start="11038" end="11046" title="Slovenes of Croatia" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191669" start="11048" end="11055" title="Germans of Croatia" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441791" start="11057" end="11063" title="Czechs of Croatia" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502513" start="11065" end="11069" title="Romani people in Croatia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276230" start="11106" end="11145" title="Constitution of Croatia" label="Constitution of the Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566878" start="11208" end="11215" title="Slovaks of Croatia" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295763" start="11227" end="11242" title="Istro-Romanians" label="Istro-Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938146" start="11250" end="11256" title="Vlachs in the history of Croatia" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509326" start="11277" end="11281" title="Jews of Croatia" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825531" start="11292" end="11301" title="Austrians of Croatia" label="Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="11303" end="11313" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091237" start="11315" end="11324" title="Romanians of Croatia" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q690869" start="11326" end="11336" title="Ruthenians" label="Ruthenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407146" start="11338" end="11349" title="Macedonians of Croatia" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503053" start="11371" end="11383" title="Montenegrins of Croatia" label="Montenegrins"/>
<link wikidata="Q10817992" start="11385" end="11393" title="Russians of Croatia" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507850" start="11395" end="11405" title="Bulgarians in Croatia" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209315" start="11407" end="11412" title="Poles of Croatia" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855539" start="11420" end="11425" title="Turks in Croatia" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q463903" start="11661" end="11685" title="De Administrando Imperio" label="De Administrando Imperio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="11738" end="11753" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="11979" end="12016" title="personal union of Croatia and Hungary" label="personal union of Croatia and Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="12049" end="12064" title="Habsburg Empire" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q843725" start="12185" end="12198" title="Magyarization" label="Magyarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="12203" end="12216" title="Germanization" label="Germanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502774" start="12276" end="12293" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; Croatian–Ottoman War" label="Ottoman conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q701314" start="12366" end="12383" title="Burgenland Croats" label="Burgenland Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="12492" end="12500" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="12516" end="12522" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="12527" end="12533" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q699015" start="12569" end="12595" title="Croatian Military Frontier" label="Croatian Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q470265" start="12647" end="12668" title="Great Serb Migrations" label="Great Serb Migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="12701" end="12718" title="Venetian Republic" label="Venetian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="12727" end="12733" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="12741" end="12749" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q699602" start="12765" end="12770" title="Cretan War (1645–1669)" label="Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q694835" start="12779" end="12807" title="Seventh Ottoman–Venetian War" label="Seventh Ottoman–Venetian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="12905" end="12920" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="13002" end="13007" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="13058" end="13069" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13172" end="13185" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="13220" end="13244" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="13246" end="13261" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="13267" end="13284" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="13354" end="13367" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="13380" end="13389" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="13391" end="13396" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="13398" end="13405" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="13410" end="13414" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="13544" end="13550" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13606" end="13618" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q313323" start="13779" end="13792" title="Volksdeutsche" label="Volksdeutsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="13904" end="13914" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="14050" end="14058" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="14116" end="14131" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="14138" end="14154" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="14159" end="14177" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="14211" end="14223" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248722" start="14294" end="14327" title="Third Italian War of Independence" label="Third Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="14345" end="14351" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q160570" start="14356" end="14362" title="Friuli" label="Friuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="14389" end="14398" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="14419" end="14432" title="Kingdom of Italy (1861–1946)" label="Kingdom Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="14475" end="14498" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299884" start="14603" end="14622" title="Italian irredentism" label="Italian irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="14712" end="14724" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q938838" start="14726" end="14733" title="Kvarner" label="Kvarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="14738" end="14746" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="14826" end="14838" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="15043" end="15068" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="15114" end="15127" title="Germanization" label="Germanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467530" start="15131" end="15142" title="Slavization" label="Slavization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="15197" end="15213" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="15494" end="15512" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q312676" start="15671" end="15689" title="Auguste de Marmont" label="Auguste de Marmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="15737" end="15755" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="15803" end="15821" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q377805" start="16065" end="16077" title="anti-Italian" label="anti-Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q698248" start="16372" end="16391" title="Kingdom of Dalmatia" label="Kingdom of Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="16399" end="16407" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="16484" end="16490" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="16913" end="16918" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="16987" end="16992" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549" start="17005" end="17012" title="Šibenik" label="Šibenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q171080" start="17025" end="17030" title="Kotor" label="Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="17046" end="17055" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q13277" start="17211" end="17214" title="Rab (island)" label="Rab"/>
<link wikidata="Q203767" start="17245" end="17248" title="Vis (island)" label="Vis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209784" start="17268" end="17271" title="Pag (island)" label="Pag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714904" start="17353" end="17377" title="Istrian–Dalmatian exodus" label="Istrian–Dalmatian exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17398" end="17410" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="17448" end="17456" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="17458" end="17474" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="17479" end="17497" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="17517" end="17523" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="17529" end="17539" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="17609" end="17621" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q625139" start="17623" end="17635" title="Karst Region" label="Karst Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="17640" end="17646" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q938838" start="17649" end="17656" title="Kvarner" label="Kvarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="17661" end="17669" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="17687" end="17692" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="17714" end="17730" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="17738" end="17746" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="17748" end="17757" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="17762" end="17774" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274327" start="17954" end="17973" title="Italian citizenship" label="Italian citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="18064" end="18071" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="18102" end="18110" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="18160" end="18170" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093327" start="18204" end="18215" title="Italian language in Slovenia" label="in Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503479" start="18227" end="18237" title="Italians of Croatia" label="in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="18786" end="18791" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549" start="18840" end="18847" title="Šibenik" label="Šibenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="18866" end="18875" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="18971" end="18976" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q171080" start="19108" end="19113" title="Kotor" label="Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="19353" end="19363" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="19542" end="19551" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="19553" end="19564" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="19569" end="19583" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="19775" end="19782" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="19784" end="19791" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="19796" end="19807" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q769377" start="20235" end="20250" title="Operation Storm" label="Operation Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q748162" start="20713" end="20755" title="accession of Croatia to the European Union" label="accession of Croatia to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="21313" end="21330" title="1918 flu pandemic" label="1918 flu pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937692" start="21668" end="21684" title="Bogoljub Kočović" label="Bogoljub Kočović"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="21724" end="21752" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312388" start="21845" end="21887" title="Yugoslav death march of Nazi collaborators" label="Yugoslav death march of Nazi collaborators"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="22629" end="22647" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350180" start="24471" end="24487" title="Dependency ratio" label="Dependency ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234834" start="24619" end="24642" title="potential support ratio" label="potential support ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="25214" end="25222" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656567" start="25327" end="25365" title="Minority languages of Croatia" label="Minority languages are in official use"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="25533" end="25538" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="25540" end="25546" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="25548" end="25557" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="25559" end="25566" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211" start="25568" end="25577" title="Ruthenian language" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="25579" end="25586" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="25588" end="25595" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="25601" end="25607" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="25935" end="25942" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35527" start="26163" end="26181" title="Dalmatian language" label="Dalmatian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q32724" start="26268" end="26276" title="Venetian language" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q163644" start="26380" end="26392" title="Tuone Udaina" label="last speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="26426" end="26431" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="26576" end="26594" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="26598" end="26612" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q146665" start="26616" end="26637" title="South Slavic language" label="South Slavic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="26710" end="26717" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="26764" end="26780" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian idiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q337565" start="26816" end="26825" title="Chakavian" label="Chakavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q838165" start="26830" end="26839" title="Kajkavian" label="Kajkavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="26876" end="26883" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="26885" end="26894" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="26900" end="26906" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="26977" end="26991" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="27023" end="27037" title="socialism" label="socialist rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q754989" start="27353" end="27378" title="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet" label="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="27383" end="27416" title="Karadžić&amp;#x27;s Cyrillic alphabet" label="Karadžić&amp;#x27;s Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="27825" end="27844" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="27874" end="27881" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="27918" end="27924" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="27940" end="27947" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="27949" end="27955" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="27960" end="27967" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="28014" end="28021" title="spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191920" start="28163" end="28180" title="Catholic Church in Croatia" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376184" start="28252" end="28269" title="Eastern Orthodoxy in Croatia" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501164" start="28277" end="28282" title="Islam in Croatia" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="28290" end="28303" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="28332" end="28340" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="28639" end="28645" title="The Gallup Organization" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="28795" end="28802" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="29119" end="29133" title="Public school (government funded)" label="Public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330325" start="29475" end="29501" title="Public holidays in Croatia" label="Public holidays in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130748394" start="29519" end="29537" title="religious festival" label="religious festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="29542" end="29550" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q209663" start="29552" end="29565" title="Easter Monday" label="Easter Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q152395" start="29567" end="29590" title="Feast of Corpus Christi" label="Feast of Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="29592" end="29606" title="Assumption Day" label="Assumption Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q587" start="29608" end="29628" title="All Saints&amp;#x27; Day" label="All Saints&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="29630" end="29639" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366863" start="29645" end="29663" title="Saint Stephen&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="29667" end="29677" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q51617" start="29744" end="29759" title="liturgical year" label="liturgical year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="29957" end="29972" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="29974" end="29981" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="29997" end="30008" title="Eid al-Fitr" label="Eid al-Fitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q514400" start="30013" end="30024" title="Eid al-Adha" label="Eid al-Adha"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="30050" end="30063" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="30068" end="30078" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="30080" end="30088" title="Marriage" label="Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="30612" end="30624" title="legal person" label="legal person"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="31195" end="31215" title="vocational education" label="vocational education"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="31235" end="31244" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008527" start="31286" end="31306" title="undergraduate degree" label="undergraduate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="31331" end="31346" title="academic degree" label="academic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="31368" end="31380" title="postgraduate" label="postgraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="31386" end="31401" title="doctoral degree" label="doctoral degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="31694" end="31702" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="32224" end="32234" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q322563" start="32239" end="32256" title="vocational school" label="vocational school"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="32497" end="32502" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="32504" end="32513" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="32607" end="32612" title="music school" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q383092" start="32617" end="32628" title="art schools" label="art schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q694222" start="32722" end="32735" title="Matura" label="leaving exams"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="32877" end="32888" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q675848" start="33030" end="33050" title="University of Zagreb" label="University of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q609301" start="33052" end="33071" title="University of Split" label="University of Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q787388" start="33073" end="33093" title="University of Rijeka" label="University of Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708709" start="33095" end="33115" title="University of Osijek" label="University of Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496233" start="33117" end="33136" title="University of Zadar" label="University of Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496046" start="33138" end="33161" title="University of Dubrovnik" label="University of Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q633782" start="33163" end="33181" title="University of Pula" label="University of Pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311141" start="33186" end="33220" title="Dubrovnik International University" label="Dubrovnik International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371037" start="33542" end="33554" title="institute of technology" label="polytechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="33562" end="33578" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383690" start="34098" end="34122" title="Ruđer Bošković Institute" label="Ruđer Bošković Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264085" start="34138" end="34175" title="Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="34191" end="34206" title="learned society" label="learned society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="34328" end="34339" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="34375" end="34396" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="35069" end="35094" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q913404" start="35379" end="35394" title="Doctor of Medicine" label="medical doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q26360" start="36505" end="36509" title="Croatian kuna" label="kuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="36516" end="36520" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653906" start="36698" end="36726" title="Social insurance" label="retirement pension insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="36728" end="36748" title="healthcare insurance" label="healthcare insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="36750" end="36780" title="occupational safety and health" label="occupational safety and health"/>
<link wikidata="Q56550185" start="37229" end="37252" title="minimum wage in Croatia" label="minimum wage in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517628" start="38391" end="38402" title="working age" label="working age"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="38551" end="38586" title="member states of the European Union" label="member states of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="38659" end="38684" title="Purchasing Power Standard" label="Purchasing Power Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="38729" end="38774" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="the ten countries which joined the EU in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="38794" end="38801" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="38806" end="38814" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q58268" start="38914" end="38927" title="Istria County" label="Istria County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="38947" end="38953" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q58071" start="38968" end="38996" title="Primorje-Gorski Kotar County" label="Primorje-Gorski Kotar County"/>
<link wikidata="Q58060" start="39038" end="39062" title="Bjelovar-Bilogora County" label="Bjelovar-Bilogora County"/>
<link wikidata="Q58092" start="39071" end="39098" title="Virovitica-Podravina County" label="Virovitica-Podravina County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371789" start="39633" end="39647" title="vacation house" label="vacation house"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="40243" end="40255" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="40354" end="40360" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27038" start="40452" end="40465" title="Zagreb County" label="Zagreb County"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="40841" end="40847" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253297" start="40850" end="40867" title="Croatian diaspora" label="Croatian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513788" start="40870" end="40899" title="Croatian Bureau of Statistics" label="Croatian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q116470996" start="40903" end="40944" title="Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q851965" start="40948" end="41008" title="Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5577" wikidata="Q1154532" url="?curid=5577" title="Politics of Croatia">
<text>The politics of Croatia are defined by a parliamentary, representative democratic republic framework, where the Prime Minister of Croatia is the head of government in a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the Government and the President of Croatia. Legislative power is vested in the Croatian Parliament (). The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The parliament adopted the current Constitution of Croatia on 22 December 1990 and decided to declare independence from Yugoslavia on 25 May 1991. The Constitutional Decision on the Sovereignty and Independence of the Republic of Croatia
came into effect on 8 October 1991. The constitution has since been amended several times. The first modern parties in the country developed in the middle of the 19th century, and their agenda and appeal changed, reflecting major social changes, such as the breakup of Austria-Hungary, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, dictatorship and social upheavals in the kingdom, World War II, the establishment of Communist rule and the breakup of the SFR Yugoslavia.

The President of the Republic () is the head of state and the commander in chief of the Croatian Armed Forces and is directly elected to serve a five-year term. The government (), the main executive power of Croatia, is headed by the prime minister, who has four deputy prime ministers who serve also as government ministers. Twenty ministers are in charge of particular activities. The executive branch is responsible for proposing legislation and a budget, executing the laws, and guiding the foreign and internal policies. The parliament is a unicameral legislative body. The number of &quot;Sabor&quot; representatives (MPs) ranges from 100 to 160; they are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms. The powers of the legislature include enactment and amendment of the constitution and laws; adoption of the government budget, declarations of war and peace, defining national boundaries, calling referendums and elections, appointments and relief of officers, supervising the Government of Croatia and other holders of public powers responsible to the Sabor, and granting of amnesties. The Croatian constitution and legislation provides for regular presidential and parliamentary elections, and the election of county prefects (county presidents) and assemblies, and city and municipal mayors and councils.

Croatia has a three-tiered, independent judicial system governed by the Constitution of Croatia and national legislation enacted by the Sabor. The Supreme Court () is the highest court of appeal in Croatia, while municipal and county courts are courts of general jurisdiction. Specialised courts in Croatia and the Superior Commercial Court, misdemeanour courts and the Superior Misdemeanour Court, administrative courts and the Superior Administrative Court. Croatian Constitutional Court () is a court that deals primarily with constitutional law. Its main authority is to rule on whether laws that are challenged are in fact unconstitutional, i.e., whether they conflict with constitutionally established rights and freedoms. The State Attorney&#x27;s Office represents the state in legal proceedings.

==Legal framework==

Croatia is a unitary democratic parliamentary republic. Following the collapse of the ruling Communist League, Croatia adopted a new constitution in 1990 – which replaced the 1974 constitution adopted by the Socialist Republic of Croatia – and organised its first multi-party elections. While the 1990 constitution remains in force, it has been amended four times since its adoption—in 1997, 2000, 2001 and 2010. Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia on 8 October 1991, which led to the breakup of Yugoslavia. Croatia&#x27;s status as a country was internationally recognised by the United Nations in 1992. Under its 1990 constitution, Croatia operated a semi-presidential system until 2000 when it switched to a parliamentary system. Government powers in Croatia are divided into legislative, executive and judiciary powers. The legal system of Croatia is civil law and, along with the institutional framework, is strongly influenced by the legal heritage of Austria-Hungary. By the time EU accession negotiations were completed on 30 June 2010, Croatian legislation was fully harmonised with the Community acquis. Croatia became a member state of the European Union on 1 July 2013.

==Executive==
The President of the Republic () is the head of state. The president is directly elected and serves a five-year term. The president is the commander in chief of the armed forces, has the procedural duty of appointing the prime minister with the consent of the Sabor (Parliament) through a majority vote (majority of all MPs), and has some influence on foreign policy. The most recent presidential election was held on 22 December 2019 and was won by Zoran Milanović. He took the oath of office on 18 February 2020. The constitution limits holders of the presidential office to a maximum of two terms and prevents the president from being a member of any political party. Consequently, the president-elect withdraws from party membership before inauguration.

The government (), the main executive power of Croatia, is headed by the prime minister who has four deputies, who also serve as government ministers. There are 16 other ministers who are appointed by the prime minister with the consent of the Sabor (majority of all MPs); these are in charge of particular sectors of activity. As of 19 October 2016, the Deputy Prime Ministers are Martina Dalić, Davor Ivo Stier, Ivan Kovačić, and Damir Krstičević. Government ministers are from the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), and the Bridge of Independent Lists (MOST) with five independent ministers. The executive branch is responsible for proposing legislation and a budget, executing the laws, and guiding the country&#x27;s foreign and domestic policies. The government&#x27;s official residence is at Banski dvori. As of 19 October 2016, the prime minister is Andrej Plenković.
|President
|Zoran Milanović
|Social Democratic Party of Croatia
|19 February 2021
|Prime Minister
|Andrej Plenković
|Croatian Democratic Union
|19 October 2016

==Legislature==
The Parliament of Croatia () is a unicameral legislative body. A second chamber, the &quot;Chamber of Counties&quot; (), was set up in 1993 pursuant to the 1990 Constitution. The Chamber of Counties was originally composed of three deputies from each of the twenty counties and the city of Zagreb. However, as it had no practical power over the Chamber of Representatives, it was abolished in 2001 and its powers were transferred to the county governments. The number of Sabor representatives can vary from 100 to 160; they are all elected by popular vote and serve four-year terms. 140 members are elected in multi-seat constituencies, up to six members are chosen by proportional representation to represent Croatians living abroad and five members represent ethnic and national communities or minorities. The two largest political parties in Croatia are the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) and the Social Democratic Party of Croatia (SDP). The last parliamentary election was held on 17 April 2024.

The Sabor meets in public sessions in two periods; the first from 15 January to 30 June, and the second from 15 September to 15 December. Extra sessions can be called by the President of the Republic, by the president of the parliament or by the government. The powers of the legislature include enactment and amendment of the constitution, enactment of laws, adoption of the state budget, declarations of war and peace, alteration of the country&#x27;s boundaries, calling and conducting referendums and elections, appointments and relief of office, supervising the work of the Government of Croatia and other holders of public powers responsible to the Sabor, and granting amnesty. Decisions are made based on a majority vote if more than half of the Chamber is present, except in cases of constitutional issues.

== Elections ==
The Croatian constitution and legislation provides for regular elections for the office of the President of the Republic, parliamentary, county prefects, county assemblies, city and municipal mayors and city and municipal councils. The President of the Republic is elected to a five-year term by a direct vote of all citizens of Croatia. A majority vote is required to win. A runoff election round is held in cases where no candidate secures the majority in the first round of voting. The presidential elections are regulated by the constitution and dedicated legislation; the latter defines technical details, appeals and similar issues.
140 members of parliament are elected to a four-year term in ten multi-seat constituencies, which are defined on the basis of the existing county borders, with amendments to achieve a uniform number of eligible voters in each constituency to within 5%. Citizens of Croatia living abroad are counted in an eleventh constituency; however, its number of seats was not fixed for the last parliamentary election. It was instead calculated based on numbers of votes cast in the ten constituencies in Croatia and the votes cast in the eleventh constituency. In the 2007 parliamentary election the eleventh constituency elected five MPs. Constitutional changes first applied in the 2011 parliamentary election have abolished this scheme and permanently assigned three MPs to the eleventh constituency. Additionally, eight members of parliament are elected by voters belonging to twenty-two recognised minorities in Croatia: the Serb minority elects three MPs, Hungarians and Italians elect one MP each, Czech and Slovak minorities elect one MP jointly, while all other minorities elect two more MPs to the parliament. The Standard D&#x27;Hondt formula is applied to the vote, with a 5% election threshold. The last parliamentary election, held in 2016, elected 151 MPs.

The county prefects and city and municipal mayors are elected to four-year terms by majority of votes cast within applicable local government units. A runoff election is held if no candidate achieves a majority in the first round of voting. Members of county, city, and municipal councils are elected to four-year terms through proportional representation; the entire local government unit forms a single constituency. The number of council members is defined by the councils themselves based on applicable legislation. Electoral committees are then tasked with determining whether the national minorities are represented in the council as required by the constitution. If the minorities are not represented, further members, who belong to the minorities and who have not been elected through the proportional representation system, are selected from electoral candidate lists and added to the council.

===Latest presidential election===

===Latest parliamentary election===


===Latest European elections===

==Judiciary==

Croatia has a three-tiered, independent judicial system governed by the constitution and national legislation enacted by the Sabor. The Supreme Court () is the highest court of appeal in Croatia; its hearings are open and judgments are made publicly, except in cases where the privacy of the accused is to be protected. Judges are appointed by the National Judicial Council and judicial office is permanent until seventy years of age. The president of the Supreme Court is elected for a four-year term by the Croatian Parliament at the proposal of the President of the Republic. As of 2017, the president of the Supreme Court is Đuro Sessa. The Supreme Court has civil and criminal departments. The lower two levels of the three-tiered judiciary consist of county courts and municipal courts. There are fifteen county courts and sixty-seven municipal courts in the country.
There are other specialised courts in Croatia; commercial courts and the Superior Commercial Court, misdemeanour courts that try trivial offences such as traffic violations, the Superior Misdemeanour Court, the Administrative Court and the Croatian Constitutional Court (). The Constitutional Court rules on matters regarding compliance of legislation with the constitution, repeals unconstitutional legislation, reports any breaches of provisions of the constitution to the government and the parliament, declares the speaker of the parliament acting president upon petition from the government in the event the country&#x27;s president becomes incapacitated, issues consent for commencement of criminal procedures against or arrest of the president, and hears appeals against decisions of the National Judicial Council. The court consists of thirteen judges elected by members of the parliament for an eight-year term. The president of the Constitutional Court is elected by the court judges for a four-year term. As of June 2012, the president of the Constitutional Court is Jasna Omejec. The National Judicial Council () consists of eleven members, specifically seven judges, two university professors of law and two parliament members, nominated and elected by the Parliament for four-year terms, and may serve no more than two terms. It appoints all judges and court presidents, except in case of the Supreme Court. As of January 2015, the president of the National Judicial Council is Ranko Marijan, who is also a Supreme Court judge.

The State Attorney&#x27;s Office represents the state in legal procedures. As of April 2018, Dražen Jelenić is the General State Attorney, and there are twenty-three deputies in the central office and lower-ranking State Attorneys at fifteen county and thirty-three municipal State Attorney&#x27;s Offices. The General State Attorney is appointed by the parliament. A special State Attorney&#x27;s Office dedicated to combatting corruption and organised crime, USKOK, was set up in late 2001.

==Local government==
Croatia was first subdivided into counties () in the Middle Ages. The divisions changed over time to reflect losses of territory to Ottoman conquest and the subsequent recapture of the same territory, and changes to the political status of Dalmatia, Dubrovnik and Istria. The traditional division of the country into counties was abolished in the 1920s, when the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes and the subsequent Kingdom of Yugoslavia introduced oblasts and banovinas respectively. After 1945 under Communist rule, Croatia, as a constituent part of Yugoslavia, abolished these earlier divisions and introduced municipalities, subdividing Croatia into approximately one hundred municipalities. Counties, significantly altered in terms of territory relative to the pre-1920s subdivisions, were reintroduced in 1992 legislation. In 1918, the Transleithanian part of Croatia was divided into eight counties with their seats in Bjelovar, Gospić, Ogulin, Požega, Vukovar, Varaždin, Osijek and Zagreb; the 1992 legislation established fifteen counties in the same territory. Since the counties were re-established in 1992, Croatia is divided into twenty counties and the capital city of Zagreb, the latter having the authority and legal status of a county and a city at the same time. In some instances, the boundaries of the counties have been changed, with the latest revision taking place in 2006. The counties subdivide into 128 cities and 428 municipalities.

The county prefects, city and municipal mayors are elected to four-year terms by a majority of votes cast within applicable local government units. If no candidate achieves a majority in the first round, a runoff election is held. Members of county, city and municipal councils are elected to four-year terms, through proportional representation with the entire local government unit as a single constituency.

The number of members of the councils is defined by the councils themselves, based on applicable legislation. Electoral committees are then tasked with determining whether the national ethnic minorities are represented on the council as required by the constitution. Further members who belong to the minorities may be added to the council if no candidate of that minority has been elected through the proportional representation system. Election silence, as in all other types of elections in Croatia, when campaigning is forbidden, is enforced the day before the election and continues until 19:00 hours on the election day when the polling stations close and exit polls may be announced. Eight nationwide local elections have been held in Croatia since 1990, the most recent being the 2017 local elections to elect county prefects and councils, and city and municipal councils and mayors. In 2017, the HDZ-led coalitions won a majority or plurality in fifteen county councils and thirteen county prefect elections. SDP-led coalitions won a majority or plurality in five county councils, including the city of Zagreb council, and the remaining county council election was won by IDS-SDP coalition. The SDP won two county prefect elections, the city of Zagreb mayoral election, the HSS and the HNS won a single county prefect election each.

==History==
===Within Austria-Hungary===
Events of 1848 in Europe and the Austrian Empire brought dramatic changes to Croatian society and politics, provoking the Croatian national revival that strongly influenced and significantly shaped political and social events in Croatia. At the time, the Sabor and Ban Josip Jelačić advocated the severance of ties with the Kingdom of Hungary, emphasising links to other South Slavic lands within the empire. Several prominent Croatian political figures emerged, such as Ante Starčević, Eugen Kvaternik, Franjo Rački and Josip Juraj Strossmayer. A period of neo-absolutism was followed by the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 and the Croatian–Hungarian Settlement, which granted limited independence to Croatia. This was compounded by Croatian claims of uninterrupted statehood since the early Middle Ages as a basis for a modern state. Two political parties that evolved in the 1860s and contributed significantly to the sentiment were the Party of Rights, led by Starčević and Kvaternik, and the People&#x27;s Party, led by Janko Drašković, Ivan Kukuljević Sakcinski, Josip Juraj Strossmayer and Ivan Mažuranić. They were opposed by the National Constitutional Party, which was in power for most of the period between the 1860s and the 1918, and advocated closer ties between Croatia and Hungary.

Other significant parties formed in the era were the Serb People&#x27;s Independent Party, which later formed the Croat-Serb Coalition with the Party of Rights and other Croat and Serb parties. The Coalition ruled Croatia between 1903 and 1918. The leaders of the Coalition were Frano Supilo and Svetozar Pribićević. The Croatian Peasant Party (HSS), established in 1904 and led by Stjepan Radić, advocated Croatian autonomy but achieved only moderate gains by 1918. In Dalmatia, the two major parties were the People&#x27;s Party – a branch of the People&#x27;s Party active in Croatia-Slavonia – and the Autonomist Party, advocating maintaining autonomy of Dalmatia, opposite to the People&#x27;s Party demands for unification of Croatia-Slavonia and Dalmatia. The Autonomist Party, most notably led by Antonio Bajamonti, was also linked to Italian irredentism. By 1900, the Party of Rights had made considerable gains in Dalmatia. The Autonomists won the first three elections, but all elections since 1870 were won by the People&#x27;s Party. In the period 1861–1918 there were seventeen elections in the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia and ten in the Kingdom of Dalmatia.

===First and Second Yugoslavia===

After the establishment of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, the HSS established itself as the most popular Croatian political party and was very popular despite efforts to ban it. The 1921 constitution defined the kingdom as a unitary state and abolished the historical administrative divisions, which effectively ended Croatian autonomy; the constitution was opposed by HSS. The political situation deteriorated further as Stjepan Radić of the HSS was assassinated in the Yugoslav Parliament in 1928, leading to the dictatorship of King Alexander in January 1929. The HSS, now led by Vladko Maček, continued to advocate the federalisation of Yugoslavia, resulting in the Cvetković–Maček Agreement of August 1939 and the autonomous Banovina of Croatia. The Yugoslav government retained control of defence, internal security, foreign affairs, trade, and transport while other matters were left to the Croatian Sabor and a crown-appointed Ban. This arrangement was soon made obsolete with the beginning of World War II, when the Independent State of Croatia, which banned all political opposition, was established. Since then, the HSS continues to operate abroad.

In the 1945 election, the Communists were unopposed because the other parties abstained. Once in power, the Communists introduced a single-party political system, in which the Communist Party of Yugoslavia was the ruling party and the Communist Party of Croatia was its branch. In 1971, the Croatian national movement, which sought greater civil rights and the decentralisation of the Yugoslav economy, culminated in the Croatian Spring, which was suppressed by the Yugoslav leadership. In January 1990, the Communist Party fragmented along national lines; the Croatian faction demanded a looser federation.

===Modern Croatia===

In 1989, the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia decided to tolerate political parties in response to growing demands to allow political activities outside the Communist party. The first political party founded in Croatia since the beginning of the Communist rule was the Croatian Social Liberal Party (HSLS), established on 20 May 1989, followed by the Croatian Democratic Union on 17 June 1989. In December 1989, Ivica Račan became the head of the reformed Communist party. At the same time, the party cancelled political trials, released political prisoners and endorsed a multi-party political system. The Civil Organisations Act was formally amended to allow political parties on 11 January 1990, legalising the parties that were already founded.

By the time of the first round of the first multi-party elections, held on 22 April 1990, there were 33 registered parties. The most relevant parties and coalitions were the League of Communists of Croatia – Party of Democratic Changes (the renamed Communist party), the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), and the Coalition of People&#x27;s Accord (KNS), which included the HSLS led by Dražen Budiša, and the HSS, which resumed operating in Croatia in December 1989. The runoff election was held on 6 May 1990. The HDZ, led by Franjo Tuđman, won ahead of the reformed Communists and the KNS. The KNS, led by Savka Dabčević-Kučar and Miko Tripalo – who had led the Croatian Spring – soon splintered into individual parties. The HDZ maintained a parliamentary majority until the 2000 parliamentary election, when it was defeated by the Social Democratic Party of Croatia (SDP), led by Račan. Franjo Gregurić, of the HDZ, was appointed prime minister to head a national unity government in July 1991 as the Croatian War of Independence escalated in intensity. His appointment lasted until August 1992. During his term, Croatia&#x27;s declaration of independence from Yugoslavia took effect on 8 October 1991. The HDZ returned to power in the 2003 parliamentary election, while the SDP remained the largest opposition party.

Franjo Tuđman won the presidential elections in 1992 and 1997. During his terms, the Constitution of Croatia, adopted in 1990, provided for a semi-presidential system. After Tuđman&#x27;s death in 1999, the constitution was amended and much of the presidential powers were transferred to the parliament and the government. Stjepan Mesić won two consecutive terms in 2000 and 2005 on a Croatian People&#x27;s Party (HNS) ticket. Ivo Josipović, an SDP candidate, won the presidential elections in December 2009 and January 2010. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović defeated Josipović in the January 2015 election run-off, becoming the first female president of Croatia.

In January 2020, former prime minister Zoran Milanovic of the Social Democrats (SDP) won the presidential election. He defeated center-right incumbent Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic of the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) in the second round of the election.
In July 2020, the ruling right-wing HDZ won the parliamentary election. Since 2016 ruled HDZ-led coalition of prime minister Andrej Plenković continued to govern.

==See also==
* List of political parties in Croatia
* Foreign relations of Croatia
* Left-wing politics in Croatia
* Far-right politics in Croatia

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154532" start="4" end="23" title="Politics of Croatia" label="politics of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="41" end="54" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="56" end="81" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="82" end="90" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195270" start="112" end="137" title="Prime Minister of Croatia" label="Prime Minister of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="169" end="187" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="189" end="204" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="225" end="235" title="Croatian Government" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q268984" start="244" end="264" title="President of Croatia" label="President of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="266" end="283" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="301" end="320" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="329" end="338" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276230" start="427" end="450" title="Constitution of Croatia" label="Constitution of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="512" end="522" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="899" end="914" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="920" end="957" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1009" end="1021" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="1082" end="1096" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="SFR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="1139" end="1152" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="1161" end="1179" title="commander in chief" label="commander in chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q327033" start="1187" end="1208" title="Croatian Armed Forces" label="Croatian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="1264" end="1274" title="Government of Croatia" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="1629" end="1639" title="Parliament of Croatia" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="1645" end="1655" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q271855" start="1919" end="1936" title="government budget" label="government budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="2007" end="2017" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593628" start="2566" end="2579" title="Croatian Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695164" start="2674" end="2694" title="general jurisdiction" label="general jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q694324" start="2761" end="2773" title="misdemeanour" label="misdemeanour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641572" start="2818" end="2838" title="administrative court" label="administrative court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583191" start="2879" end="2908" title="Croatian Constitutional Court" label="Croatian Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="3152" end="3180" title="State Attorney&amp;#x27;s Office" label="State Attorney&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="3259" end="3266" title="unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="3339" end="3355" title="Communist League of Yugoslavia" label="Communist League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276230" start="3379" end="3391" title="Constitution of Croatia" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="3454" end="3483" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="Socialist Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="3741" end="3762" title="breakup of Yugoslavia" label="breakup of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="3909" end="3933" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="3967" end="3987" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="4111" end="4120" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q748162" start="4243" end="4268" title="Accession of Croatia to the European Union" label="EU accession negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q256414" start="4352" end="4368" title="Community acquis" label="Community acquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4407" end="4421" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q327033" start="4618" end="4630" title="Croatian Armed Forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q57687" start="4903" end="4918" title="Zoran Milanović" label="Zoran Milanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q774482" start="4932" end="4946" title="oath of office" label="oath of office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501349" start="5594" end="5607" title="Martina Dalić" label="Martina Dalić"/>
<link wikidata="Q12956737" start="5609" end="5624" title="Davor Ivo Stier" label="Davor Ivo Stier"/>
<link wikidata="Q27537248" start="5626" end="5638" title="Ivan Kovačić" label="Ivan Kovačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q12629500" start="5644" end="5660" title="Damir Krstičević" label="Damir Krstičević"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="5696" end="5721" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16116415" start="5737" end="5764" title="Bridge of Independent Lists" label="Bridge of Independent Lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="5782" end="5793" title="independent (politics)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="5809" end="5825" title="Executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q806072" start="6010" end="6022" title="Banski dvori" label="Banski dvori"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685764" start="6069" end="6085" title="Andrej Plenković" label="Andrej Plenković"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436709" start="6088" end="6097" title="Presidents of Croatia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q57687" start="6099" end="6114" title="Zoran Milanović" label="Zoran Milanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q830323" start="6116" end="6150" title="Social Democratic Party of Croatia" label="Social Democratic Party of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195270" start="6170" end="6184" title="Prime Minister of Croatia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685764" start="6186" end="6202" title="Andrej Plenković" label="Andrej Plenković"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="6204" end="6229" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="6554" end="6560" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="6885" end="6899" title="constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="6933" end="6960" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="7125" end="7150" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q830323" start="7165" end="7199" title="Social Democratic Party of Croatia" label="Social Democratic Party of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="8475" end="8490" title="Two-round system" label="runoff election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266665" start="9296" end="9323" title="2007 Croatian parliamentary election" label="2007 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q426752" start="9412" end="9439" title="2011 Croatian parliamentary election" label="2011 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="9658" end="9671" title="Serbs of Croatia" label="Serb minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q837094" start="9690" end="9700" title="Hungarians of Croatia" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503479" start="9705" end="9713" title="Italians of Croatia" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441791" start="9733" end="9738" title="Czechs of Croatia" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566878" start="9743" end="9749" title="Slovaks of Croatia" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q337866" start="9852" end="9881" title="D&amp;#x27;Hondt method" label="Standard D&amp;#x27;Hondt formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q217032" start="9916" end="9934" title="election threshold" label="election threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="10329" end="10356" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593628" start="11163" end="11176" title="Croatian Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11656" end="11666" title="Đuro Sessa" label="Đuro Sessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q694324" start="12001" end="12013" title="misdemeanour" label="misdemeanour"/>
<link wikidata="Q657433" start="12055" end="12072" title="traffic violation" label="traffic violation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583191" start="12141" end="12170" title="Croatian Constitutional Court" label="Croatian Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12696" end="12721" title="Croatian National Judicial Council" label="National Judicial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161836" start="12979" end="12991" title="Jasna Omejec" label="Jasna Omejec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12997" end="13022" title="Croatian National Judicial Council" label="National Judicial Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13393" end="13406" title="Ranko Marijan" label="Ranko Marijan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13448" end="13476" title="State Attorney&amp;#x27;s Office (Croatia)" label="State Attorney&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13537" end="13551" title="Dražen Jelenić" label="Dražen Jelenić"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="13567" end="13581" title="State Attorney" label="State Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737756" start="13905" end="13910" title="USKOK" label="USKOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="14012" end="14023" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="14199" end="14207" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="14209" end="14218" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="14223" end="14229" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="14412" end="14418" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998182" start="14424" end="14433" title="Subdivisions of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="banovinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="14805" end="14819" title="Transleithania" label="Transleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744" start="15392" end="15398" title="List of cities in Croatia" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q57058" start="15407" end="15421" title="Municipalities of Croatia" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q371909" start="15435" end="15442" title="prefect" label="prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744" start="15445" end="15449" title="List of cities in Croatia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q57058" start="15454" end="15463" title="Municipalities of Croatia" label="municipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435941" start="15548" end="15570" title="Administrative divisions of Croatia" label="local government units"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="15630" end="15645" title="Two-round system" label="runoff election"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="15742" end="15769" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276230" start="16088" end="16100" title="Constitution of Croatia" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29480360" start="16623" end="16643" title="2017 Croatian local elections" label="2017 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="16777" end="16786" title="Plurality (voting)" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="17219" end="17233" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="Events of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q690959" start="17252" end="17267" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the Habsburg areas" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="17341" end="17366" title="Croatian national revival" label="Croatian national revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="17474" end="17479" title="Sabor" label="Sabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q154418" start="17488" end="17501" title="Josip Jelačić" label="Josip Jelačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q253094" start="17543" end="17561" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1538–1867)" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="17590" end="17602" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q571619" start="17690" end="17704" title="Ante Starčević" label="Ante Starčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q701626" start="17706" end="17721" title="Eugen Kvaternik" label="Eugen Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q516286" start="17723" end="17735" title="Franjo Rački" label="Franjo Rački"/>
<link wikidata="Q434257" start="17740" end="17763" title="Josip Juraj Strossmayer" label="Josip Juraj Strossmayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="17777" end="17791" title="neo-absolutism" label="neo-absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="17812" end="17847" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q195384" start="17856" end="17885" title="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement" label="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250281" start="18163" end="18178" title="Party of Rights (1861–1929)" label="Party of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563411" start="18220" end="18239" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Kingdom of Croatia)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285032" start="18248" end="18263" title="Janko Drašković" label="Janko Drašković"/>
<link wikidata="Q697783" start="18265" end="18290" title="Ivan Kukuljević Sakcinski" label="Ivan Kukuljević Sakcinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q434257" start="18292" end="18315" title="Josip Juraj Strossmayer" label="Josip Juraj Strossmayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q453536" start="18320" end="18334" title="Ivan Mažuranić" label="Ivan Mažuranić"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18361" end="18390" title="National Constitutional Party" label="National Constitutional Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564395" start="18575" end="18611" title="Serb People&amp;#x27;s Independent Party" label="Serb People&amp;#x27;s Independent Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17662959" start="18636" end="18656" title="Croat-Serb Coalition" label="Croat-Serb Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q692107" start="18801" end="18813" title="Frano Supilo" label="Frano Supilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263774" start="18818" end="18837" title="Svetozar Pribićević" label="Svetozar Pribićević"/>
<link wikidata="Q638194" start="18843" end="18865" title="Croatian Peasant Party" label="Croatian Peasant Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q347471" start="18904" end="18917" title="Stjepan Radić" label="Stjepan Radić"/>
<link wikidata="Q698248" start="18992" end="19000" title="Kingdom of Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656709" start="19033" end="19052" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Kingdom of Dalmatia)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251672" start="19128" end="19144" title="Autonomist Party" label="Autonomist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091282" start="19327" end="19344" title="Antonio Bajamonti" label="Antonio Bajamonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299884" start="19365" end="19384" title="Italian irredentism" label="Italian irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="19631" end="19658" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q698248" start="19674" end="19693" title="Kingdom of Dalmatia" label="Kingdom of Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280950" start="19925" end="19942" title="Vidovdan Constitution" label="1921 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="19968" end="19981" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969543" start="20214" end="20233" title="Yugoslav Parliament" label="Yugoslav Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="20279" end="20288" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q254114" start="20326" end="20338" title="Vladko Maček" label="Vladko Maček"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="20366" end="20380" title="federalization" label="federalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382617" start="20413" end="20438" title="Cvetković–Maček Agreement" label="Cvetković–Maček Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q601252" start="20473" end="20492" title="Banovina of Croatia" label="Banovina of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20745" end="20757" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="20768" end="20796" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="21080" end="21109" title="Communist Party of Yugoslavia" label="Communist Party of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268048" start="21139" end="21165" title="Communist Party of Croatia" label="Communist Party of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q616146" start="21325" end="21340" title="Croatian Spring" label="Croatian Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="21566" end="21595" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="Socialist Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249448" start="21819" end="21848" title="Croatian Social Liberal Party" label="Croatian Social Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="21901" end="21926" title="Croatian Democratic Union" label="Croatian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q315467" start="21962" end="21973" title="Ivica Račan" label="Ivica Račan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286953" start="22338" end="22365" title="1990 Croatian parliamentary election" label="first multi-party elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252312" start="22612" end="22645" title="Coalition of People&amp;#x27;s Accord" label="Coalition of People&amp;#x27;s Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256067" start="22684" end="22697" title="Dražen Budiša" label="Dražen Budiša"/>
<link wikidata="Q183703" start="22825" end="22838" title="Franjo Tuđman" label="Franjo Tuđman"/>
<link wikidata="Q267808" start="22906" end="22926" title="Savka Dabčević-Kučar" label="Savka Dabčević-Kučar"/>
<link wikidata="Q640589" start="22931" end="22943" title="Miko Tripalo" label="Miko Tripalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285120" start="23075" end="23102" title="2000 Croatian parliamentary election" label="2000 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q830323" start="23132" end="23166" title="Social Democratic Party of Croatia" label="Social Democratic Party of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q982371" start="23188" end="23203" title="Franjo Gregurić" label="Franjo Gregurić"/>
<link wikidata="Q327922" start="23256" end="23281" title="national unity government" label="national unity government"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="23302" end="23330" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278811" start="23537" end="23564" title="2003 Croatian parliamentary election" label="2003 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264416" start="23668" end="23672" title="1992 Croatian presidential election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285005" start="23677" end="23681" title="1997 Croatian presidential election" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276230" start="23705" end="23728" title="Constitution of Croatia" label="Constitution of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="23762" end="23786" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q146496" start="23943" end="23956" title="Stjepan Mesić" label="Stjepan Mesić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278351" start="23986" end="23990" title="2000 Croatian presidential election" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262348" start="23995" end="23999" title="2005 Croatian presidential election" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255803" start="24005" end="24033" title="Croatian People&amp;#x27;s Party – Liberal Democrats" label="Croatian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57258" start="24048" end="24061" title="Ivo Josipović" label="Ivo Josipović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128936" start="24115" end="24145" title="Croatian presidential election, 2009–2010" label="December 2009 and January 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176299" start="24147" end="24171" title="Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović" label="Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović"/>
<link wikidata="Q57687" start="24317" end="24332" title="Zoran Milanovic" label="Zoran Milanovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685764" start="24662" end="24678" title="Andrej Plenković" label="Andrej Plenković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280941" start="24716" end="24752" title="List of political parties in Croatia" label="List of political parties in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28950323" start="24755" end="24783" title="Foreign relations of Croatia" label="Foreign relations of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25063167" start="24786" end="24815" title="Left-wing politics in Croatia" label="Left-wing politics in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434656" start="24818" end="24847" title="Far-right politics in Croatia" label="Far-right politics in Croatia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5578" wikidata="Q8067" url="?curid=5578" title="Economy of Croatia">
<text>The economy of Croatia is a developed mixed economy. It is one of the largest economies in Southeast Europe by nominal gross domestic product (GDP). It is an open economy with accommodative foreign policy, highly dependent on international trade in Europe. Within Croatia, economic development varies among its counties, with strongest growth in Central Croatia and its financial centre, Zagreb. It has a very high level of human development, low levels of income inequality, and a high quality of life. Croatia&#x27;s labor market has been perennially inefficient, with inconsistent business standards as well as ineffective corporate and income tax policy.

Croatia&#x27;s economic history is closely linked to its historic nation-building efforts. Its pre-industrial economy leveraged the country&#x27;s geography and natural resources to guide agricultural growth. The 1800s saw a shipbuilding boom, railroading, and industrial production. During the 1900s, Croatia entered into a planned economy (with socialism) in 1941 and a command economy (with communism) during World War II. It experienced rapid urbanization in the 1950s and decentralized in 1965, diversifying its economy before the collapse of Yugoslavia during the 1990s. The Croatian War of Independence (1991–95) curbed 21–25% of wartime GDP, leaving behind a developing transition economy.

The modern Croatian economy is considered high-income and dominated by its tertiary service sector, which accounts for 70% of GDP. The high levels of tourism in Croatia contributes to nearly 20% of GDP, with a total of 20.6 million tourists visiting in 2023. Croatia is an emerging energy power in the region, with strategic investments in liquefied natural gas (LNG), geothermal power, and electric automobiles. It supports regional economic activity via transportation networks across the Adriatic Sea and throughout Pan-European corridors. As a member of the European Union, Eurozone, and Schengen Area, it uses the euro (€) as official currency. Croatia has free-trade agreements with many world nations and is a part of the World Trade Organization (2000) and the EEA (2013).

==History==

===Pre-20th century ===
When Croatia was still part of the Dual Monarchy, its economy was largely agricultural. However, modern industrial companies were also located in the vicinity of the larger cities. The Kingdom of Croatia had a high ratio of population working in agriculture. Many industrial branches developed in that time, like forestry and wood industry (stave fabrication, the production of potash, lumber mills, shipbuilding). The most profitable one was stave fabrication, the boom of which started in the 1820s with the clearing of the oak forests around Karlovac and Sisak and again in the 1850s with the marshy oak masses along the Sava and Drava rivers. Shipbuilding in Croatia played a huge role in the 1850s Austrian Empire, especially the long-range sailing boats. Sisak and Vukovar were the centres of river-shipbuilding. Slavonia was also mostly an agricultural land and it was known for its silk production. Agriculture and the breeding of cattle were the most profitable occupations of the inhabitants. It produced corn of all kinds, hemp, flax, tobacco, and great quantities of liquorice.

The first steps towards industrialization began in the 1830s and in the following decades the construction of big industrial enterprises took place. During the 2nd half of the 19th and early 20th century there was an upsurge of industry in Croatia, strengthened by the construction of railways and the electric-power production. The industrial production was still lower than agricultural production. Regional differences were high. Industrialization was faster in inner Croatia than in other regions, while Dalmatia remained one of the poorest provinces of Austria-Hungary. The slow rate of modernization and rural overpopulation caused extensive emigration, particularly from Dalmatia. According to estimates, roughly 400,000 Croats emigrated from Austria-Hungary between 1880 and 1914. In 1910 8.5% of the population of Croatia-Slavonia lived in urban settlements.

In 1918 Croatia became part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, which was in the interwar period one of the least developed countries in Europe. Most of its industry was based in Slovenia and Croatia, but further industrial development was modest and centered on textile mills, sawmills, brick yards and food-processing plants. The economy was still traditionally based on agriculture and raising of livestock, with peasants accounting for more than half of Croatia&#x27;s population.

In 1941 the Independent State of Croatia (NDH), a World War II puppet state of Germany and Italy, was established in parts of Axis-occupied Yugoslavia. The economic system of NDH was based on the concept of &quot;Croatian socialism&quot;. The main characteristic of the new system was the concept of a planned economy with high levels of state involvement in economic life. The fulfillment of basic economic interests was primarily ensured with measures of repression. All large companies were placed under state control and the property of the regime&#x27;s national enemies was nationalized. Its currency was the NDH kuna. The Croatian State Bank was the central bank, responsible for issuing currency. As the war progressed the government kept printing more money and its amount in circulation was rapidly increasing, resulting in high inflation rates.

After World War II, the new Communist Party of Yugoslavia converted to a command economy on the Soviet model of rapid industrial development. In accordance with the communist plan, mainly companies in the pharmaceutical industry, the food industry and the consumer goods industry were founded in Croatia. Metal and heavy industry was mainly promoted in Bosnia and Serbia. By 1948 almost all domestic and foreign-owned capital had been nationalized. The industrialization plan relied on high taxation, fixed prices, war reparations, Soviet credits, and export of food and raw materials. Forced collectivization of agriculture was initiated in 1949. At that time 94% of agricultural land was privately owned, and by 1950 96% was under the control of the social sector. A rapid improvement of food production and the standard of living was expected, but due to bad results the program was abandoned three years later.

Throughout the 1950s Croatia experienced rapid urbanization. Decentralization came in 1965 and spurred growth of several sectors including a prosperous tourist industry. SR Croatia was, after SR Slovenia, the second most developed republic in Yugoslavia with a ~55% higher GDP per capita than the Yugoslav average, generating 31.5% of Yugoslav GDP or $30.1Bn in 1990. Croatia and Slovenia accounted for nearly half of the total Yugoslav GDP, and this was reflected in the overall standard of living. In the mid-1960s, Yugoslavia lifted emigration restrictions and the number of emigrants increased rapidly. In 1971 224,722 workers from Croatia were employed abroad, mostly in West Germany. Foreign remittances contributed $2 billion annually to the economy by 1990. Profits gained through Croatia&#x27;s industry were used to develop poor regions in other parts of former Yugoslavia, leading to Croatia contributing much more to the federal Yugoslav economy than it gained in return. This, coupled with austerity programs and hyperinflation in the 1980s, led to discontent in both Croatia and Slovenia which eventually fuelled political movements calling for independence.


In the late 1980s and early 1990s, with the collapse of socialism and the beginning of economic transition, Croatia faced considerable economic problems stemming from:
* the legacy of longtime communist mismanagement of the economy;
* damage during the internecine fighting to bridges, factories, power lines, buildings, and houses;
* the large refugee and displaced population, both Croatian and Bosnian;
* the disruption of economic ties; and
* inefficient privatization

At the time Croatia gained independence, its economy (and the whole Yugoslavian economy) was in the middle of recession. Privatization under the new government had barely begun when war broke out in 1991. As a result of the Croatian War of Independence, infrastructure sustained massive damage in the period 1991–92, especially the revenue-rich tourism industry. The privatization of sovereign assets and transformation from a planned economy to a market economy was thus slow and unsteady, largely as a result of public mistrust when many state-owned companies were sold to politically well-connected at below-market prices. With the end of the war, Croatia&#x27;s economy recovered moderately, but corruption, cronyism, and a general lack of transparency stymied economic reforms and foreign investment. The privatization of large government-owned companies was practically halted during the war and in the years immediately following the conclusion of peace. In 2000, roughly 70% of Croatia&#x27;s major companies were still state-owned, including water, electricity, oil, transportation, telecommunications, and tourism.

The early 1990s experienced high inflation. In 1991 the Croatian dinar was introduced as a transitional currency, but inflation continued to accelerate. The anti-inflationary stabilization steps in 1993 decreased retail price inflation from a monthly rate of 38.7% to 1.4%, and by the end of the year, Croatia experienced deflation. In 1994 Croatia introduced the kuna as its currency. As a result of the macro-stabilization programs, the negative growth of GDP during the early 1990s stopped and reversed into a positive trend. Post-war reconstruction activity provided another impetus to growth. Consumer spending and private sector investments, both of which were postponed during the war, contributed to the growth in 1995–1997. Croatia began its independence with a relatively low external debt because the debt of Yugoslavia was not shared among its former republics at the beginning. In March 1995 Croatia agreed with the Paris Club of creditor governments and took 28.5% of Yugoslavia&#x27;s previously non-allocated debt over 14 years. In July 1996 an agreement was reached with the London Club of commercial creditors, when Croatia took 29.5% of Yugoslavia&#x27;s debt to commercial banks. In 1997 around 60 percent of Croatia&#x27;s external debt was inherited from former Yugoslavia.

At the beginning of 1998 value-added tax was introduced. The central government budget was in surplus in that year, most of which was used to repay foreign debt. Government debt to GDP had fallen from 27.30% to 26.20% at the end of 1998. However, the consumer boom was disrupted in mid 1998, as a result of the bank crisis when 14 banks went bankrupt. Unemployment increased and GDP growth slowed down to 1.9%. The recession that began at the end of 1998 continued through most of 1999, and after a period of expansion GDP in 1999 had a negative growth of −0.9%. In 1999 the government tightened its fiscal policy and revised the budget with a 7% cut in spending.

In 1999 the private sector share in GDP reached 60%, which was significantly lower than in other former socialist countries. After several years of successful macroeconomic stabilization policies, low inflation and a stable currency, economists warned that the lack of fiscal changes and the expanding role of the state in the economy caused the decline in the late 1990s and were preventing sustainable economic growth.

===21st century===
The new government led by the president of SDP, Ivica Račan, carried out a number of structural reforms after it won the parliamentary elections on 3 January 2000. The country emerged from the recession in the 4th quarter of 1999 and growth picked up in 2000. Due to overall increase in stability, the economic rating of the country improved and interest rates dropped. Economic growth in the 2000s was stimulated by a credit boom led by newly privatized banks, capital investment, especially in road construction, a rebound in tourism and credit-driven consumer spending. Inflation remained tame and the currency, the kuna, stable. In 2000 Croatia generated 5,899 billion kunas in total income from the shipbuilding sector, which employed 13,592 people. Total exports in 2001 amounted to $4,659,286,000, of which 54.7% went to the countries of the EU. Croatia&#x27;s total imports were $9,043,699,000, 56% of which originated from the EU.

Unemployment reached its peak in late 2002, but has since been steadily declining. In 2003, the nation&#x27;s economy would officially recover to the amount of GDP it had in 1990. In late 2003 the new government led by HDZ took over the office. Unemployment continued falling, powered by growing industrial production and rising GDP, rather than only seasonal changes from tourism. Unemployment reached an all-time low in 2008 when the annual average rate was 8.6%, GDP per capita peaked at $16,158, while public debt as percentage of GDP decreased to 29%. Most economic indicators remained positive in this period except for the external debt as Croatian firms focused more on empowering the economy by taking loans from foreign resources. Between 2003 and 2007, Croatia&#x27;s private-sector share of GDP increased from 60% to 70%. The Croatian National Bank took steps to curb further growth of indebtedness of local banks with foreign banks. The dollar debt figure is adversely affected by the EUR-USD ratio—over a third of the increase in debt since 2002 is due to currency value changes.

Economic growth has been hurt by the global financial crisis. Immediately after the crisis it seemed that Croatia did not suffer serious consequences like some other countries. However, in 2009, the crisis gained momentum and the decline in GDP growth, at a slower pace, continued during 2010. In 2011 the GDP stagnated as the growth rate was zero. Since the global crisis hit the country, the unemployment rate has been steadily increasing, resulting in the loss of more than 100,000 jobs. While unemployment was 9.6% in late 2007, in January 2014 it peaked at 22.4%. In 2010 Gini coefficient was 0,32. In September 2012, Fitch ratings agency unexpectedly improved Croatia&#x27;s economic outlook from negative to stable, reaffirming Croatia&#x27;s current BBB rating. The slow pace of privatization of state-owned businesses and an over-reliance on tourism have also been a drag on the economy.

Croatia joined the European Union on 1 July 2013 as the 28th member state. The Croatian economy is heavily interdependent on other principal economies of Europe, and any negative trends in these larger EU economies also have a negative impact on Croatia. Italy, Germany and Slovenia are Croatia&#x27;s most important trade partners. In spite of the rather slow post-recession recovery, in terms of income per capita it is still ahead of some European Union member states such as Bulgaria, and Romania. In terms of minimum monthly wage, Croatia is ahead of 9 EU members (Greece, Malta, Estonia, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Romania, Latvia, Hungary, and Bulgaria) at €970.

The annual average unemployment rate in 2014 was 17.3% and Croatia has the third-highest unemployment rate in the European Union, after Greece (26.5%), and Spain (24.%). Of particular concern is the heavily backlogged judiciary system, combined with inefficient public administration, especially regarding the issues of land ownership and corruption in the public sector. Unemployment is regionally uneven: it is very high in eastern and southern parts of the country, nearing 20% in some areas, while relatively low in the north-west and in larger cities, where it is between 3 and 7%. In 2015 external debt rose by €2.7 billion since the end of 2014 and as of December 2022 is around €50.9 billion.

===2016–2019===
During 2015 the Croatian economy started with slow but upward economic growth, which continued during 2016 and conclusive at the end of the year seasonally adjusted was recorded at 3.5%. The better than expected figures during 2016 enabled the Croatian Government and with more tax receipts enabled the repayment of debt as well as narrow the current account deficit during Q3 and Q4 of 2016 This growth in economic output, coupled with the reduction of government debt has made a positive impact on the financial markets with many ratings agencies revising their outlook from negative to stable, which was the first upgrade of Croatia&#x27;s credit rating since 2007. Due to consecutive months of economic growth and the demand for labour, plus the outflows of residents to other European countries, Croatia had recorded the biggest fall in the number of unemployed during the month of November 2016 from 16.1% to 12.7%.

=== 2020 ===
COVID-19 Pandemic has caused more than 400,000 workers to file for economic aid of 4000.00 HRK./month. In the first quarter of 2020, Croatian GDP rose by 0.2% but then in Q2 Government of Croatia announced the biggest quarterly GDP plunge of -15.1% since GDP has been measured. Economic activity also plunged in Q3 2020 when GDP slid by an additional -10.0%.

In autumn 2020 European Commission estimated total GDP loss in 2020 to be -9.6%. Growth was set to pick up in the last month of Q1 2021 and the second quarter of 2021 respectively +1.4% and +3.0%, meaning that Croatia was set to reach 2019 levels by 2022.

=== 2021 ===
In July 2021 projection was improved to 5.4% due to the strong outturn in the first quarter and the positive high-frequency indicators concerning consumption, construction, industry and tourism prospects. In November 2021 Croatia outperformed these projections and the real GDP growth was calculated to be 8.1% for the year 2021, improving its projection of 5.4% GDP growth made in July. The recovery was supported by strong private consumption, the better-than-expected performance of tourism and the ongoing resilience of the export sector. Preliminary data point to tourism-related expenditure already exceeding 2019 levels, which has been supportive of both employment and consumption. Exports of goods have also continued to perform strongly (up 43%yoy in 2Q21) pointing to resilient competitiveness. Croatian merchandise exports in the first nine months of 2021 amounted to €13.3 billion, an annual increase of 24.6%. At the same time, imports rose 20.3% to €20.4 billion. The coverage of imports by exports for the first nine months is 65.4%. This made 2021 Croatian export&#x27;s record year as the trade off-set from 2019 was exceeded by €2 billion.

Exports recovered in all major markets, more precisely with all EU countries and CEFTA countries. Specifically, on the EU market, only a lower export result is recorded in relations with Sweden, Belgium and Luxembourg. Italy is again the main market for Croatian products, followed by Germany and Slovenia. Apart from the high contribution of crude oil that Ina sends to Hungary to the Mol refinery for processing, the export of artificial fertilizers from Petrokemija also has a significant contribution to growth.

For 2022, the Commission revised downwards its projection for Croatia&#x27;s economic growth to 5.6% from 5.9% previously predicted in July 2021. Commission again confirmed that the volume of Croatia&#x27;s GDP should reach its 2019 level during 2022, while in 2023 the GDP will grow by 3.4%. The Commission warned that the key downside risks stem from Croatia&#x27;s relatively low vaccination rates, which could lead to stricter containment measures, and continued delays of the earthquake-related reconstruction. Croatia&#x27;s entry into the Schengen area and euro adoption towards the end of the forecast period could benefit investment and trade.

On Friday, 12 November 2021 Fitch raised Croatia&#x27;s credit rating by one level, from ‘BBB−‘ to ‘BBB’, Croatia&#x27;s highest credit rating in history, with a positive outlook, noting progress in preparations for Eurozone membership and a strong recovery of the Croatian economy from the pandemic crisis. This is also secured by the failure of the eurosceptic party Hrvatski Suverenisti in a bid on the referendum to block Euro adoption in Croatia. In December 2021 Croatia&#x27;s industrial production increased for the thirteenth consecutive month, observing the growth of production increasing in all of the five aggregates. meaning that industrial production in 2021 increased by 6.7 percent.

In 2021 Croatia joined the list of countries with its own automobile industry, with Rimac Automobili&#x27;s Nevera started being produced. The company also took over Bugatti Automobiles in November same year and started building its new HQ in Zagreb, titled as the &quot;Rimac Campus&quot;, that will serve as the company&#x27;s international research and development (R&amp;D) and production base for all future Rimac products, as well as home of R&amp;D for future Bugatti models. The company also plans to build battery systems for different manufacturers from the automotive industry This campus will also become the home of R&amp;D for future Bugatti models due to the new joint venture, though these vehicles will be built at Bugatti&#x27;s Molsheim plant in France.

=== 2022 ===
In late March 2022 Croatian Bureau of Statistics announced that Croatia&#x27;s industrial output rose by 4% in February, thus growing for 15 months in a row. Croatia continued to have strong growth during 2022 fuelled by tourism revenue and increased exports. According to a preliminary estimate, Croatia&#x27;s GDP in Q2 grew by 7.7% from the same period of 2021. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected in early September 2022 that Croatia&#x27;s economy will expand by 5.9% in 2022, whilst EBRD expects Croatian GDP growth to reach 6.5% by the end of 2022. Pfizer announced launching a new production plant in Savski Marof whilst Croatian IT industry grew 3.3% confirming the trend that started with Coronavirus pandemic where the Croatia&#x27;s digital economy increased by 16 percent on average annually from 2019 to 2021. It is estimated that by 2030 its value could reach 15 percent of GDP, with the ICT sector being the main driver of that growth.

In 2022, Croatian economy is expected to grow between 5.9 and 7.8% in real terms and it is expected to reach between $72 and $73.6 billion according to preliminary estimates by Croatian Government surpassing early estimates of 491 billion kuna or $68.5 billion. Croatian Purchasing Power Parity in 2022 for the first time should exceed $40 000, however considering Croatian economy experienced 6 years of deep recession, catching up will take several more years of high growth. Economic outlook for 2023 for Croatian economy are mixed, depends largely on how the big Eurozone economies perform, Croatia&#x27;s largest trading partners; Italy, Germany, Austria, Slovenia and France are expected to slow down, but avoid recession according to latest economic projections and estimates, so Croatian economy as a result could see better than expected results in 2023, early projections of between 1 and 2.6% economic growth in 2023 with inflation at 7% is a significant slow down for the country, however country is experiencing major internal and inward investment cycle unparalleled in recent history. EU recovery funds in tune of €8.7 billion coupled with large EU investments in recently earthquake affected areas of Croatia, as well as major investments by local business in to renewable energy sector, also EU supported and funded, as well as major investments in transport infrastructure and rapidly expanding Croatia&#x27;s ICT sector, Croatian economy could see continuation of rapid growth in 2023.

On 12 July 2022, the Eurogroup approved Croatia becoming the 20th member of the Eurozone, with the formal introduction of the Euro currency to take place on 1 January 2023. Croatia joined the Schengen Area in 2023. By 2023, the minimum wage is ostensibly expected to rise to NET 700 EUR, increasing consumer spending.

==Sectors==
In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Croatia is Services with 110,085 companies followed by Retail Trade and Construction with 22,906 and 22,121 companies respectively.

===Industry===


===Tourism===


Tourism is a notable source of income during the summer and a major industry in Croatia. In 2019, it dominates the Croatian service sector and accounts for up to 11.8% of Croatian GDP. In 2023, 15.8 million international tourists visited Croatia. Annual tourist industry income for 2011 was estimated at €6.61 billion. Its positive effects are felt throughout the economy of Croatia in terms of increased business volume observed in retail business, processing industry orders and summer seasonal employment. The industry is considered an export business, because it significantly reduces the country&#x27;s external trade imbalance. Since the conclusion of the Croatian War of Independence, the tourist industry has grown rapidly, recording a fourfold rise in tourist numbers, with more than 10 million tourists each year. The most numerous are tourists from Germany, Slovenia, Austria and the Czech Republic as well as Croatia itself. Length of a tourist stay in Croatia averages 4.9 days.

The bulk of the tourist industry is concentrated along the Adriatic Sea coast. Opatija was the first holiday resort since the middle of the 19th century. By the 1890s, it became one of the most significant European health resorts. Later a large number of resorts sprang up along the coast and numerous islands, offering services ranging from mass tourism to catering and various niche markets, the most significant being nautical tourism, as there are numerous marinas with more than 16 thousand berths, cultural tourism relying on appeal of medieval coastal cities and numerous cultural events taking place during the summer. Inland areas offer mountain resorts, agrotourism and spas. Zagreb is also a significant tourist destination, rivalling major coastal cities and resorts.

Croatia has unpolluted marine areas reflected through numerous nature reserves and 99 Blue Flag beaches and 28 Blue Flag marinas. Croatia is ranked as the 18th most popular tourist destination in the world. About 15% of these visitors (over one million per year) are involved with naturism, an industry for which Croatia is world-famous. It was also the first European country to develop commercial naturist resorts.

===Agriculture===

Croatian agricultural sector subsists from exports of blue water fish, which in recent years experienced a tremendous surge in demand, mainly from Japan and South Korea. Croatia is a notable producer of organic foods and much of it is exported to the European Union. Croatian wines, olive oil and lavender are particularly sought after. Value of Croatia&#x27;s agriculture sector is around 3.1 billion according to preliminary data released by the national statistics office.

Croatia has around 1.72 million hectares of agricultural land, however totally utilized land for agricultural in 2020 was around 1.506 million hectares, of these permanent pasture land constituted 536 000 hectares or some 35.5% of total land available to agriculture. Croatia imports significant quantity of fruits and olive oil, despite having large domestic production of the same. In terms of livestock Croatian agriculture had some 15.2 million poultry, 453 000 Cattle, 802 000 Sheep, 1.157 000 Pork/Pigs,88 000 Goats. Croatia also produced 67 000 tons of blue fish, some 9000 of these are Tuna fish, which are farmed and exported to Japan, South Korea and United States.

Croatia produced in 2022:

* 1.66 million tons of maize;
* 970 thousand tons of wheat;
* 524 thousand tons of sugar beet (the beet is used to manufacture sugar and ethanol);
* 319 thousand tons of barley;
* 196 thousand tons of soybean;
* 154 thousand tons of sunflower seed;
* 146 thousand tons of grape;
* 107 thousand tons of potato;
* 59 thousand tons of rapeseed;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like apple (93 thousand tons), triticale (62 thousand tons) and olive (34 thousand tons).

=== Transport ===


The highlight of Croatia&#x27;s recent infrastructure developments is its rapidly developed motorway network, largely built in the late 1990s and especially in the 2000s. By January 2022, Croatia had completed more than of motorways, connecting Zagreb to most other regions and following various European routes and four Pan-European corridors. The busiest motorways are the A1, connecting Zagreb to Split and the A3, passing east–west through northwest Croatia and Slavonia. A widespread network of state roads in Croatia acts as motorway feeder roads while connecting all major settlements in the country. The high quality and safety levels of the Croatian motorway network were tested and confirmed by several EuroTAP and EuroTest programs.

Croatia has an extensive rail network spanning , including of electrified railways and of double track railways. The most significant railways in Croatia are found within the Pan-European transport corridor Vb and corridor X connecting Rijeka to Budapest and Ljubljana to Belgrade, both via Zagreb. All rail services are operated by Croatian Railways.

There are international airports in Zagreb, Zadar, Split, Dubrovnik, Rijeka, Osijek and Pula. As of January 2011, Croatia complies with International Civil Aviation Organization aviation safety standards and the Federal Aviation Administration upgraded it to Category 1 rating.

The busiest cargo seaport in Croatia is the Port of Rijeka and the busiest passenger ports are Split and Zadar. In addition to those, a large number of minor ports serve an extensive system of ferries connecting numerous islands and coastal cities in addition to ferry lines to several cities in Italy. The largest river port is Vukovar, located on the Danube, representing the nation&#x27;s outlet to the Pan-European corridor VII.

===Energy===


There are of crude oil pipelines in Croatia, connecting the JANAF oil terminal with refineries in Rijeka and Sisak, as well as several transhipment terminals. The system has a capacity of 20 million tonnes per year. The natural gas transportation system comprises of trunk and regional natural gas pipelines, and more than 300 associated structures, connecting production rigs, the Okoli natural gas storage facility, 27 end-users and 37 distribution systems.

Croatian production of energy sources covers 29% of nationwide natural gas demand and 26% of oil demand. In 2023, net total electrical power production in Croatia reached 16,378 GWh and Croatia imported 26% of its electric power energy needs. The bulk of Croatian imports are supplied by the Krško Nuclear Power Plant in Slovenia, 50% owned by Hrvatska elektroprivreda, providing 12% of Croatia&#x27;s electricity.

Electricity:
* Production: 13,696 GWh (2022)
* Consumption: 18,391 GWh (2022)
* Exports: 7,225 GWh (2022)
* Imports: 11,920 GWh (2022)

Electricity – production by source:
* Hydro: 34% (2023)
* Thermal: 21% (2023)
* Nuclear: 12% (2023)
* Renewable: 7% (2023)
* Imports: 26% (2023)

Crude Oil:
* Production: 594 thousand tons (2022)
* Consumption: 2.306 million tons (2022)
* Exports: 202 thousand tons (2022)
* Imports: 1,979 million tons (2022)
* Proved Reserves: (2022)
Natural Gas:
* Production: 745 million m3 (2022)
* Consumption: 2,529 billion m3 (2022)
* Exports: 1,063 million m3 (2022)
* Imports: 3,022 billion m3 (2022)
* Proved Reserves: 15.592,4 million m3 (2022)

==Banking==
=== Central bank ===
The country&#x27;s monetary policy is formulated and implemented by its national bank. 
* Croatian National Bank

=== Retail banks ===

* Zagrebačka banka (owned by UniCredit from Italy)
* Privredna banka Zagreb (owned by Intesa Sanpaolo from Italy)
* Hrvatska poštanska banka
* OTP Banka (owned by OTP Bank from Hungary)
* Raiffeisen Bank Austria (owned by Raiffeisen from Austria)
* Erste &amp; Steiermärkische Bank (former Riječka banka, owned by Erste Bank from Austria)

==Central budget==
The central budget is set by the Government of Croatia to cover their upcoming fiscal year, which runs from 1 January to 31 December. For 2024, they reported €28.52 billion in revenue with €32.61 billion in expenditure, running a €4.09 billion budget deficit.

The breakdown of Croatia&#x27;s budget for 2023, by ministry (department), is shown below.
* Labor and Pension System, Family and Social Policy – €10.59 billion
* Finance – €7.15 billion
* Health – €4.29 billion
* Science and Education – €3.84 billion
* Economy and Sustainable Development – €2.19 billion
* Maritime Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure – €1.56 billion
* Agriculture – €1.22 billion
* Interior – €1.18 billion
* Defence – €1.17 billion
* Physical Planning, Construction and State Property – €0.74 billion
* Justice and Public Administration – €0.68 billion
* Culture and Media – €0.54 billion
* Regional Development and EU funds – €0.42 billion
* Tourism and Sport – €0.28 billion
* Veterans&#x27; Affairs – €0.17 billion
* Foreign and European Affairs – €0.15 billion

==Stock exchanges==
* Zagreb Stock Exchange

==Economic indicators==
The following table shows the main economic indicators for the period 2000–2023 according to the Croatian Bureau of Statistics.
The Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) conversion factors are based on OECD estimates. Croatian government debt values are published by the Croatian National Bank. Indicators for 2024-2027 are provided by the IMF, specifically the World Economic Outlook (April 2024).

==Economic output==

==See also==
* Economy of Europe
* Areas of Special State Concern
* Croatia and the euro
* Croatia and the World Bank
* Croatian brands
* Taxation in Croatia

==References==
==External links==

* Croatian National Bank
* Croatian Chamber of Economy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="15" end="22" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="28" end="37" title="Developed country" label="developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="38" end="51" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70" end="107" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)#Table" label="largest economies in Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="119" end="141" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929451" start="158" end="170" title="open economy" label="open economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28950323" start="190" end="204" title="Foreign relations of Croatia" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568082" start="294" end="319" title="List of Croatian counties by GDP" label="varies among its counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q190665" start="346" end="361" title="Central Croatia" label="Central Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="388" end="394" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q59214526" start="405" end="420" title="List of Croatian counties by Human Development Index" label="very high level"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="457" end="474" title="Gini coefficient" label="income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="487" end="502" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200749" start="584" end="602" title="Ease of doing business index" label="business standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388140" start="626" end="657" title="Taxation in Croatia" label="corporate and income tax policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752412" start="726" end="741" title="nation-building" label="nation-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q215923" start="792" end="816" title="Geography of Croatia" label="country&amp;#x27;s geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="985" end="1000" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1007" end="1016" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1032" end="1047" title="Planned economy#Command economy" label="command economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1054" end="1063" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1072" end="1084" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="1137" end="1150" title="Decentralization" label="decentralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="1196" end="1218" title="Breakup of Yugoslavia" label="collapse of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="1241" end="1269" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1287" end="1308" title="Croatian War of Independence#Impact and aftermath" label="21–25% of wartime GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330546" start="1338" end="1356" title="transition economy" label="transition economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="1401" end="1412" title="World Bank high-income economy" label="high-income"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="1434" end="1457" title="tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q898224" start="1509" end="1527" title="tourism in Croatia" label="tourism in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377086" start="1632" end="1653" title="Energy in Croatia" label="emerging energy power"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="1722" end="1725" title="Liquefied natural gas" label="LNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q127993" start="1728" end="1738" title="geothermal energy" label="geothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="1850" end="1862" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q671469" start="1878" end="1900" title="Pan-European corridors" label="Pan-European corridors"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1921" end="1935" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="1937" end="1945" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="1951" end="1964" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="1978" end="1982" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2088" end="2112" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="2128" end="2131" title="European Economic Area" label="EEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="2213" end="2226" title="The Dual monarchy" label="Dual Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q623573" start="2363" end="2381" title="Kingdom of Croatia (Habsburg)" label="Kingdom of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172769" start="2519" end="2524" title="stave (wood)" label="stave"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564271" start="2556" end="2562" title="potash" label="potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="2564" end="2576" title="Sawmill" label="lumber mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="2578" end="2590" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="2723" end="2731" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="2736" end="2741" title="Sisak" label="Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="2881" end="2896" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867" start="2949" end="2956" title="Vukovar" label="Vukovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q623589" start="2997" end="3005" title="Kingdom of Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="3193" end="3197" title="cereal" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="3212" end="3216" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="3218" end="3222" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q257106" start="3257" end="3266" title="liquorice" label="liquorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q931988" start="3554" end="3562" title="Croatian Railways" label="railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q698248" start="3777" end="3785" title="Kingdom of Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="4092" end="4108" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="4173" end="4194" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256012" start="4311" end="4319" title="Drava Banovina" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q601252" start="4324" end="4331" title="Banovina of Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505660" start="4395" end="4408" title="Textile manufacturing" label="textile mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="4410" end="4417" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q31073494" start="4420" end="4431" title="Brickyard" label="brick yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="4548" end="4555" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="4630" end="4658" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4668" end="4680" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="4681" end="4693" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4697" end="4704" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="4709" end="4714" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="4744" end="4768" title="World War II in Yugoslavia" label="Axis-occupied Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="4840" end="4849" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="4920" end="4935" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342457" start="5233" end="5241" title="Independent State of Croatia kuna" label="NDH kuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="5503" end="5532" title="Communist Party of Yugoslavia" label="Communist Party of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5548" end="5563" title="Planned economy#Command economy" label="command economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="5790" end="5804" title="heavy industry" label="heavy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208545" start="5828" end="5834" title="Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q269864" start="5839" end="5845" title="Socialist Republic of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036450" start="5990" end="6005" title="World War II reparations towards Yugoslavia" label="war reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029809" start="6068" end="6084" title="Collectivization in Yugoslavia" label="collectivization"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="6412" end="6419" title="Socialist Republic of Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="6452" end="6468" title="Decentralization" label="Decentralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q209062" start="6561" end="6571" title="SR Croatia" label="SR Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211092" start="6583" end="6594" title="SR Slovenia" label="SR Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="6634" end="6644" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862248" start="6819" end="6831" title="Economy of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="6871" end="6889" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="7067" end="7079" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="7394" end="7403" title="austerity" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="7417" end="7431" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330546" start="7653" end="7672" title="Transition economy" label="economic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q165235" start="7963" end="7970" title="Bosnians" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862248" start="8108" end="8127" title="Economy of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavian economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="8264" end="8292" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187204" start="8407" end="8440" title="Privatization in Croatia" label="privatization of sovereign assets"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="8488" end="8502" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q595634" start="9222" end="9236" title="Croatian dinar" label="Croatian dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26360" start="9530" end="9534" title="Croatian kuna" label="kuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q830323" start="11612" end="11615" title="Social Democratic Party of Croatia" label="SDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q315467" start="11617" end="11628" title="Ivica Račan" label="Ivica Račan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285120" start="11690" end="11731" title="2000 Croatian parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections on 3 January 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q738439" start="12729" end="12732" title="HDZ" label="HDZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q461319" start="13140" end="13153" title="external debt" label="external debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143457" start="13348" end="13370" title="Croatian National Bank" label="Croatian National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="14182" end="14198" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="14522" end="14536" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="14758" end="14763" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="14765" end="14772" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="14777" end="14785" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="14982" end="14990" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="14996" end="15003" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="15073" end="15079" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="15081" end="15086" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="15088" end="15095" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="15097" end="15111" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="15113" end="15121" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="15123" end="15130" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="15132" end="15138" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="15140" end="15147" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="15153" end="15161" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="15309" end="15315" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="16827" end="16844" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 Pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26360" start="16918" end="16922" title="Croatian kuna" label="HRK."/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="17001" end="17022" title="Government of Croatia" label="Government of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="17202" end="17221" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="18681" end="18683" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q319014" start="18698" end="18703" title="Central European Free Trade Agreement" label="CEFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="18804" end="18810" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="18812" end="18819" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="18824" end="18834" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="18836" end="18841" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="18902" end="18909" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="18914" end="18922" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="18960" end="18969" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662137" start="18975" end="18978" title="INA d.d." label="Ina"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="18988" end="18995" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q549181" start="19003" end="19006" title="MOL (company)" label="Mol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="19046" end="19067" title="artificial fertilizer" label="artificial fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377621" start="19074" end="19085" title="Petrokemija" label="Petrokemija"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="19148" end="19158" title="European Commission" label="Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q104676100" start="19517" end="19534" title="Deployment of COVID-19 vaccines" label="vaccination rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q88259708" start="19615" end="19648" title="2020 Zagreb earthquake" label="earthquake-related reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="19680" end="19693" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen area"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580906" start="19698" end="19702" title="Croatia and the euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q871325" start="19816" end="19821" title="Fitch Ratings" label="Fitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054503" start="19844" end="19857" title="List of countries by credit rating" label="credit rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194405" start="19987" end="20023" title="Enlargement of the eurozone" label="preparations for Eurozone membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="20139" end="20150" title="Euroscepticism" label="eurosceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97289787" start="20157" end="20177" title="Hrvatski Suverenisti" label="Hrvatski Suverenisti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334368" start="20573" end="20589" title="Rimac Automobili" label="Rimac Automobili"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379367" start="20597" end="20603" title="Rimac Nevera" label="Nevera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308012" start="20655" end="20674" title="Bugatti Automobiles" label="Bugatti Automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="20732" end="20738" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513788" start="21295" end="21324" title="Croatian Bureau of Statistics" label="Croatian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="21641" end="21672" title="International Monetary Fund" label="The International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="21777" end="21781" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="EBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="21844" end="21850" title="Pfizer" label="Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q958771" start="21897" end="21909" title="Savski Marof" label="Savski Marof"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="21926" end="21937" title="IT industry" label="IT industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="21987" end="22007" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="Coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q138461" start="22033" end="22048" title="digital economy" label="digital economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="22191" end="22194" title="Information and communications technology" label="ICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="22877" end="22882" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="22884" end="22891" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="22893" end="22900" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="22902" end="22910" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="22915" end="22921" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138571" start="23520" end="23529" title="renewable" label="renewable"/>
<link wikidata="Q149964" start="23768" end="23777" title="Eurogroup" label="Eurogroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="23827" end="23835" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="23873" end="23877" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="23939" end="23952" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="24030" end="24033" title="Euro" label="EUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="25210" end="25224" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223353" start="25387" end="25394" title="Opatija" label="Opatija"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="25650" end="25662" title="mass tourism" label="mass tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445893" start="25729" end="25745" title="nautical tourism" label="nautical tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415049" start="25812" end="25828" title="cultural tourism" label="cultural tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956672" start="25972" end="25983" title="agrotourism" label="agrotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341387" start="25988" end="25991" title="spa" label="spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="26175" end="26190" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue Flag beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="26370" end="26378" title="naturism" label="naturism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564463" start="26580" end="26595" title="Blue water" label="blue water fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="26683" end="26694" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q380778" start="26729" end="26741" title="organic food" label="organic food"/>
<link wikidata="Q353953" start="26793" end="26806" title="Croatian wine" label="Croatian wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="26809" end="26818" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="26823" end="26831" title="lavender" label="lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="27730" end="27735" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="27760" end="27765" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="27790" end="27800" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="27834" end="27839" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="27844" end="27851" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="27877" end="27883" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="27908" end="27915" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076906" start="27940" end="27954" title="sunflower seed" label="sunflower seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="27979" end="27984" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="28009" end="28015" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q177932" start="28039" end="28047" title="rapeseed" label="rapeseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="28122" end="28127" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q380329" start="28148" end="28157" title="triticale" label="triticale"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="28181" end="28186" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q115916067" start="28320" end="28336" title="Motorways in Croatia" label="motorway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q106123" start="28524" end="28539" title="International E-road network" label="European routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q671469" start="28549" end="28571" title="Pan-European corridors" label="Pan-European corridors"/>
<link wikidata="Q429165" start="28603" end="28605" title="A1 (Croatia)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q429577" start="28642" end="28644" title="A3 (Croatia)" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q115916067" start="28728" end="28750" title="state roads in Croatia" label="state roads in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11332551" start="28768" end="28780" title="Feeder line (network)" label="feeder roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658179" start="28988" end="29010" title="List of railway lines in Croatia" label="extensive rail network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375987" start="29148" end="29182" title="European route E73" label="Pan-European transport corridor Vb"/>
<link wikidata="Q659418" start="29187" end="29197" title="Pan-European Corridor X" label="corridor X"/>
<link wikidata="Q128016" start="29362" end="29368" title="Zagreb Airport" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q155359" start="29370" end="29375" title="Zadar Airport" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125392" start="29377" end="29382" title="Split Airport" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147000" start="29384" end="29393" title="Dubrovnik Airport" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141414" start="29395" end="29401" title="Rijeka Airport" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423278" start="29403" end="29409" title="Osijek Airport" label="Osijek"/>
<link wikidata="Q389327" start="29414" end="29418" title="Pula Airport" label="Pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="29462" end="29503" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="29538" end="29569" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="29623" end="29630" title="seaport" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567835" start="29649" end="29663" title="Port of Rijeka" label="Port of Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231268" start="29700" end="29705" title="Port of Split" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694481" start="30011" end="30036" title="Pan-European Corridor VII" label="Pan-European corridor VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q505616" start="30114" end="30119" title="Adria oil pipeline" label="JANAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q474478" start="30807" end="30832" title="Krško Nuclear Power Plant" label="Krško Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636760" start="30859" end="30883" title="Hrvatska elektroprivreda" label="Hrvatska elektroprivreda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143457" start="31731" end="31753" title="Croatian National Bank" label="Croatian National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q140381" start="31779" end="31795" title="Zagrebačka banka" label="Zagrebačka banka"/>
<link wikidata="Q45568" start="31806" end="31815" title="UniCredit" label="UniCredit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246343" start="31830" end="31852" title="Privredna banka Zagreb" label="Privredna banka Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343118" start="31863" end="31878" title="Intesa Sanpaolo" label="Intesa Sanpaolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923981" start="31893" end="31917" title="Hrvatska poštanska banka" label="Hrvatska poštanska banka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31920" end="31929" title="OTP banka d.d." label="OTP Banka"/>
<link wikidata="Q912778" start="31940" end="31948" title="OTP Bank" label="OTP Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31965" end="31988" title="Raiffeisen Bank Austria" label="Raiffeisen Bank Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q580195" start="31999" end="32009" title="Raiffeisen Zentralbank" label="Raiffeisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q129262179" start="32026" end="32058" title="Erste &amp;amp; Steiermärkische Bank" label="Erste &amp;amp; Steiermärkische Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310001" start="32091" end="32101" title="Erste Bank" label="Erste Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="32169" end="32190" title="Government of Croatia" label="Government of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="32215" end="32226" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="32380" end="32394" title="Deficit spending" label="budget deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828875" start="32490" end="32540" title="Ministry of Labour and Pension System, Family and Social Policy" label="Labor and Pension System, Family and Social Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443880" start="32560" end="32567" title="Ministry of Finance (Croatia)" label="Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442446" start="32586" end="32592" title="Ministry of Health (Croatia)" label="Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443900" start="32611" end="32632" title="Ministry of Science and Education (Croatia)" label="Science and Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443855" start="32651" end="32686" title="Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development (Croatia)" label="Economy and Sustainable Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442429" start="32705" end="32751" title="Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure" label="Maritime Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512721" start="32770" end="32781" title="Ministry of Agriculture (Croatia)" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607663" start="32800" end="32808" title="Ministry of the Interior (Croatia)" label="Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113255" start="32827" end="32834" title="Ministry of Defence (Croatia)" label="Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443907" start="32853" end="32903" title="Ministry of Construction, Spatial Planning and State Property" label="Physical Planning, Construction and State Property"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443921" start="32922" end="32955" title="Ministry of Justice and Public Administration (Croatia)" label="Justice and Public Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443835" start="32974" end="32991" title="Ministry of Culture and Media (Croatia)" label="Culture and Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949654" start="33010" end="33043" title="Ministry of Regional Development and EU Funds (Croatia)" label="Regional Development and EU funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443844" start="33062" end="33079" title="Ministry of Tourism and Sports (Croatia)" label="Tourism and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272953" start="33098" end="33120" title="Ministry of Croatian Veterans" label="Veterans&amp;#x27; Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789649" start="33139" end="33167" title="Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs (Croatia)" label="Foreign and European Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q140388" start="33207" end="33228" title="Zagreb Stock Exchange" label="Zagreb Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513788" start="33351" end="33380" title="Croatian Bureau of Statistics" label="Croatian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="33386" end="33409" title="Purchasing Power Parity" label="Purchasing Power Parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143457" start="33517" end="33539" title="Croatian National Bank" label="Croatian National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="33586" end="33589" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226947" start="33682" end="33699" title="Economy of Europe" label="Economy of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279001" start="33702" end="33732" title="Areas of Special State Concern" label="Areas of Special State Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580906" start="33735" end="33755" title="Croatia and the euro" label="Croatia and the euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q60755180" start="33758" end="33784" title="Croatia and the World Bank" label="Croatia and the World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187179" start="33787" end="33802" title="Croatian brands" label="Croatian brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388140" start="33805" end="33824" title="Taxation in Croatia" label="Taxation in Croatia"/>
</links>
</doc>
