<doc id="8799" wikidata="Q348970" url="?curid=8799" title="D. B. Cooper">
<text>D. B. Cooper, also known as Dan Cooper, was an unidentified man who hijacked Northwest Orient Airlines Flight 305, a Boeing 727 aircraft, in United States airspace on November 24, 1971. During the flight from Portland, Oregon, to Seattle, Washington, Cooper told a flight attendant he had a bomb, and demanded $200,000 in ransom (equivalent to $1,558,543.21 in 2025) and four parachutes upon landing in Seattle. After releasing the passengers in Seattle, Cooper instructed the flight crew to refuel the aircraft and begin a second flight to Mexico City, with a refueling stop in Reno, Nevada. About thirty minutes after taking off from Seattle, Cooper opened the aircraft&#x27;s aft door, deployed the staircase, and parachuted into the night over southwestern Washington. Cooper&#x27;s true identity and whereabouts have never been determined conclusively.

In 1980, a small portion of the ransom money was found along the banks of the Columbia River near Vancouver, Washington. The discovery of the money renewed public interest in the mystery but yielded no additional information about Cooper&#x27;s identity or fate, and the remaining money was never recovered. For forty-five years after the hijacking, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) maintained an active investigation and built an extensive case file but ultimately did not reach any definitive conclusions. The crime remains the only documented unsolved case of air piracy in the history of commercial aviation. The FBI speculates Cooper did not survive his jump for several reasons: the inclement weather, Cooper&#x27;s lack of proper skydiving equipment, the forested terrain into which he jumped, his lack of detailed knowledge of his landing area and the disappearance of the remaining ransom money, suggesting it was never spent. In July 2016, the FBI officially suspended active investigation of the case, although reporters, enthusiasts, professional investigators and amateur sleuths continue to pursue numerous theories for Cooper&#x27;s identity, success and fate.

Cooper&#x27;s hijacking — and several imitators during the next year — immediately prompted major upgrades to security measures for airports and commercial aviation. Metal detectors were installed at airports, baggage inspection became mandatory and passengers who paid cash for tickets on the day of departure were selected for additional scrutiny. Boeing 727s were retrofitted with eponymous &quot;Cooper vanes&quot;, designed to prevent the aft staircase from being lowered in-flight. By 1973, aircraft hijacking incidents had decreased, as the new security measures dissuaded would-be hijackers whose only motive was money.

== Hijacking ==

On Thanksgiving Eve, November 24, 1971, a man carrying a black attaché case approached the flight counter for Northwest Orient Airlines at Portland International Airport. Using cash, the man bought a one-way ticket on , a thirty-minute trip north to Seattle–Tacoma International Airport (Sea-Tac). On his ticket, the man listed his name as &quot;Dan Cooper&quot;. Eyewitnesses described Cooper as a white male in his mid-40s, with dark hair and brown eyes, wearing a black or brown business suit, a white shirt, a thin black tie, a black raincoat and brown shoes. Carrying a briefcase and a brown paper bag, Cooper boarded Flight 305, a Boeing 727-100 (FAA registration N467US). Cooper took seat 18-E in the last row and ordered a drink, a bourbon and 7-Up from a flight attendant.

With a crew of six (consisting of Captain William A. Scott, First Officer William &quot;Bill&quot; J. Rataczak, Flight Engineer Harold E. Anderson and flight attendants Alice Hancock, Tina Mucklow and Florence Schaffner) and thirty-six passengers aboard, including Cooper, Flight 305 left Portland on-schedule at 2:50 pm PST. Shortly after takeoff, Cooper handed a note to flight attendant Schaffner, who was sitting in the jump seat at the rear of the airplane, directly behind Cooper. Assuming the note was a lonely businessman&#x27;s telephone number, Schaffner dropped the note unopened into her purse. Cooper then leaned toward her and whispered, &quot;Miss, you&#x27;d better look at that note. I have a bomb.&quot;

Schaffner opened the note. In neat, all-capital letters printed with a felt-tip pen, Cooper had written, &quot;Miss—I have a bomb in my briefcase and want you to sit by me.&quot; Schaffner returned the note to Cooper, sat down as he requested, and asked quietly to see the bomb. He opened his briefcase, and she saw two rows of four red cylinders, which she assumed were dynamite. Attached to the cylinders were a wire and a large, cylindrical battery, which resembled a bomb.

Cooper closed the briefcase and told Schaffner his demands. She wrote a note with Cooper&#x27;s demands, brought it to the cockpit and informed the flight crew of the situation. Captain Scott directed her to remain in the cockpit for the remainder of the flight and take notes of events as they happened. He then relayed to Northwest flight operations in Minnesota the hijacker&#x27;s demands: &quot;[Cooper] requests $200,000 in a knapsack by 5:00 pm. He wants two front parachutes, two back parachutes. He wants the money in negotiable American currency.&quot; By requesting two sets of parachutes, Cooper implied he planned to take a hostage with him, thereby discouraging authorities from supplying non-functional equipment.

With Schaffner in the cockpit, flight attendant Mucklow sat next to Cooper to act as a liaison between him and the flight crew. Cooper then made additional demands: upon landing at Sea-Tac, fuel trucks were to meet the plane and all passengers were to remain seated while Mucklow brought the money aboard. He said he would release the passengers after he had the money. The last items brought aboard would be the four parachutes.

Scott informed Sea–Tac air traffic control of the situation, who contacted the Seattle Police Department (SPD) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). The passengers were told their arrival in Seattle would be delayed because of a &quot;minor mechanical difficulty&quot;. Donald Nyrop, the president of Northwest at the time, authorized payment of the ransom and ordered all employees to cooperate with the hijacker and comply with his demands. For approximately two hours, Flight 305 circled Puget Sound to give the SPD and the FBI sufficient time to assemble Cooper&#x27;s ransom money and parachutes, and to mobilize emergency personnel.

During the flight from Portland to Seattle, Cooper demanded Mucklow remain by his side at all times. She later said Cooper appeared familiar with the local terrain; while looking out the window, he remarked, &quot;Looks like Tacoma down there&quot;, as the aircraft flew above it. When told the parachutes were coming from McChord Air Force Base, Cooper correctly noted McChord was only a twenty-minute drive from Sea-Tac. She later described the hijacker&#x27;s demeanor: &quot;[Cooper] was not nervous. He seemed rather nice and he was not cruel or nasty.&quot;

While the airplane circled Seattle, Mucklow chatted with Cooper and asked why he chose Northwest Airlines to hijack. He laughed and replied, &quot;It&#x27;s not because I have a grudge against your airlines, it&#x27;s just because I have a grudge,&quot; then explained the flight simply suited his needs. He asked where she was from; she answered she was originally from Pennsylvania, but was living in Minneapolis at the time. Cooper responded that Minnesota was &quot;very nice country.&quot; She asked where he was from, but he became upset and refused to answer. He asked if she smoked and offered her a cigarette. She replied she had quit, but accepted the cigarette.

FBI records note Cooper spoke briefly to an unidentified passenger while the airplane maintained its holding pattern over Seattle. In his interview with FBI agents, passenger George Labissoniere stated he visited the restroom directly behind Cooper on several occasions. After one visit, Labissoniere said the path to his seat was blocked by a passenger wearing a cowboy hat, questioning Mucklow about the supposed mechanical problem delaying them. Labissoniere said Cooper was initially amused by the interaction, then became irritated and told the man to return to his seat, but &quot;the cowboy&quot; ignored Cooper and continued to question Mucklow. Labissoniere claimed he eventually persuaded &quot;the cowboy&quot; to return to his seat.

Mucklow&#x27;s version of the interaction differed from Labissoniere&#x27;s. She said a passenger approached her and asked for a sports magazine to read because he was bored. She and the passenger moved to an area directly behind Cooper, where they both looked for magazines. The passenger took a copy of &quot;The New Yorker&quot; and returned to his seat. When Mucklow returned to sit with Cooper, he said, &quot;If that is a sky marshal, I don&#x27;t want any more of that&quot;, but she reassured him there were no sky marshals on the flight. Despite his brief interaction with Cooper, &quot;the cowboy&quot; was not interviewed by the FBI and was never identified.

The $200,000 ransom was received from Seattle First National Bank in a bag weighing approximately . The money—10,000 unmarked $20 bills, most of which had serial numbers beginning with &quot;L&quot; (indicating issuance by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco)—was photographed on microfilm by the FBI. Seattle police obtained the two front (reserve) parachutes from a local skydiving school and the two back (main) parachutes from a local stunt pilot.

===Passengers released===

Around 5:24 PST, Scott was informed the parachutes had been delivered to Sea-Tac and notified Cooper they would be landing soon. At 5:46 PST, Flight 305 landed at Sea-Tac. With Cooper&#x27;s permission, Scott parked the aircraft on a partially-lit runway, away from the main terminal. Cooper demanded only one representative of the airline approach the plane with the parachutes and money, and the only entrance and exit would be through the aircraft&#x27;s front door via mobile stairs.

Northwest&#x27;s Seattle operations manager, Al Lee, was designated to be the courier. To avoid the possibility Cooper might mistake Lee&#x27;s airline uniform for a law enforcement officer, he changed into civilian clothes for the task. With the passengers remaining seated, a ground crew attached a mobile stair. Per Cooper&#x27;s directive, Mucklow exited the aircraft through the front door and retrieved the ransom money. When she returned, she carried the money bag past the seated passengers to Cooper in the last row.

Cooper then agreed to release the passengers. As they debarked, Cooper inspected the money. In an attempt to break the tension, Mucklow jokingly asked Cooper if she could have some of it. Cooper readily agreed and handed her a packet of bills, but she immediately returned the money and explained accepting gratuities was against company policy. She said Cooper had tried to tip her and the other two flight attendants earlier in the flight with money from his pocket, but they had each declined, citing the policy.

With the passengers safely debarked, only Cooper and the six crew members remained aboard. In accordance with Cooper&#x27;s demands, Mucklow made three trips outside the aircraft to retrieve the parachutes, which she brought to him in the rear of the plane. While Mucklow brought aboard the parachutes, Schaffner asked Cooper if she could retrieve her purse, stored in a compartment behind his seat. Cooper agreed and told her, &quot;I won&#x27;t bite you.&quot; Flight attendant Hancock then asked Cooper if the flight attendants could leave, to which he replied, &quot;Whatever you girls would like,&quot; so Hancock and Schaffner debarked. When Mucklow brought the final parachute to Cooper, she gave him printed instructions for using the parachutes, but Cooper said he didn&#x27;t need them.

A problem with the refueling process caused a delay, so a second truck and then a third were brought to the aircraft to complete the refueling. During the delay, Mucklow said Cooper complained the money was delivered in a cloth bag instead of a knapsack as he had directed, and he now had to improvise a new way to transport the money. Using a pocket knife, he cut the canopy from one of the reserve parachutes, and stuffed some of the money into the empty parachute bag.

An FAA official requested a face-to-face meeting with Cooper aboard the aircraft, but Cooper denied the request. Cooper became impatient, saying, &quot;This shouldn&#x27;t take so long,&quot; and, &quot;Let&#x27;s get this show on the road.&quot; He then gave the cockpit crew his flight plan and directives: a southeast course toward Mexico City at the minimum airspeed possible without stalling the aircraft—approximately —at a maximum altitude. Cooper also specified the landing gear must remain deployed, the wing flaps must be lowered 15 degrees and the cabin must remain unpressurized.

First Officer Rataczak informed Cooper that the configuration limited the aircraft&#x27;s range to about , so a second refueling would be necessary before entering Mexico. Cooper and the crew discussed options, and agreed on Reno–Tahoe International Airport as the refueling stop. Cooper further directed the aircraft take off with the rear exit door open and its airstair extended. Northwest officials objected for reasons of safety, but Cooper countered by saying, &quot;It can be done, do it,&quot; but then did not insist and said he would lower the staircase once they were airborne. Cooper demanded Mucklow remain aboard to assist the operation.

===Back in the air===

Around 7:40 pm, Flight 305 took off, with only Cooper, Mucklow, Scott, Rataczak and Flight Engineer Anderson aboard. Two F-106 fighters from McChord Air Force Base and a Lockheed T-33 trainer—diverted from an unrelated Air National Guard mission—followed the 727. All three jets maintained &quot;S&quot; flight patterns to stay behind the slow-moving 727, and out of Cooper&#x27;s view. After takeoff, Cooper told Mucklow to lower the aft staircase. She told him and the flight crew she feared being sucked out of the aircraft. The flight crew suggested she come to the cockpit and retrieve an emergency rope with which she could tie herself to a seat. Cooper rejected the suggestion, stating he did not want her going up front or the flight crew coming back to the cabin. She continued to express her fear to him, and asked him to cut some cord from one of the parachutes to create a safety line for her. He said he would lower the stairs himself, instructed her to go to the cockpit, close the curtain partition between the Coach and First Class sections and not return.

Before she left, Mucklow begged Cooper, &quot;Please, please take the bomb with you.&quot; Cooper responded that he would either disarm it or take it with him. As she walked to the cockpit and turned to close the curtain partition, she saw Cooper standing in the aisle tying what appeared to be the money bag around his waist. From takeoff to when Mucklow entered the cockpit, four to five minutes had elapsed. For the rest of the flight to Reno, Mucklow remained in the cockpit, and was the last person to see Cooper. Around 8:00 pm, a cockpit warning light flashed, indicating the aft staircase had been deployed. Scott used the plane&#x27;s intercom to ask Cooper if he needed assistance, but Cooper&#x27;s last message was a one-word reply: &quot;No.&quot; The crew&#x27;s ears popped from the drop in air pressure from the stairs being opened. At approximately 8:13 p.m., the aircraft&#x27;s tail section suddenly pitched upward, forcing the pilots to trim and return the aircraft to level flight. In his interview with the FBI, Rataczak said the sudden upward pitch occurred while the flight was near the suburbs north of Portland.

With the aft cabin door open and the staircase deployed, the flight crew remained in the cockpit, unsure if Cooper was still aboard. Mucklow used the intercom to inform Cooper they were approaching Reno and that he needed to raise the stairs so the airplane could land safely. She repeated her requests as the pilots made the final approach to land, but neither Mucklow nor the flight crew received a reply from Cooper. At 11:02 pm, with the aft staircase still deployed, Flight 305 landed at Reno–Tahoe International Airport. FBI agents, state troopers, sheriff&#x27;s deputies and Reno police established a perimeter around the aircraft but, fearing the hijacker and the bomb were still aboard, did not approach the plane. Scott searched the cabin, confirmed Cooper was no longer aboard and, after a thirty-minute search, an FBI bomb squad declared the cabin safe.

==Investigation==
In addition to sixty-six latent fingerprints aboard the plane, FBI agents recovered Cooper&#x27;s black clip-on tie, tie clip and two of the four parachutes, one of which had been opened and had three shroud lines cut from the canopy. FBI agents interviewed eyewitnesses in Portland, Seattle and Reno, and developed a series of composite sketches.

Local police and FBI agents immediately began questioning possible suspects. In a rush to meet a deadline, reporter James Long recorded the name &quot;Dan Cooper&quot; as &quot;D. B. Cooper&quot;. United Press International wire service reporter Clyde Jabin republished Long&#x27;s error, and as other media sources repeated the error, the hijacker&#x27;s pseudonym became &quot;D. B. Cooper&quot;. Acting on the possibility the hijacker may have used his real name (or the same alias in a previous crime), Portland police discovered and interviewed a Portland citizen named D. B. Cooper. The Portland Cooper had a minor police record, but was quickly eliminated as a suspect.
Due to the number of variables and parameters, precisely defining the area to search was difficult. The jet&#x27;s airspeed estimates varied, the environmental conditions along the flight path varied with the aircraft&#x27;s location and altitude, and only Cooper knew how long he remained in free-fall before pulling his ripcord. The F-106 pilots neither saw anyone jumping from the airliner, nor did their radar detect a deployed parachute. A black-clad man jumping into the moonless night would be difficult to see, especially given the limited visibility, cloud cover and lack of ground lighting. The T-33 pilots did not make visual contact with the 727.

On December 6, 1971, after the incident, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover approved the use of an Air Force SR-71 Blackbird to retrace and photograph Flight 305&#x27;s flightpath, and attempt to locate the items Cooper carried during his jump. The SR-71 made five flights to retrace Flight 305&#x27;s route, but due to poor visibility, the photography attempts were unsuccessful.

In an experimental recreation, flying the same aircraft used in the hijacking in the same flight configuration, FBI agents pushed a sled out of the open airstair and were able to reproduce the upward motion of the tail section and brief change in cabin pressure described by the flight crew at 8:13 pm. Initial extrapolations placed Cooper&#x27;s landing zone within an area on the southernmost outreach of Mount St. Helens, a few miles southeast of Ariel, Washington, near Lake Merwin, an artificial lake formed by a dam on the Lewis River. Search efforts concentrated on Clark and Cowlitz counties, encompassing the terrain immediately south and north of the Lewis River in southwest Washington. FBI agents and sheriff&#x27;s deputies searched large areas of the largely forested terrain on foot and by helicopter. Door-to-door searches of local farmhouses were also performed. Other search parties ran patrol boats along Lake Merwin and Yale Lake, the reservoir immediately to its east. Neither Cooper nor any of the equipment he presumably carried was found.

Using fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters from the Oregon Army National Guard, the FBI coordinated an aerial search along the entire flight path (known as Victor 23 in U.S. aviation terminology, and as &quot;Vector 23&quot; in most Cooper from Seattle to Reno. Although numerous broken treetops and several pieces of plastic and other objects resembling parachute canopies were sighted and investigated, nothing relevant to the hijacking was found.

Soon after the spring thaw in early 1972, teams of FBI agents aided by some 200 soldiers from Fort Lewis, along with United States Air Force personnel, National Guardsmen, and civilian volunteers, conducted another thorough ground search of Clark and Cowlitz Counties for 18 days in March, and then another 18 days in April. Electronic Explorations Company, a marine-salvage firm, used a submarine to search the depths of Lake Merwin. Two local women stumbled upon a skeleton in an abandoned structure in Clark County; it was later identified as the remains of Barbara Ann Derry, a teenaged girl who had been abducted and murdered several weeks before. Ultimately, the extensive search and recovery operation uncovered no significant material evidence related to the hijacking.

Based on early computer projections produced for the FBI, Cooper&#x27;s drop zone was first estimated to be between Ariel dam to the north and the town of Battle Ground, Washington, to the south. In March 1972, after a joint investigation with Northwest Orient Airlines and the Air Force, the FBI determined Cooper probably jumped over the town of La Center, Washington.

In 2019, the FBI released a report detailing the burglary of a grocery store, about three hours after Cooper jumped, near Heisson, Washington. Heisson, an unincorporated community, was within the calculated drop zone Northwest Airlines presented to the FBI. In the report, the FBI noted the burglar took only survival items, such as beef jerky and gloves. However, the report notes that the burglar wore &quot;military type boots with a corregated sole&quot;, while Cooper was described as wearing slip-on shoes.

===Search for ransom money===
A month after the hijacking, the FBI distributed lists of the ransom serial numbers to financial institutions, casinos, racetracks, businesses with routine transactions involving large amounts of cash, and to law-enforcement agencies around the world. Northwest Orient offered a reward of 15% of the recovered money, to a maximum of $25,000. In early 1972, U.S. Attorney General John N. Mitchell released the serial numbers to the general public. Two men used counterfeit $20 bills printed with Cooper serial numbers to swindle $30,000 from a &quot;Newsweek&quot; reporter named Karl Fleming in exchange for an interview with a man they falsely claimed was the hijacker.

In early 1973, with the ransom money still missing, &quot;The Oregon Journal&quot; republished the serial numbers and offered $1,000 to the first person to turn in a ransom bill to the newspaper or any FBI field office. In Seattle, the &quot;Post-Intelligencer&quot; made a similar offer with a $5,000 reward. The offers remained in effect until Thanksgiving 1974, and though several near matches were reported, no genuine bills were found. In 1975, Northwest Orient&#x27;s insurer, Global Indemnity Co., complied with an order from the Minnesota Supreme Court and paid the airline&#x27;s $180,000 () claim on the ransom money.

===Later developments===
Analysis of the flight data indicated the first estimated location of Cooper&#x27;s landing zone was inaccurate. Captain Scott—who was flying the aircraft manually because of Cooper&#x27;s speed and altitude demands—determined the flight path was farther east than initially reported. Additional data provided by Continental Airlines pilot Tom Bohan—who was flying four minutes behind Flight 305—led the FBI to recalculate their estimates for Cooper&#x27;s drop zone. Bohan noted the FBI&#x27;s calculations for Cooper&#x27;s drop zone were based on incorrectly-recorded wind direction, and therefore the FBI&#x27;s estimates were inaccurate.

Based on Bohan&#x27;s data and subsequent recalculations of the flight path, the FBI determined Cooper&#x27;s drop zone was probably over the Washougal River watershed. In 1986, FBI Agent Ralph Himmelsbach wrote, &quot;I have to confess, if I were going to look for Cooper... I would head for the Washougal.&quot; The Washougal Valley and the surrounding areas have been repeatedly searched but no discoveries traceable to the hijacking have been reported, and the FBI believes any remaining physical clues were probably destroyed in the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens.

===Investigation suspended===
On July 8, 2016, the FBI announced active investigation of the Cooper case was suspended, citing the need to deploy investigative resources and manpower on issues of greater and more urgent priority. Local field offices would continue to accept any legitimate physical evidence, related specifically to the parachutes or to the ransom money. The 66-volume case file compiled during the 45-year course of the investigation would be preserved for historical purposes at FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C., and on the FBI website. All of the evidence is open to the public. The crime remains the only documented unsolved case of air piracy in commercial aviation history.

==Physical evidence==
During their forensic search of the aircraft, FBI agents found four major pieces of evidence, each with a direct physical link to Cooper: a black clip-on tie, a mother-of-pearl tie clip, a hair from Cooper&#x27;s headrest, and eight filter-tipped Raleigh cigarette butts from the armrest ashtray.

===Clip-on necktie===
FBI agents found a black clip-on necktie in seat 18-E, where Cooper had been seated. Attached to the tie was a gold tie-clip with a circular mother-of-pearl setting in the center of the clip. The FBI determined the tie had been sold exclusively at JCPenney department stores, but had been discontinued in 1968.

By late 2007, the FBI had built a partial DNA profile from samples found on Cooper&#x27;s tie in 2001. However, the FBI also acknowledged no evidence linked Cooper to the source of the DNA sample. FBI Special Agent Fred Gutt said, &quot;The tie had two small DNA samples, and one large sample ... it&#x27;s difficult to draw firm conclusions from these samples.&quot; The FBI also made public a file of previously unreleased evidence, including Cooper&#x27;s airplane ticket, composite sketches, fact sheets, and posted a request for information about Cooper&#x27;s identification.

In March 2009, a group of &quot;citizen sleuths&quot; using GPS, satellite imagery, and other technologies unavailable in 1971, began reinvestigating components of the case. Known as the Cooper Research Team (CRT), the group included paleontologist Tom Kaye from the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture in Seattle, scientific illustrator Carol Abraczinskas, computer scientist Sean Christo, and metallurgist Alan Stone. Although the CRT obtained little new information about the buried ransom money or Cooper&#x27;s landing zone, they found, analyzed, and identified hundreds of organic and metallic particles on Cooper&#x27;s tie.

Using electron microscopy, the CRT identified &quot;Lycopodium&quot; spores, the source of which was likely pharmaceutical. The team also found minute particles of unalloyed titanium on the tie, along with particles of bismuth, antimony, cerium, strontium sulfide, aluminum, and titanium-antimony alloys. The metal and rare-earth particles suggested Cooper may have worked for Boeing or another aeronautical engineering company, at a chemical manufacturing plant, or at a metal fabrication and production facility.

The material with the most significance, explained Kaye, was the unalloyed titanium. During the 1970s, the use of pure titanium was rare and would only be used in aircraft fabrication facilities, or at chemical companies combining titanium and aluminum to store extremely corrosive substances. The cerium and strontium sulfide were used by Boeing&#x27;s supersonic transport development project, and by Portland factories in which cathode-ray tubes were manufactured, such as Teledyne and Tektronix. Cooper researcher Eric Ulis has speculated that the titanium-antimony alloys are linked to Rem-Cru Titanium Inc., a metals manufacturer and Boeing contractor.

===Hair samples===

FBI agents found two hair samples in Cooper&#x27;s seat: a single strand of limb hair on the seat, and a single strand of brown Caucasian head hair on the headrest. The limb hair was destroyed after the FBI Crime Laboratory determined the sample lacked enough unique microscopic characteristics to be useful. However, the FBI Crime Laboratory determined the head hair was suitable for future comparison, and preserved the hair on a microscope slide. During their attempts to build Cooper&#x27;s DNA profile in 2002, the FBI discovered the hair sample had been lost.
===Cigarette butts===

In the armrest ashtray of seat 18-E, FBI agents found eight Raleigh filter-tipped cigarette butts. The butts were sent to the FBI Crime Laboratory, but investigators were unable to find fingerprints and returned the butts to the Las Vegas field office. In 1998, the FBI sought to extract DNA from the cigarette butts, but discovered the butts had been destroyed while in the custody of the Las Vegas field office.

===Recovered ransom money===

On February 10, 1980, eight-year-old Brian Ingram was vacationing with his family on the Columbia River at a beachfront known as Tina (or Tena) Bar, about downstream from Vancouver, Washington, and southwest of Ariel. As he raked the sandy riverbank to build a campfire, he uncovered three packets of the ransom cash, totaling about $5,800. The bills had disintegrated from lengthy exposure to the elements, but were still bundled in rubber bands. FBI technicians confirmed the money was indeed a portion of the ransom: two packets of 100 twenty-dollar bills each, and a third packet of 90, all arranged in the same order as when given to Cooper.

The discovery caused new conjecture, and ultimately raised more questions than it answered. Initial statements by investigators and scientific consultants were founded on the assumption the bundled bills washed freely into the Columbia River from one of its many connecting tributaries. An Army Corps of Engineers hydrologist noted the bills had disintegrated in a &quot;rounded&quot; fashion and were &quot;matted together&quot;, indicating they &quot;had been deposited by river action&quot;, as opposed to having been buried deliberately. The finding supported the hypothesis Cooper had landed near the Washougal River, which merges with the Columbia upstream from the discovery site, and not in or near Lake Merwin, the Lewis River, or any of its tributaries feeding the Columbia River downstream from Tina Bar.

The &quot;free-floating&quot; hypothesis neither explained the ten bills missing from one packet, nor explained how the three packets remained together after separating from the rest of the money. Physical evidence was incompatible with geological evidence; Himmelsbach wrote free-floating bundles would have washed up on the bank &quot;within a couple of years&quot; of the hijacking; otherwise, the rubber bands would have long since deteriorated. Geological evidence suggested the bills arrived at Tina Bar after 1974, when the Army Corps of Engineers performed a dredging operation on a nearby section of the river. Geologist Leonard Palmer of Portland State University found two distinct layers of sand and sediment between the clay deposited on the riverbank by the dredge and the sand layer in which the bills were buried, indicating the bills arrived long after dredging had been completed.

In late 2020, analysis of diatoms found on the bills suggests the bundles found at Tina Bar were not submerged in the river or buried dry at the time of the hijacking in November 1971. Only diatoms that bloom during springtime were found, indicating the money had entered the water at least several months after the hijacking.

In 1986, after protracted negotiations, the recovered bills were divided equally between Brian Ingram and Northwest Orient&#x27;s insurer Royal Globe Insurance; the FBI retained 14 examples as evidence. Ingram sold fifteen of his bills at auction in 2008 for about $37,000 ().

The Columbia River ransom money remains the only confirmed physical evidence from the hijacking found outside the aircraft.

===Parachutes===
During the hijacking, Cooper demanded and received two main parachutes and two reserve parachutes. The two reserve (front) parachutes were supplied by a local skydiving school and the two main (back) parachutes were supplied by a local pilot, Norman Hayden. Earl Cossey, the parachute rigger who packed all four parachutes brought to Cooper, described the two main parachutes as emergency bailout parachutes (as opposed to sporting parachutes used by skydivers). Cossey further described the main parachutes as being like military parachutes because they were rigged to open immediately upon the ripcord being pulled and were incapable of being steered. When the airplane landed in Reno, FBI agents discovered two parachutes Cooper left behind: one reserve (front) parachute and one main (back) parachute. The reserve parachute had been opened and three shroud lines had been cut out, but the main parachute left behind was still intact. The unused main parachute was described by FBI agents as a Model NB6 (Navy Backpack 6) and is on display at the Washington State Historical Society Museum.

One of the two reserve (front) parachutes Cooper was given was an unusable training parachute intended to only be used for classroom demonstrations. According to Cossey, the reserve parachute&#x27;s internal canopy was sewn together so skydiving students could get the feel of pulling a ripcord on a packed parachute without the canopy actually deploying. This non-functional reserve parachute was not found in the aircraft when it landed in Reno, causing FBI agents to speculate Cooper was not an experienced parachutist because someone with experience would have realized this reserve parachute was a &quot;dummy parachute&quot;. However, within days of the hijacking, the FBI revealed that neither of the parachute harnesses Cooper was given had the necessary D-rings required to attach reserve parachutes. Although Cooper lacked the ability to attach this &quot;dummy&quot; parachute to his main harness as a reserve parachute, it was not found in the airplane, so what he did with it is unknown. Cossey speculated Cooper removed the sewn-together canopy and used the empty reserve container as an extra money bag. Tina Mucklow&#x27;s testimony was in line with Cossey&#x27;s speculation, stating she recalled Cooper attempting to pack money inside a parachute container.

In November 1978, a deer hunter found a 727&#x27;s instruction placard for lowering the aft airstair. The placard was found near a logging road about east of Castle Rock, Washington, north of Lake Merwin, but within Flight 305&#x27;s basic flight path.

==Theories, hypotheses and conjecture==
During the 45-year span of its active investigation, the FBI periodically made public some of its working hypotheses and tentative conclusions, drawn from witness testimony and the scarce physical evidence.

===Sketches===
During the first year of the investigation, the FBI used eyewitness testimony from the passengers and flight crew to develop sketches of Cooper. The first sketch, officially titled Composite A, was completed a few days after the hijacking and was released on November 28, 1971. According to witnesses, the Composite A sketch—jokingly known as &quot;Bing Crosby&quot;—was not an accurate likeness of Cooper. The Composite A sketch, said witnesses, showed a young man with a narrow face, and did not resemble Cooper or capture his disinterested, &quot;let&#x27;s get this over with&quot; look. Flight attendant Florence Schaffner repeatedly told the FBI the Composite A sketch was a very poor likeness of Cooper.

After multiple eyewitnesses said Composite A was not an accurate rendering, FBI artists developed a second composite sketch. Completed in late 1972, the second Composite B sketch was intended to depict more accurately Cooper&#x27;s age, skin tone, and face shape. Eyewitnesses to whom Composite B was shown said the sketch was more accurate, but the Composite B Cooper looked too &quot;angry&quot; or &quot;nasty&quot;. One flight attendant said the Composite B sketch looked like a &quot;hoodlum&quot; and remembered Cooper as &quot;more refined in appearance&quot;. Moreover, said witnesses, the Composite B sketch depicted a man older than Cooper, with a lighter complexion.

Using the criticisms of Composite B, FBI artists made adjustments and improvements to the Composite B sketch. On January 2, 1973, the FBI finalized revised Composite B, their third sketch of Cooper. Of the new sketch, one flight attendant said revised Composite B was, &quot;a very close resemblance&quot; to the hijacker. Opined another flight attendant, &quot;the hijacker would be easily recognized from this sketch.&quot;

In April 1973, the FBI concluded the revised Composite B sketch was the best likeness of Cooper they could develop, and should be considered the definitive sketch of Cooper.
===Suspect profiling===
Flight attendants Schaffner and Mucklow, who spent the most time interacting with Cooper, were interviewed on the same night in separate cities and gave nearly identical descriptions: a man in his mid-40s, approximately tall and , with olive-toned skin, brown eyes, short combed-back black hair, and no discernible accent. University of Oregon student Bill Mitchell, who sat across from Cooper during the three-hour flight, gave the FBI several interviews and provided detailed descriptions of Cooper for what subsequently became Composite Sketch B.

Mitchell&#x27;s descriptions of Cooper were similar to those provided by the flight attendants, except Mitchell described Cooper as to . Since Mitchell was tall, he described himself as &quot;way bigger&quot; than Cooper and referred to Cooper as &quot;slight&quot;. Robert Gregory, one of the only other passengers besides Mitchell who provided the FBI with a full description of Cooper, also described Cooper as tall. Gregory stated he believed Cooper to be of Mexican-American or Native American descent.

In May 1973, the FBI internally released an eight-page suspect profile of Cooper. The profile suggested Cooper was a military-trained parachutist and not a sports skydiver: in addition to his familiarity with the military parachutes with which he was provided, Cooper&#x27;s age would have made him an outlier in the sport-skydiving community and would have increased the likelihood of being recognized by a club member. Multiple eyewitnesses noted Cooper&#x27;s athletic build, so the FBI profile suggested Cooper probably exercised regularly despite his age.

FBI profilers suspected Cooper was an Air Force veteran familiar with Seattle and the surrounding areas. Cooper recognized Tacoma as the jet circled Puget Sound, and in his conversation with Mucklow, Cooper correctly noted McChord AFB&#x27;s proximity to Seattle-Tacoma Airport, a detail with which most civilians would be unfamiliar.

Cooper&#x27;s mannerisms—such as his vocabulary, planning, his thorough retrieval of evidence, and his use of aviation terminology—led the FBI to conclude Cooper was not a common criminal: Cooper was clearly intelligent, not impulsive or easily rattled, a careful and procedure-oriented planner, adept at anticipating contingencies and adaptive strategies, with meticulous and methodical tendencies. Profilers also noted Cooper&#x27;s ability to quickly and competently adapt to various situations as they arose indicated he probably preferred to work independently, and neither needed nor wanted an accomplice.

Cooper&#x27;s financial situation was probably desperate. According to retired FBI chief investigator Ralph Himmelsbach, extortionists and other criminals who steal large amounts of money nearly always do so because they need it urgently; otherwise, the crime is not worth the considerable risk. The FBI considered—but ultimately dismissed—the possibility Cooper was a &quot;thrill seeker&quot; who made the jump, &quot;just to prove it could be done&quot;.

Because Cooper spilled the only drink he was served and never requested another, the FBI theorized Cooper was neither a heavy drinker nor an alcoholic. Moreover, an alcoholic would likely have been incapable of refusing further alcoholic beverages throughout the stressful and lengthy hijacking. By calculating the number of cigarettes Cooper smoked throughout the hijacking, the FBI believed Cooper smoked about one pack of cigarettes a day.

Agents theorized Cooper&#x27;s alias was based on the adventure hero Dan Cooper, a fictional Royal Canadian Air Force test pilot and the main character of a popular French-language Belgian comic book series, one cover of which depicted Dan Cooper skydiving. Because the Dan Cooper comics were neither translated to English nor imported to the United States, FBI profilers speculated the hijacker encountered them during a European tour of duty, and spoke fluent French.

=== Knowledge and planning ===
Based on the evidence and Cooper&#x27;s tactics, the FBI speculated Cooper planned the hijacking carefully using detailed, specific knowledge of aviation, the local terrain, and the 727&#x27;s capabilities. Cooper chose a seat in the last row of the rear cabin for three reasons: to observe and respond to any action in front of him, to minimize the possibility of being approached or attacked by someone behind him, and to make himself less conspicuous to the rest of the passengers. To ensure he would not be deliberately supplied with sabotaged equipment, Cooper demanded four parachutes to force the assumption he might compel one or more hostages to jump with him. FBI agent Ralph Himmelsbach noted Cooper&#x27;s choice of a bomb—instead of other weapons previously used by hijackers—thwarted any multidirectional attempts to rush him.

Cooper was careful to avoid leaving evidence. Before he jumped, Cooper demanded Mucklow return to him all notes either written by him, or on his behalf. Mucklow said she used the last match in his paper matchbook to light one of his cigarettes, and when she attempted to dispose of the empty matchbook, he demanded she return it to him. Although Cooper meticulously attempted to retrieve evidence, he left his clip-on tie in his seat.

Cooper was clearly familiar with the 727&#x27;s capabilities and confidential features, but the 727&#x27;s design was the primary reason Cooper chose the aircraft. With its aft airstair and the placement of its three engines, the 727 was one of the only passenger jets from which a parachute jump could be easily made. Mucklow told the FBI Cooper appeared to be familiar with the 727&#x27;s typical refueling time and procedures.

By specifying a 15° flap setting, Cooper displayed specific knowledge of aviation tactics and the 727&#x27;s capabilities. Unlike most commercial jet airliners, the 727 could remain in slow, low-altitude flight without stalling. The flap setting Cooper specifically requested allowed him to control the 727&#x27;s airspeed and altitude without entering the cockpit, where he could have been overpowered by the three pilots. First Officer Bill Rataczak, who spoke with Cooper on the intercom during the hijacking, told the FBI, &quot;[Cooper] displayed a specific knowledge of flying and aircraft in general.&quot;

The most significant knowledge Cooper displayed was a feature both secret and unique to the 727: the aft airstair could be operated during flight, and the single activation switch in the rear of the cabin could not be overridden from the cockpit. Cooper knew how to operate the aft staircase, and had clearly planned to use it for his escape. The FBI speculated Cooper knew the Central Intelligence Agency was using 727s to drop agents and supplies into enemy territory during the Vietnam War. Since no situation on a passenger flight would necessitate such an operation, civilian crews were neither informed the aft airstair could be lowered midflight, nor were they aware its operation could not be overridden from the cockpit.

Cooper appeared to be familiar with parachutes, although his experience level is unknown. Mucklow said Cooper, &quot;appeared to be completely familiar with the parachutes which had been furnished to him&quot;, and told a journalist, &quot;Cooper put on [his] parachute as though he did so every day&quot;. Cooper&#x27;s familiarity with the military-style parachutes he was given has resulted in speculation that Cooper was a military parachutist and not a civilian skydiver.

Larry Carr, who directed the investigative team from 2006 to 2009, does not believe Cooper was a paratrooper. Instead, Carr speculates Cooper had been an Air Force aircraft cargo loader. An aircraft cargo-loading assignment would provide him with aviation knowledge and experience: cargo loaders have basic jump training, wear emergency parachutes, and know how to dispatch items from planes in flight. As a cargo loader, Cooper would be familiar with parachutes, &quot;but not necessarily sufficient knowledge to survive the jump he made&quot;.

=== Cooper&#x27;s fate ===
From the beginning of their investigation, FBI agents did not believe Cooper survived his jump. The FBI provided several reasons and facts to support their conclusion: Cooper&#x27;s apparent lack of skydiving experience, his lack of proper equipment for his jump and survival, the temperature and inclement weather on the night of the hijacking, the wooded terrain into which Cooper jumped, his lack of knowledge of his landing area, and the unused ransom money.

First, Cooper appeared to lack the necessary skydiving knowledge, skills, and experience for the type of jump he attempted. Carr said: &quot;We originally thought Cooper was an experienced jumper, perhaps even a paratrooper.&quot; He further said: &quot;We concluded after a few years this was simply not true. No experienced parachutist would have jumped in the pitch-black night, in the rain, with a wind in his face wearing loafers and a trench coat. It was simply too risky.&quot; Alternatively, skydiving instructor Earl Cossey, who supplied the parachutes, testified Cooper would not have needed extensive experience to survive the jump and &quot;anyone who had six or seven practice jumps could accomplish this&quot;. However, Cossey also noted jumping at night drastically increased the risk of injury, and without jump boots, Cooper would probably have suffered severe ankle or leg injuries upon landing.

Second, Cooper did not appear to have the equipment necessary for either his jump or his survival in the wilderness. He failed to bring or request a helmet, and jumped into a 15 °F (−9 °C) wind at 10,000 feet (3,000 m) in November over Washington without proper protection against the extreme wind chill. Although the contents of Cooper&#x27;s paper bag are unknown, he did not use any of the bag&#x27;s contents to assist him during any part of the hijacking, so the FBI speculated the bag contained items he needed for his jump, such as boots, gloves, and goggles.

Third, Cooper did not have an accomplice waiting on the ground to help him escape. Such an arrangement would have required both a precisely timed jump and the flight crew&#x27;s cooperation to follow a predetermined flight path, but Cooper did not give the flight crew a specific path. Moreover, the flight crew proposed—and Cooper agreed—to alter the flight path, and fly from Seattle to Reno for refueling, and Cooper had no way of keeping an accomplice apprised of his changed plans. The low cloud cover and lack of visibility to the ground further complicated Cooper&#x27;s ability to determine his location, establish a bearing, or see his landing zone.

Finally, the ransom money was never spent, and the recovered portion was found unused. Carr said: &quot;Diving into the wilderness without a plan, without the right equipment, in such terrible conditions, he probably never even got his chute open.&quot; FBI agent Richard Tosaw theorized Cooper became incapacitated from hypothermia during his jump, landed in the Columbia River, and drowned. However, FBI agents were not unanimous in their assessments of Cooper&#x27;s ultimate fate. A senior FBI agent anonymously opined in a 1976 article in &quot;The Seattle Times&quot;, &quot;I think [Cooper] made it. I think he slept in his own bed that night. It was a clear night. A lot of the country is pretty flat ... he could have just walked out. Right down the road. Hell, they weren&#x27;t even looking for him there at the time. They thought he was somewhere else. He could just walk down the road.&quot;

Conclusive evidence of Cooper&#x27;s death has not been found. In the months after Cooper&#x27;s hijacking, five men attempted copycat hijackings, and all five survived their parachute escapes. The survival of the copycats—several of whom had circumstances and conditions similar to Cooper&#x27;s jump—forced FBI lead case agent Ralph Himmelsbach to reevaluate his opinions and theories regarding Cooper&#x27;s chances for survival. Himmelsbach cited three examples of hijackers who survived jumps in conditions similar to Cooper&#x27;s escape: Martin McNally, Frederick Hahneman, and Richard LaPoint.

Hijacker Martin McNally jumped using only a reserve chute, without protective gear, at night, over Indiana. Unlike Cooper, who appeared to be familiar with parachutes, McNally had to be shown how to put on his parachute. Additionally, McNally&#x27;s pilot increased the airspeed to , nearly twice the airspeed of Flight 305 at the time of Cooper&#x27;s jump. The increased windspeed caused a violent jump for McNally: the money bag was immediately torn from him, &quot;yet he had landed unharmed except for some superficial scratches and bruises&quot;.

49-year-old Frederick Hahneman hijacked a 727 in Pennsylvania and survived after jumping at night into a Honduran jungle. A third copycat, Richard LaPoint, hijacked a 727 in Nevada. Wearing only trousers, a shirt, and cowboy boots, LaPoint jumped into the freezing January wind over northern Colorado and landed in the snow. In 2008, Himmelsbach admitted he originally thought Cooper had only a fifty-percent chance of survival, but subsequently revised his assessment.

By 1976, most published legal analyses concurred the impending expiration of the statute of limitations for prosecution of the hijacker would make little difference. Since the statute&#x27;s interpretation varies from case to case and from court to court, a prosecutor could argue Cooper had forfeited legal immunity on any of several valid technical grounds. In November 1976, a Portland grand jury returned an indictment &quot;in absentia&quot; against &quot;John Doe, &quot;a.k.a.&quot; Dan Cooper&quot; for air piracy and violation of the Hobbs Act. The indictment formally enabled prosecution to be continued, should the hijacker be apprehended at any time in the future.

==Suspects==
Between 1971 and 2016, the FBI processed more than a thousand &quot;serious suspects&quot;, including assorted publicity seekers and deathbed confessors.

===Ted Braden===

Theodore Burdette Braden Jr. (1928–2007) was a Special Forces commando during the Vietnam War, a master skydiver, and a convicted felon. He was believed by many within the Special Forces community, both at the time of the hijacking and during subsequent years, to have been Cooper. Born in Ohio, Braden first joined the military at the age of 16 in 1944, serving with the 101st Airborne during World War II. He eventually became one of the military&#x27;s best parachutists, often representing the Army in international skydiving tournaments, and his military records list him as having made 911 jumps. During the 1960s, Braden was a team leader within the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam – Studies and Observations Group (MACVSOG), a classified commando unit of Green Berets which performed unconventional warfare operations during the Vietnam War. He also served as a military skydiving instructor, teaching HALO jumping techniques to members of Project Delta. Braden spent 23 months in Vietnam, conducting classified operations within both North and South Vietnam, as well as Laos and Cambodia. In December 1966, Braden deserted his unit in Vietnam and made his way to the Congo to serve as a mercenary, but only served there a brief time before being arrested by CIA agents and taken back to the United States for a court-martial. Despite having committed a capital offense by deserting in wartime, Braden was given an honorable discharge and prohibited from re-enlisting in the military in exchange for his continued secrecy about the MACVSOG program.

Braden was profiled in the October 1967 issue of &quot;Ramparts&quot; magazine, wherein he was described by fellow Special Forces veteran and journalist Don Duncan as being someone with a &quot;secret death wish&quot; who &quot;continually places himself in unnecessary danger but always seems to get away with it&quot;, specifically referring to Braden&#x27;s disregard for military skydiving safety regulations. Duncan also claimed that during Braden&#x27;s time in Vietnam, he was &quot;continuously involved in shady deals to make money&quot;. After his military discharge in 1967, the details of Braden&#x27;s life are largely unknown, but at the time of the hijacking he was a truck driver for Consolidated Freightways, which was headquartered in Vancouver, Washington, just across the Columbia River from Portland and not far from the suspected dropzone of Ariel, Washington. It is also known that during the early 1970s he was investigated by the FBI for stealing $250,000 during a trucking scam he had allegedly devised, but he was never charged for this supposed crime. In 1980, Braden was indicted by a Federal grand jury for driving an 18-wheeler full of stolen goods from Arizona to Massachusetts, but it is unknown whether there was a conviction in that case. Two years later Braden was arrested in Pennsylvania for driving a stolen vehicle with fictitious plates and for having no driver&#x27;s license. Braden was eventually sent to Federal prison during the late 1980s, serving time in Pennsylvania, but the precise crime is unknown.

Despite his ability as a soldier, he was not well liked personally and was described by a family member as &quot;the perfect combination of high intelligence and criminality&quot;. From his time working covert operations in Vietnam, he likely would have possessed the then-classified knowledge about the ability and proper specifications for jumping from a 727, perhaps having done it himself on MACVSOG missions. Physically, Braden&#x27;s military records list him at , which is shorter than the height description of at least given by the two flight attendants, but this military measurement would have been taken in his stocking feet and he may have appeared somewhat taller in shoes. However, he possessed a dark complexion from years of outdoor military service, had short dark hair, a medium athletic build, and was 43 years of age at the time of the hijacking, which are features all in line with the descriptions of Cooper.

===Kenneth Christiansen===
In 2003, Minnesota resident Lyle Christiansen watched a television documentary about the Cooper hijacking and became convinced that his late brother Kenneth (1926–1994) was Cooper. After repeated futile attempts to convince the FBI as well as author and movie director Nora Ephron (whom he hoped would make a movie about the case), he contacted private investigator Skipp Porteous in New York City. In 2010, Porteous published a book postulating that Christiansen was the hijacker. The next year, an episode of the History series &quot;Brad Meltzer&#x27;s Decoded&quot; also summarized the circumstantial evidence linking Christiansen to the Cooper case.

Christiansen enlisted in the Army in 1944 and was trained as a paratrooper. World War II had ended by the time he was deployed in 1945, but he made occasional training jumps while stationed in Japan with occupation forces during the late 1940s. After leaving the Army, he joined Northwest Orient in 1954 as a laborer stationed at Northwest Airlines&#x27; Far East stopover on Shemya Island in the Aleutians. He subsequently became a flight attendant, and then a purser, based in Seattle. Christiansen was 45 years old at the time of the hijacking, but he was shorter (5 ft 8 in or 173 cm) and thinner (150 pounds or 68 kg) than eyewitness descriptions of Cooper. Christiansen smoked (as did the hijacker) and displayed a fondness for bourbon (the drink Cooper had requested). Stewardess Florence Schaffner told author Geoffrey Gray that photos of Christiansen fit her memory of the hijacker&#x27;s appearance more closely than those of the other suspects she had been shown, but added that she could not conclusively identify him.

Despite the publicity generated by Porteous&#x27;s book and the 2011 television documentary, the FBI maintains that Christiansen cannot be considered a prime suspect. It cites the poor match to eyewitness physical descriptions and a complete absence of direct incriminating evidence.

===Jack Coffelt===
Bryant &quot;Jack&quot; Coffelt (1917–1975) was a con man, ex-convict, and purported government informant who claimed to have been the chauffeur and confidant of Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s last undisputed descendant, great-grandson Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith. In 1972, he began claiming he was Cooper and attempted through an intermediary – a former cellmate named James Brown – to sell his story to a Hollywood production company. He said he landed near Mount Hood, about southeast of Ariel, injuring himself and losing the ransom money in the process. Photos of Coffelt bear a resemblance to the composite drawings, although he was in his mid-fifties in 1971. He was reportedly in Portland on the day of the hijacking and sustained leg injuries around that time which were consistent with a skydiving mishap.

Coffelt&#x27;s account was reviewed by the FBI, which concluded that it differed in several details from information that had not been made public and was therefore a fabrication. Brown continued peddling the story long after Coffelt died in 1975. Multiple media venues, including the CBS news program &quot;60 Minutes&quot;, considered and rejected it.

===Lynn Cooper===
Lynn Doyle &quot;L. D.&quot; Cooper (1931–1999), a leather worker and Korean War veteran, was proposed as a suspect in July 2011 by his niece, Marla Cooper. As an eight-year-old, she recalled Cooper and another uncle planning something &quot;very mischievous&quot;, involving the use of &quot;expensive walkie-talkies&quot;, at her grandmother&#x27;s house in Sisters, Oregon, southeast of Portland. The next day Flight 305 was hijacked; and though the uncles ostensibly were turkey hunting, L. D. Cooper came home wearing a bloody shirt—the result, he said, of an auto accident. Later, Marla claimed, her parents came to believe that L. D. was the hijacker. She also recalled that her uncle, who died in 1999, was obsessed with the Canadian comic book hero Dan Cooper and &quot;had one of his comic books thumbtacked to his wall&quot;—although he was not a skydiver or paratrooper.

In August 2011, &quot;New York&quot; magazine published an alternative witness sketch, reportedly based on a description by Flight 305 eyewitness Robert Gregory, depicting horn-rimmed sunglasses, a &quot;russet&quot;-colored suit jacket with wide lapels, and marcelled hair. The article observed that L. D. Cooper had wavy hair that looked marcelled (as did Duane Weber, see below). The FBI announced that no fingerprints had been found on a guitar strap made by L. D. Cooper. One week later, they added that his DNA did not match the partial DNA profile obtained from the hijacker&#x27;s tie, but acknowledged that there is no certainty that the hijacker was the source of the organic material obtained from the tie.

===Barbara Dayton===
Barbara Dayton (1926–2002), a recreational pilot and University of Washington librarian who was named Robert Dayton at birth, served in the U.S. Merchant Marine and then the Army during World War II. After discharge, Dayton worked with explosives for construction work and aspired to a professional airline career, but could not obtain a commercial pilot&#x27;s license.

Dayton had gender reassignment surgery in 1969, and changed her name to Barbara; she is believed to be the first person to have had this type of surgery in Washington. She claimed to have staged the hijacking two years later, presenting as a man, in order to &quot;get back&quot; at the airline industry and the FAA, whose insurmountable rules and conditions had prevented her from becoming an airline pilot. Dayton said that the ransom money was hidden in a cistern near Woodburn, Oregon, a suburban area south of Portland. She eventually recanted the entire story, ostensibly after learning that hijacking charges could still be brought. She also did not match the physical description particularly closely.

===William Gossett===
William Pratt Gossett (1930–2003) was a Marine Corps, Army, and Army Air Forces veteran who had military service in Korea and Vietnam. His military experience included jump training and wilderness survival. Gossett was known to be obsessed with the Cooper hijacking. According to Galen Cook, a lawyer who has collected information related to Gossett for years, he once showed his sons a key to a Vancouver, British Columbia, safe deposit box which, he claimed, contained the long-missing ransom money.

The FBI has no direct evidence implicating Gossett and cannot even reliably place him in the Pacific Northwest at the time of the hijacking. &quot;There is not one link to the D. B. Cooper case,&quot; said Special Agent Carr, &quot;other than the statements [Gossett] made to someone.&quot;

===Joe Lakich===
Joe Lakich (1921–2017) was a retired U.S. Army Major and Korean War veteran whose daughter Susan Giffe was killed less than two months before the hijacking, as a consequence of a botched hostage negotiation conducted by the FBI. The events culminating in the death of Lakich&#x27;s daughter would be studied by hostage negotiators for decades as an example of what not to do during a hostage situation. He and his wife later sued the FBI, and ultimately an Appeals Court ruled in their favor, holding that the FBI acted negligently during the hostage negotiation.

Lakich would become a Cooper suspect in large part due to the revelation that Cooper&#x27;s tie contained microscopic particles of uncommon metals, such as unalloyed titanium. It is speculated that few people during that era would have contact with such materials, and that Cooper may have worked in a manufacturing environment working on electronics as engineer or manager. When the hijacking occurred, Lakich was working in Nashville as a production supervisor at an electronics capacitor factory and would have likely been exposed to the materials found on the tie. When Cooper was asked by Tina Mucklow why he was committing the hijacking, he replied: &quot;It&#x27;s not because I have a grudge against your airlines, it&#x27;s just because I have a grudge.&quot; It is believed by some that this &quot;grudge&quot; was Lakich&#x27;s anger toward the FBI for their failed efforts at rescuing his daughter less than two months earlier.

===John List===

John Emil List (1925–2008) was an accountant and war veteran who murdered his wife, three teenage children, and 85-year-old mother in Westfield, New Jersey, fifteen days before the Cooper hijacking, withdrew $200,000 from his mother&#x27;s bank account, and disappeared. He came to the attention of the Cooper task force due to the timing of his disappearance, multiple matches to the hijacker&#x27;s description, and the reasoning that &quot;a fugitive accused of mass murder has nothing to lose&quot;. After his capture in 1989, List denied any involvement in the Cooper hijacking: no substantial evidence implicates him, and the FBI no longer considers him a suspect. List died in prison in 2008.

===Ted Mayfield===
Theodore Ernest Mayfield (1935–2015) was a Special Forces veteran, pilot, competitive skydiver, and skydiving instructor. He served prison time in 1994 for negligent homicide after two of his students died when their parachutes failed to open and was later found indirectly responsible for thirteen additional skydiving deaths due to faulty equipment and training. In 2010, he was sentenced to three years&#x27; probation for piloting an airplane 26 years after losing his pilot&#x27;s license and rigging certificates. He was suggested repeatedly as a suspect early in the investigation, according to FBI Agent Ralph Himmelsbach, who knew Mayfield from a prior dispute at a local airport. He was ruled out, based partly on the fact that he telephoned Himmelsbach less than two hours after Flight 305 landed in Reno to volunteer advice on standard skydiving practices and possible landing zones, as well as information on local skydivers.

===Richard McCoy===
Richard McCoy, Jr. (1942–1974) was an Army veteran who served two tours of duty in Vietnam, first as a demolition expert and later with the Green Berets as a helicopter pilot. After his military service, he became a warrant officer in the Utah National Guard and an avid recreational skydiver, with aspirations of becoming a Utah State Trooper.

On April 7, 1972, McCoy staged the best-known of the copycat hijackings. He boarded United Airlines&#x27; (a with aft stairs) in Denver, Colorado, and, brandishing what later proved to be a paperweight resembling a hand grenade and an unloaded pistol, he demanded four parachutes and $500,000. After delivery of the money and parachutes at San Francisco International Airport, McCoy ordered the aircraft back into the sky and bailed out over Provo, Utah, leaving behind his handwritten hijacking instructions and his fingerprints on a magazine he had been reading.

He was arrested on April 9 with the ransom cash in his possession and, after trial and conviction, received a 45-year sentence. Two years later, he escaped from Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary with several accomplices by crashing a garbage truck through the main gate. Tracked down three months later in Virginia Beach, McCoy was killed in a shootout with FBI agents.

In their 1991 book, &quot;D.B. Cooper: The Real McCoy&quot;, parole officer Bernie Rhodes and former FBI agent Russell Calame asserted that they had identified McCoy as Cooper. They cited obvious similarities in the two hijackings, claims by McCoy&#x27;s family that the tie and mother-of-pearl tie clip left on the airplane belonged to McCoy, and McCoy&#x27;s own refusal to admit or deny that he was Cooper. A proponent of their claim was the FBI agent who killed McCoy. &quot;When I shot Richard McCoy,&quot; he said, &quot;I shot D. B. Cooper at the same time.&quot;

Although there is no reasonable doubt that McCoy committed the Denver hijacking, the FBI does not consider him a suspect in the Cooper case because of mismatches in age and description (e.g., McCoy was 29 years old, with projecting ears), skydiving skill much greater than thought to be possessed by the hijacker, and credible evidence that McCoy was in Las Vegas on the day of the Portland hijacking, and at home in Utah the day after, having Thanksgiving dinner with his family.

In addition, all three of the stewardesses from the Cooper hijacking were shown photographs of McCoy and agreed that he was not their hijacker. They were even able to point to specific differences in the two men, specifically that Cooper&#x27;s nose wasn&#x27;t as broad as McCoy&#x27;s, that Cooper had more hair than McCoy, and that Cooper&#x27;s ears did not protrude as much as McCoy&#x27;s. McCoy&#x27;s photo was also shown to the ticket agent who sold Cooper his ticket, the gate agent, and the passenger seated closest to Cooper (Bill Mitchell), and they too concluded that McCoy and Cooper were not the same.

In 2024, McCoy&#x27;s two children publicly stated that their father had been D. B. Cooper after a parachute was found by YouTuber Dan Gryder on the property formerly owned by McCoy&#x27;s mother. Gryder claims to have handed this parachute over to the FBI, though the FBI have not confirmed this.

===Sheridan Peterson===

Sheridan Peterson (1926–2021) served with the Marine Corps during World War II and was employed later as a technical editor at Boeing, based in Seattle. Investigators became interested in Peterson as a suspect soon after the skyjacking because of his experience as a smokejumper and love of taking physical risks, as well as his similar appearance and age (44) to the Cooper description. His involvement in the civil rights movement and assisting refugees in Vietnam during the Vietnam War could have potentially radicalized him to pursue hijacking.

Peterson often teased the media about whether he was really Cooper. Entrepreneur Eric Ulis, who spent years investigating the crime, said he was &quot;98% convinced&quot; that Peterson was Cooper; when pressed by FBI agents, Peterson insisted he was in Nepal at the time of the hijacking. He died in 2021.

In an episode of History Channel&#x27;s &quot;History&#x27;s Greatest Mysteries&quot;, analysis of DNA found on the tie worn by Cooper indicated that Peterson was not a match for Cooper when compared to a DNA sample from one of Peterson&#x27;s living daughters. Eric Ulis has since withdrawn his allegation that Peterson could have been Cooper.

===Robert Rackstraw===

Robert Wesley Rackstraw (1943–2019) was a retired pilot and ex-convict who served on an Army helicopter crew and other units during the Vietnam War. He came to the attention of the Cooper task force in February 1978, after he was arrested in Iran and deported to the U.S. to face explosives possession and check kiting charges. Several months later, while released on bail, Rackstraw attempted to fake his own death by radioing a false mayday call and telling controllers that he was bailing out of a rented airplane over Monterey Bay. Police later arrested him in Fullerton, California, on an additional charge of forging federal pilot certificates; the airplane he claimed to have ditched was found, repainted, in a nearby hangar. Cooper investigators noted his physical resemblance to Cooper composite sketches even though he was only 28 in 1971, military parachute training, and criminal record but eliminated him as a suspect in 1979 after no direct evidence of his involvement could be found.

In 2016, Rackstraw was featured as a suspect by a History channel program, along with a book. On September 8, 2016, Thomas J. Colbert, the author of the book, and attorney Mark Zaid filed a lawsuit to compel the FBI to release its Cooper case file by the Freedom of Information Act. In 2017, Colbert and a group of volunteer investigators uncovered what they believed to be &quot;a decades-old parachute strap&quot; at an undisclosed location in the Pacific Northwest. This was followed later in 2017 with a piece of foam, which they suspected was part of Cooper&#x27;s parachute backpack. In January 2018, Tom and Dawna Colbert reported that they had obtained a confession letter originally written in December 1971 containing codes that matched three units Rackstraw was a part of while in the Army.

One of the Flight 305 flight attendants reportedly &quot;did not find any similarities&quot; between photos of Rackstraw from the 1970s and her recollection of Cooper&#x27;s appearance. Rackstraw&#x27;s attorney termed the renewed allegations &quot;the stupidest thing I&#x27;ve ever heard&quot;, and Rackstraw himself told &quot;People&quot; magazine, &quot;It&#x27;s a lot of [expletive], and they know it is&quot;. The FBI declined further comment. Rackstraw stated in a 2017 phone interview that he lost his job over the 2016 investigations. Rackstraw said to Colbert, &quot;I told everybody I was [the hijacker]&quot;, before explaining the admission was a stunt. He died in 2019.

===Walter Reca===
Walter R. Reca (1933–2014) was a former military paratrooper and intelligence operative. He was proposed as a suspect by his friend Carl Laurin in 2018. In 2008, Reca told Laurin via a recorded telephone call that he was the hijacker. Reca gave Laurin permission in a notarized letter to share his story after his death. He also allowed Laurin to tape their telephone conversations about the crime during a six-week period in late 2008. In over three hours of recordings, Reca shared details about his version of the hijacking. He also confessed to his niece, Lisa Story.

From Reca&#x27;s description of the terrain on his way to the drop zone, Laurin concluded that he landed near Cle Elum, Washington. After Reca described an encounter with a dump truck driver at a roadside cafe after he landed, Laurin located Jeff Osiadacz, who was driving his dump truck near Cle Elum the night of the hijacking and met a stranger at the Teanaway Junction Café just outside of town. The man asked Osiadacz to give his friend directions to the café by telephone, presumably to be picked up, and he complied. Laurin convinced Joe Koenig, a former member of the Michigan State Police, of Reca&#x27;s guilt. Koenig later published a book on Cooper, titled &quot;Getting The Truth: I Am D.B. Cooper&quot;.

These claims have aroused skepticism. Cle Elum is well north and east of Flight 305&#x27;s known flight path, more than north of the drop zone assumed by most analysts, and even further from Tina Bar, where a portion of the ransom money was found. Reca was a military paratrooper and private skydiver with hundreds of jumps to his credit, in contradiction to the FBI&#x27;s publicized profile of an amateur skydiver at best. Reca also did not resemble the composite portrait the FBI assembled, which Laurin and Osiadacz used to explain why Osiadacz&#x27;s suspicions were not aroused at the time. In response to the allegations against Reca, the FBI said that it would be inappropriate to comment on specific tips provided to them, and that no evidence to date had proved the culpability of any suspect beyond a reasonable doubt.

===William Smith===

In November 2018, &quot;The Oregonian&quot; published an article proposing William J. Smith (1928–2018), of Bloomfield, New Jersey, as a suspect. The article was based on research conducted by an Army data analyst who sent his findings to the FBI in mid-2018. Smith, a New Jersey native, was a World War II veteran. After high school, he enlisted with the United States Navy and volunteered for combat air crew training. After his discharge, he worked for the Lehigh Valley Railroad and was affected by the Penn Central Transportation Company&#x27;s bankruptcy in 1970, the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history at that time. The article proposed that the loss of his pension created a grudge against the corporate establishment and transportation field, as well as a sudden need for money. Smith was 43 at the time of the hijacking. In his high school yearbook, a list of alumni killed in World War II lists an Ira Daniel Cooper, possibly the source for the hijacker&#x27;s pseudonym. The analyst claimed that Smith&#x27;s naval aviation experience would have given him knowledge of airplanes and parachutes, and his railroad experience would have helped him find railroad tracks and hop on a train to escape the area after landing.

According to the analyst, aluminum spiral chips found on the clip-on tie could have come from a locomotive maintenance facility. Smith&#x27;s information about the Seattle area may have come from his close friend Dan Clair, who was stationed at Fort Lewis during the war. The analyst noted that the man who claimed to be Cooper in Max Gunther&#x27;s 1985 book identified himself as &quot;Dan LeClair&quot;. Smith and Clair worked together for Conrail at Newark&#x27;s Oak Island Yard. Smith retired from that facility as a yardmaster. The article noted that a picture of Smith on the Lehigh Valley Railroad website showed a &quot;remarkable resemblance&quot; to Cooper FBI sketches. The FBI said that it would be inappropriate to comment on tips related to Smith.

===Duane Weber===
Duane L. Weber (1924–1995) was a World War II Army veteran who served time in at least six prisons from 1945 to 1968 for burglary and forgery. He was proposed as a suspect by his widow, Jo, based primarily on a deathbed confession: three days before he died in 1995, Weber told his wife, &quot;I am Dan Cooper.&quot; The name meant nothing to her, she said; but months later, a friend told her of its significance in the hijacking. She went to her local library to research Cooper, found Max Gunther&#x27;s book, and discovered notations in the margins in her husband&#x27;s handwriting. Like the hijacker, Weber drank bourbon and chain-smoked. Other circumstantial evidence included a 1979 trip to Seattle and the Columbia River, where his wife remembered him throwing a trash bag just upstream of Tina Bar.

Himmelsbach said, &quot;[Weber] does fit the physical description (and) does have the criminal background that I have always felt was associated with the case&quot;, but did not believe Weber was Cooper. The FBI eliminated Weber as an active suspect in July 1998 when his fingerprints did not match any of those processed in the hijacked plane, and no other direct evidence could be found to implicate him. Later, his DNA also failed to match the samples recovered from Cooper&#x27;s tie.

==Similar hijackings==

Cooper was among the first to attempt air piracy for personal gain; eleven days before Cooper&#x27;s hijack, Canadian Paul Joseph Cini had hijacked an Air Canada DC-8 over Montana, but was overpowered by the crew when he put down his shotgun to strap on his parachute. Encouraged by Cooper&#x27;s apparent success, fifteen similar hijackings—all unsuccessful—were attempted in 1972. Some examples from that year:
* Richard Charles LaPoint, an Army veteran from Boston, boarded Hughes Airwest Flight 800 at McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas on January 20. Brandishing what he claimed was a bomb while the DC-9 was on the taxiway, he demanded $50,000, two parachutes, and a helmet. After releasing the 51 passengers and two flight attendants, he ordered the airplane on an eastward trajectory toward Denver, then bailed out over the treeless plains of northeastern Colorado. Authorities, tracking the locator-equipped parachute and his footprints in the snow and mud, apprehended him a few hours later.
* Richard McCoy Jr., a former Army Green Beret, hijacked a United Airlines 727-100 on April 7 after it left Denver, diverted it to San Francisco, then bailed out over Utah with $500,000 in ransom money. He landed safely and was arrested two days later.
* Frederick Hahneman used a handgun to hijack an Eastern Air Lines 727 in Allentown, Pennsylvania, on May 7, demanded $303,000, and eventually parachuted into his native Honduras. A month later, with the FBI in pursuit and a $25,000 bounty on his head, he surrendered at the American embassy in Tegucigalpa. After being given a life sentence in September 1972, he was paroled in 1984.
* Robb Heady, a 22-year-old former Army paratrooper hijacked United Airlines Flight 239 from Reno to San Francisco on June 2, 1972. Carrying his own parachute and using a .357 () revolver, he demanded $200,000 in ransom money. He jumped from the airplane and was captured the next morning.
* Martin McNally, an unemployed service-station attendant, used a submachine gun on June 23 to commandeer an American Airlines 727 en route from St. Louis, Missouri, to Tulsa, Oklahoma, then diverted it eastward to Indiana and bailed out with $500,000 in ransom. McNally lost the ransom money as he exited the aircraft, but landed safely near Peru, Indiana, and was apprehended a few days later in a Detroit suburb. When interviewed in a 2020 podcast retrospective, McNally said he had been inspired by Cooper.
With the advent of universal luggage searches in 1973 (see Airport security), the general incidence of hijackings dropped dramatically. There were no further notable Cooper imitators until July 11, 1980, when Glenn K. Tripp seized Northwest Orient Flight 608 at Seattle-Tacoma Airport, demanding $600,000 ($100,000 by an independent account), two parachutes, and the assassination of his boss. A quick-thinking flight attendant drugged Tripp&#x27;s alcoholic drink with Valium. After a ten-hour standoff, during which Tripp reduced his demands to three cheeseburgers and a ground vehicle in which to escape, he was apprehended. Tripp attempted to hijack the same Northwest flight on January 21, 1983, and this time demanded to be flown to Afghanistan. When the airplane landed in Portland, he was shot and killed by FBI agents.

==Aftermath==
===Airport security===
Despite the initiation of the federal Sky Marshal Program the previous year, 31 hijackings were committed in U.S. airspace in 1972; 19 of them were for the specific purpose of extorting money. In 15 of the extortion cases, the hijackers also demanded parachutes. In early 1973, the FAA began requiring airlines to search all passengers and their bags. Amid multiple lawsuits charging that such searches violated Fourth Amendment protections against search and seizure, federal courts ruled that they were acceptable when applied universally and when limited to searches for weapons and explosives. Only two hijackings were attempted in 1973, both by psychiatric patients; one hijacker, Samuel Byck, intended to crash the airliner into the White House to kill President Nixon.

===Aircraft modifications===

Due to multiple &quot;copycat&quot; hijackings in 1972, the FAA required that the exterior of all aircraft be fitted with a spring-loaded device, later dubbed the &quot;Cooper vane&quot;, that prevents lowering of the aft airstair during flight. The device consists of a flat blade of aluminum mounted on a pivot, which is spring-loaded to stay out of the way of the door when the craft is at rest, but aerodynamically rotates into position to prevent the door from being opened when the airplane is traveling at flight speeds. Operation of the vane is automatic and cannot be overridden from within the aircraft. As a direct result of the hijacking, the installation of peepholes was mandated in all cockpit doors; this enables the cockpit crew to observe passengers without opening the cockpit door.

===Subsequent history of N467US===
In 1978, the hijacked 727-100 aircraft was sold by Northwest Orient to Piedmont Airlines, where it was re-registered N838N and continued in domestic carrier service. In 1984, it was purchased by the charter company Key Airlines, re-registered N29KA, and incorporated into the Air Force&#x27;s civilian charter fleet that shuttled workers between Nellis Air Force Base and the Tonopah Test Range during the F-117 Nighthawk development program. In 1996, the aircraft was scrapped for parts in a Memphis aircraft boneyard.

===Death of Earl J. Cossey===
On April 23, 2013, Earl J. Cossey, who packed the four parachutes that were given to Cooper, was found dead in his home in Woodinville, Washington, a suburb of Seattle. His death was ruled a homicide due to blunt-force trauma to the head. The perpetrator remains unknown. Some commenters alleged possible association with the Cooper case, but authorities responded that they had no reason to believe that any such association exists. Woodinville officials announced later that burglary was most likely the motive for the crime.

==In popular culture==

Himmelsbach famously termed Cooper a &quot;rotten sleazy crook&quot;, but his bold and unusual crime inspired a cult following that was expressed in song, movies, and literature. Novelty shops sold t-shirts emblazoned with &quot;D. B. Cooper, Where Are You?&quot; Restaurants and bowling alleys in the Pacific Northwest hold regular Cooper-themed promotions and sell tourist souvenirs. A &quot;Cooper Day&quot; celebration has been held at the Ariel General Store and Tavern each November since 1974 with the exception of 2015, the year its owner, Dona Elliot, died.

An annual convention, known as CooperCon, is held every year in late November in Seattle, Washington. The event, founded by Cooper researcher Eric Ulis in 2018, is a multi-day gathering of Cooper researchers and enthusiasts. Originally held in Vancouver, Washington, it was relocated to Seattle beginning in 2023. CooperCon replaced the annual D. B. Cooper Days, which ended when the owner of the Ariel Store Pub died and the pub was forced to close.

==See also==

* Cold case
* Gentleman thief
* List of aircraft hijackings
* List of fugitives from justice who disappeared

==Footnotes==
==References==

===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* — Disclaimer: Large amounts of Gunther&#x27;s content based on alleged interviews with a woman known as &quot;Clara&quot;, who claimed to have discovered an injured Cooper two days after the hijacking and lived with him until he died a decade later. This material is considered by the FBI and others as a hoax or fabrication, whether by Gunther or &quot;Clara&quot;. For critical analysis, &quot;see&quot; 
* (Himmelsbach was the FBI&#x27;s chief investigator on the case until his retirement in 1980; &quot;Norjak&quot; is FBI shorthand for the Cooper hijacking.)
* (Straightforward accounting of official information and evidence.)

==Further reading==

==External links==

* FBI Reading Room Files of the D.B. Cooper Case</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q348970" start="0" end="12" title="D. B. Cooper" label="D. B. Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q348970" start="28" end="38" title="D. B. Cooper" label="Dan Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="68" end="76" title="aircraft hijacking" label="hijacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="77" end="102" title="Northwest Orient Airlines" label="Northwest Orient Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="117" end="127" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="209" end="225" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="230" end="237" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414572" start="322" end="328" title="ransom" label="ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="541" end="552" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="579" end="591" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055947" start="702" end="711" title="airstair" label="staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="717" end="726" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="937" end="951" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q234053" start="957" end="978" title="Vancouver, Washington" label="Vancouver, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="1213" end="1244" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="1431" end="1441" title="air piracy" label="air piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="1605" end="1614" title="skydiving" label="skydiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q116031920" start="2075" end="2092" title="D. B. Cooper copycat hijackings" label="several imitators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378517" start="2155" end="2185" title="airport security" label="security measures for airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640723" start="2190" end="2209" title="commercial aviation" label="commercial aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211959" start="2211" end="2225" title="Metal detector" label="Metal detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q24662" start="2412" end="2423" title="retrofitted" label="retrofitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167849" start="2445" end="2456" title="Cooper vane" label="Cooper vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="2694" end="2706" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q915026" start="2754" end="2766" title="attaché case" label="attaché case"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="2801" end="2826" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest Orient Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425566" start="2830" end="2860" title="Portland International Airport" label="Portland International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14295" start="2941" end="2977" title="Seattle–Tacoma International Airport" label="Seattle–Tacoma International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3328" end="3342" title="Boeing 727#727-100" label="Boeing 727-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="3344" end="3347" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="FAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q543127" start="3431" end="3438" title="Bourbon whiskey" label="bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q270059" start="3443" end="3447" title="7-Up" label="7-Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q101539" start="3455" end="3471" title="flight attendant" label="flight attendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146304" start="3508" end="3515" title="pilot in command" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q123030" start="3534" end="3547" title="First officer (aviation)" label="First Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q432425" start="3586" end="3601" title="flight engineer" label="Flight Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q382835" start="3898" end="3907" title="jump seat" label="jump seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q80728" start="4568" end="4576" title="dynamite" label="dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="5030" end="5039" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="5147" end="5156" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="5859" end="5878" title="air traffic control" label="air traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442150" start="5915" end="5940" title="Seattle Police Department" label="Seattle Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="5955" end="5986" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="6036" end="6043" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294949" start="6115" end="6127" title="Donald Nyrop" label="Donald Nyrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414572" start="6195" end="6201" title="ransom" label="ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="6336" end="6347" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="6710" end="6716" title="Tacoma, Washington" label="Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520213" start="6808" end="6830" title="McChord Field" label="McChord Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="7421" end="7433" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="7453" end="7464" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="8781" end="8795" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q612761" start="8898" end="8909" title="sky marshal" label="sky marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893199" start="9267" end="9276" title="United States twenty dollar bill" label="$20 bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657981" start="9368" end="9405" title="Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco" label="Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q830450" start="9427" end="9436" title="Microform" label="microfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="9521" end="9530" title="skydiving" label="skydiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q545034" start="12712" end="12723" title="flight plan" label="flight plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="12766" end="12777" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197176" start="12793" end="12801" title="airspeed" label="airspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q752034" start="12819" end="12827" title="stall (fluid dynamics)" label="stalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="12905" end="12917" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="12944" end="12954" title="Flap (aeronautics)" label="wing flaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389519" start="13008" end="13021" title="cabin pressurization" label="unpressurized"/>
<link wikidata="Q597139" start="13249" end="13281" title="Reno–Tahoe International Airport" label="Reno–Tahoe International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055947" start="13388" end="13396" title="airstair" label="airstair"/>
<link wikidata="Q753808" start="13821" end="13826" title="Convair F-106 Delta Dart" label="F-106"/>
<link wikidata="Q58725" start="13870" end="13883" title="Lockheed T-33" label="Lockheed T-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q407622" start="13919" end="13937" title="Air National Guard" label="Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="15215" end="15219" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603074" start="15418" end="15426" title="intercom" label="intercom"/>
<link wikidata="Q639090" start="15693" end="15700" title="Aircraft principal axes" label="pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q581516" start="15731" end="15735" title="trim tab" label="trim"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352001" start="16496" end="16507" title="Reno Police Department" label="Reno police"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="16744" end="16754" title="bomb squad" label="bomb squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q178022" start="16824" end="16843" title="Fingerprint" label="latent fingerprints"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866014" start="17000" end="17011" title="shroud line" label="shroud line"/>
<link wikidata="Q615777" start="17127" end="17143" title="composite sketch" label="composite sketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="17345" end="17371" title="United Press International" label="United Press International"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="17372" end="17384" title="wire service" label="wire service"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="17627" end="17632" title="Pseudonym" label="alias"/>
<link wikidata="Q140028" start="18118" end="18127" title="Free fall" label="free-fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057168" start="18526" end="18538" title="Director of the FBI" label="FBI Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="18539" end="18554" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q190114" start="18588" end="18603" title="Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird" label="SR-71 Blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675" start="19268" end="19284" title="Mount St. Helens" label="Mount St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790370" start="19311" end="19328" title="Ariel, Washington" label="Ariel, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476890" start="19335" end="19346" title="Lake Merwin" label="Lake Merwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="19351" end="19366" title="artificial lake" label="artificial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q829832" start="19390" end="19401" title="Lewis River (Washington)" label="Lewis River"/>
<link wikidata="Q156287" start="19434" end="19439" title="Clark County, Washington" label="Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q156276" start="19444" end="19451" title="Cowlitz County, Washington" label="Cowlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352827" start="19801" end="19810" title="Yale Lake" label="Yale Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101036" start="19976" end="20002" title="Oregon Army National Guard" label="Oregon Army National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926474" start="20080" end="20089" title="Victor airways" label="Victor 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="20455" end="20463" title="United States Army" label="soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505731" start="20469" end="20479" title="Fort Lewis (Washington)" label="Fort Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="20492" end="20515" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="20763" end="20772" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q810999" start="21309" end="21334" title="Battle Ground, Washington" label="Battle Ground, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506592" start="21502" end="21523" title="La Center, Washington" label="La Center, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766114" start="21648" end="21667" title="Heisson, Washington" label="Heisson, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="21681" end="21705" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="22181" end="22187" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347566" start="22449" end="22465" title="John N. Mitchell" label="John N. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="22619" end="22627" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755324" start="22800" end="22818" title="The Oregon Journal" label="The Oregon Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q286261" start="22984" end="23002" title="Seattle Post-Intelligencer" label="Post-Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113741" start="23279" end="23302" title="Supreme Court of Minnesota" label="Minnesota Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="23709" end="23729" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972626" start="24182" end="24197" title="Washougal River" label="Washougal River"/>
<link wikidata="Q152005" start="24198" end="24207" title="Watershed (rivers)" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q778218" start="24578" end="24611" title="1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens" label="1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q167479" start="25112" end="25128" title="FBI headquarters" label="FBI headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="25132" end="25148" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="25272" end="25282" title="air piracy" label="air piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="25906" end="25914" title="JCPenney" label="JCPenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="26012" end="26015" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="26787" end="26801" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q388376" start="26820" end="26863" title="Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture" label="Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="26919" end="26937" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="26956" end="26968" title="metallurgist" label="metallurgist"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="27200" end="27219" title="electron microscopy" label="electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q624488" start="27246" end="27256" title="Lycopodium" label="Lycopodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="27368" end="27376" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="27413" end="27420" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="27422" end="27430" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385" start="27432" end="27438" title="cerium" label="cerium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765041" start="27440" end="27457" title="strontium sulfide" label="strontium sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="27459" end="27467" title="Aluminium" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318430" start="27513" end="27523" title="rare earth mineral" label="rare-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="27785" end="27793" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="28050" end="28056" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q639498" start="28064" end="28104" title="Boeing 2707" label="supersonic transport development project"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="28141" end="28157" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696127" start="28186" end="28194" title="Teledyne" label="Teledyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347679" start="28199" end="28208" title="Tektronix" label="Tektronix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="29513" end="29527" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q234053" start="29595" end="29616" title="Vancouver, Washington" label="Vancouver, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="30362" end="30385" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="30386" end="30397" title="Hydrology" label="hydrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="31456" end="31464" title="dredging" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="31537" end="31562" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="31815" end="31821" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023555" start="35067" end="35090" title="Castle Rock, Washington" label="Castle Rock, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="35775" end="35786" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="37765" end="37785" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="40134" end="40143" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159039" start="40985" end="40995" title="Dan Cooper (comics)" label="Dan Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="41009" end="41033" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882210" start="41097" end="41115" title="Belgian comics" label="Belgian comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="44120" end="44147" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q749387" start="45048" end="45059" title="paratrooper" label="paratrooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="46034" end="46043" title="skydiving" label="skydiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044340" start="47197" end="47207" title="wind chill" label="wind chill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667245" start="47502" end="47512" title="accomplice" label="accomplice"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="48682" end="48699" title="The Seattle Times" label="The Seattle Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q116031920" start="49146" end="49183" title="D. B. Cooper copycat hijackings" label="five men attempted copycat hijackings"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984453" start="49599" end="49617" title="Frederick Hahneman" label="Frederick Hahneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984453" start="50207" end="50225" title="Frederick Hahneman" label="Frederick Hahneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="50300" end="50308" title="Honduras" label="Honduran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="50747" end="50769" title="statute of limitations" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4317382" start="50968" end="50982" title="legal immunity" label="legal immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="51055" end="51065" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="51095" end="51106" title="Trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q302057" start="51127" end="51135" title="John Doe" label="John Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874855" start="51209" end="51218" title="Hobbs Act" label="Hobbs Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247661" start="51490" end="51509" title="deathbed confession" label="deathbed confessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="51612" end="51623" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="51902" end="51916" title="101st Airborne" label="101st Airborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q673330" start="52187" end="52256" title="Military Assistance Command, Vietnam – Studies and Observations Group" label="Military Assistance Command, Vietnam – Studies and Observations Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="52298" end="52310" title="Green Berets" label="Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967730" start="52445" end="52449" title="High-altitude military parachuting" label="HALO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089148" start="52483" end="52496" title="Project DELTA" label="Project Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="52711" end="52716" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="52731" end="52740" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290027" start="53142" end="53162" title="Ramparts (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Ramparts&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295251" start="53246" end="53256" title="Donald W. Duncan" label="Don Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163272" start="53793" end="53817" title="Consolidated Freightways" label="Consolidated Freightways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="55614" end="55623" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q214677" start="55874" end="55885" title="Nora Ephron" label="Nora Ephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="55950" end="55970" title="private investigator" label="private investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="56120" end="56127" title="History (American TV network)" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954122" start="56141" end="56168" title="Brad Meltzer&amp;#x27;s Decoded" label="Brad Meltzer&amp;#x27;s Decoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="56337" end="56349" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="56465" end="56482" title="Allied occupation of Japan" label="occupation forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307407" start="56723" end="56729" title="purser" label="purser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243381" start="57445" end="57458" title="prime suspect" label="prime suspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="57647" end="57654" title="con man" label="con man"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="57759" end="57774" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350420" start="57825" end="57853" title="Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith" label="Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="57997" end="58006" title="Hollywood (film industry)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q275662" start="58050" end="58060" title="Mount Hood" label="Mount Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="58692" end="58695" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="58715" end="58725" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="58850" end="58860" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q532964" start="59140" end="59155" title="Sisters, Oregon" label="Sisters, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="59680" end="59700" title="New York (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;New York&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023802" start="59923" end="59932" title="marcelled" label="marcelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="60457" end="60481" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="60544" end="60564" title="United States Merchant Marine" label="U.S. Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="60787" end="60814" title="gender reassignment surgery" label="gender reassignment surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="61235" end="61242" title="cistern" label="cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762847" start="61248" end="61264" title="Woodburn, Oregon" label="Woodburn, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="61549" end="61561" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="61573" end="61588" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="61905" end="61932" title="Vancouver, British Columbia" label="Vancouver, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120101" start="61934" end="61950" title="safe deposit box" label="safe deposit box"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="62105" end="62122" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q287382" start="63978" end="63999" title="Westfield, New Jersey" label="Westfield, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q750215" start="64309" end="64320" title="mass murder" label="mass murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893188" start="64607" end="64621" title="United States special operations forces" label="Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q641449" start="64720" end="64738" title="negligent homicide" label="negligent homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="64976" end="64985" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="65664" end="65676" title="Green Berets" label="Green Berets"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="65740" end="65755" title="warrant officer" label="warrant officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902381" start="65763" end="65782" title="Utah National Guard" label="Utah National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="65954" end="65969" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="65999" end="66005" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="66007" end="66015" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8688" start="66210" end="66245" title="San Francisco International Airport" label="San Francisco International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23443" start="66312" end="66323" title="Provo, Utah" label="Provo, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890881" start="66597" end="66627" title="Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary" label="Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="66739" end="66753" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q379497" start="69068" end="69079" title="smokejumper" label="smokejumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="69212" end="69233" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="70280" end="70288" title="deportation" label="deported"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232246" start="70335" end="70347" title="check kiting" label="check kiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q283777" start="70465" end="70471" title="mayday" label="mayday"/>
<link wikidata="Q584588" start="70551" end="70563" title="Monterey Bay" label="Monterey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q494723" start="70594" end="70615" title="Fullerton, California" label="Fullerton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332286" start="70644" end="70651" title="forgery" label="forging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="71079" end="71086" title="History (American TV network)" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q28018667" start="71145" end="71162" title="Thomas J. Colbert" label="Thomas J. Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770482" start="71201" end="71210" title="Mark Zaid" label="Mark Zaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="71284" end="71310" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="Freedom of Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="71479" end="71496" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="72162" end="72168" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065481" start="73220" end="73240" title="Cle Elum, Washington" label="Cle Elum, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837707" start="73686" end="73707" title="Michigan State Police" label="Michigan State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905670" start="74641" end="74657" title="reasonable doubt" label="reasonable doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547338" start="74705" end="74718" title="The Oregonian" label="The Oregonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q648622" start="74789" end="74811" title="Bloomfield, New Jersey" label="Bloomfield, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="75037" end="75055" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490228" start="75141" end="75163" title="Lehigh Valley Railroad" label="Lehigh Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428642" start="75188" end="75223" title="Penn Central Transportation Company" label="Penn Central Transportation Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794819" start="76244" end="76255" title="Max Gunther" label="Max Gunther"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="76356" end="76363" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="76367" end="76373" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073606" start="76381" end="76396" title="Oak Island Yard" label="Oak Island Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156810" start="76436" end="76446" title="yardmaster" label="yardmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q115478963" start="78138" end="78154" title="Paul Joseph Cini" label="Paul Joseph Cini"/>
<link wikidata="Q185339" start="78171" end="78181" title="Air Canada" label="Air Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q223315" start="78182" end="78186" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-8" label="DC-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933323" start="78497" end="78511" title="Hughes Airwest" label="Hughes Airwest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78512" end="78522" title="Hughes Airwest#1972 hijacking" label="Flight 800"/>
<link wikidata="Q853886" start="78526" end="78556" title="McCarran International Airport" label="McCarran International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="78634" end="78638" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9" label="DC-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327734" start="79033" end="79050" title="Richard McCoy Jr." label="Richard McCoy Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="79090" end="79105" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984453" start="79286" end="79304" title="Frederick Hahneman" label="Frederick Hahneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="79333" end="79350" title="Eastern Air Lines" label="Eastern Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="79358" end="79381" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238" start="79579" end="79590" title="Tegucigalpa" label="Tegucigalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178550" start="80025" end="80039" title="submachine gun" label="submachine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="80068" end="80085" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="80104" end="80123" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="80128" end="80133" title="Tulsa" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="80174" end="80181" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q386657" start="80302" end="80315" title="Peru, Indiana" label="Peru, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="80359" end="80366" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80529" end="80545" title="#Airport security" label="Airport security"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="80940" end="80946" title="Valium" label="Valium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067853" start="81374" end="81393" title="Federal Air Marshal Service" label="Sky Marshal Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="81748" end="81764" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q930534" start="82022" end="82033" title="Samuel Byck" label="Samuel Byck"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="82075" end="82086" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167849" start="82312" end="82323" title="Cooper vane" label="Cooper vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q82711" start="82814" end="82822" title="peephole" label="peephole"/>
<link wikidata="Q677831" start="83052" end="83069" title="Piedmont Airlines (1948–1989)" label="Piedmont Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398015" start="83196" end="83208" title="Key Airlines" label="Key Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q735912" start="83327" end="83348" title="Nellis Air Force Base" label="Nellis Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442240" start="83357" end="83375" title="Tonopah Test Range" label="Tonopah Test Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q184491" start="83387" end="83402" title="Lockheed F-117 Nighthawk" label="F-117 Nighthawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="83474" end="83481" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q127649" start="83482" end="83499" title="aircraft boneyard" label="aircraft boneyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q986378" start="83655" end="83678" title="Woodinville, Washington" label="Woodinville, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055205" start="85121" end="85130" title="Cold case" label="Cold case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358328" start="85133" end="85148" title="Gentleman thief" label="Gentleman thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605121" start="85151" end="85178" title="List of aircraft hijackings" label="List of aircraft hijackings"/>
<link wikidata="Q55619355" start="85181" end="85227" title="List of fugitives from justice who disappeared" label="List of fugitives from justice who disappeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794819" start="85317" end="85331" title="Max Gunther" label="Gunther&amp;#x27;s"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8805" wikidata="Q1229663" url="?curid=8805" title="Distributism">
<text>Distributism is an economic theory asserting that the world&#x27;s productive assets should be widely owned rather than concentrated. Developed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, distributism was based upon Catholic social teaching principles, especially those of Pope Leo XIII in his encyclical &quot;Rerum novarum&quot; (1891) and Pope Pius XI in &quot;Quadragesimo anno&quot; (1931). It has influenced Anglo Christian Democratic movements, and has been recognized as one of many influences on the social market economy.

Distributism views &quot;laissez-faire&quot; capitalism and state socialism as equally flawed and exploitative, due to their extreme concentration of ownership. Instead, it favours small independent craftsmen and producers; or, if that is not possible, economic mechanisms such as cooperatives and member-owned mutual organisations, as well as small to medium enterprises and vigorous anti-trust laws to restrain or eliminate overweening economic power. Christian democratic political parties such as the American Solidarity Party have advocated distributism alongside social market economy in their economic policies and party platform.

== Overview ==
According to distributists, the right to property is a fundamental right, and the means of production should be spread as widely as possible rather than being centralised under the control of the state (statocracy), a few individuals (plutocracy), or corporations (corporatocracy). Therefore, distributism advocates a society marked by widespread property ownership. Cooperative economist Race Mathews argues that such a system is key to creating a just social order.

Distributism has often been described in opposition to both &quot;laissez-faire&quot; capitalism and state socialism which distributists see as equally flawed and exploitative. Furthermore, some distributists argue that state capitalism and state socialism are the logical conclusion of capitalism as capitalism&#x27;s concentrated powers eventually capture the state. Thomas Storck argues: &quot;Both socialism and capitalism are products of the European Enlightenment and are thus modernising and anti-traditional forces. In contrast, distributism seeks to subordinate economic activity to human life as a whole, to our spiritual life, our intellectual life, our family life.&quot; A few distributists, including Dorothy Day, were influenced by the economic ideas of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and his mutualist economic theory. The lesser-known anarchist branch of distributism of Day and the Catholic Worker Movement can be considered a form of free-market libertarian socialism due to their opposition to state capitalism and state socialism.

Some have seen it more as an aspiration, successfully realised in the short term by the commitment to the principles of subsidiarity and solidarity (built into financially independent local cooperatives and small family businesses). However, proponents also cite such periods as the Middle Ages as examples of the long-term historical viability of distributism. Particularly influential in the development of distributist theory were Catholic authors G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc, two of distributism&#x27;s earliest and strongest proponents.

== Background ==

The mid-to-late 19th century witnessed an increase in the popularity of political Catholicism across Europe. According to historian Michael A. Riff, a common feature of these movements was opposition to secularism, capitalism, and socialism. In 1891 Pope Leo XIII promulgated &quot;Rerum novarum&quot;, in which he addressed the &quot;misery and wretchedness pressing so unjustly on the majority of the working class&quot; and spoke of how &quot;a small number of very rich men&quot; had been able to &quot;lay upon the teeming masses of the laboring poor a yoke little better than that of slavery itself&quot;. Affirmed in the encyclical was the right of all men to own property, the necessity of a system that allowed &quot;as many as possible of the people to become owners&quot;, the duty of employers to provide safe working conditions and sufficient wages, and the right of workers to unionise. Common and government property ownership was expressly dismissed as a means of helping the poor.

Around the start of the 20th century, G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc drew together the disparate experiences of the various cooperatives and friendly societies in Northern England, Ireland, and Northern Europe into a coherent political theory which specifically advocated widespread private ownership of housing and control of industry through owner-operated small businesses and worker-controlled cooperatives. In the United States in the 1930s, distributism was treated in numerous essays by Chesterton, Belloc and others in &quot;The American Review&quot;, published and edited by Seward Collins. Pivotal among Belloc&#x27;s and Chesterton&#x27;s other works regarding distributism are &quot;The Servile State&quot; and &quot;Outline of Sanity&quot;.

== Economic theory ==
=== Private property ===
In &quot;Rerum novarum&quot;, Leo XIII states that people are likely to work harder and with greater commitment if they possess the land on which they labour, which in turn will benefit them and their families as workers will be able to provide for themselves and their household. He puts forward the idea that when men have the opportunity to possess property and work on it, they will &quot;learn to love the very soil which yields in response to the labor of their hands, not only food to eat, but an abundance of the good things for themselves and those that are dear to them&quot;. He also states that owning property is beneficial for a person and his family and is, in fact, a right due to God having &quot;given the earth for the use and enjoyment of the whole human race&quot;.

G. K. Chesterton presents similar views in his 1910 book, &quot;What&#x27;s Wrong with the World&quot;. Chesterton believes that whilst God has limitless capabilities, man has limited abilities in terms of creation. Therefore, man is entitled to own property and treat it as he sees fit, stating: &quot;Property is merely the art of the democracy. It means that every man should have something that he can shape in his own image, as he is shaped in the image of heaven. But because he is not God, but only a graven image of God, his self-expression must deal with limits; properly with limits that are strict and even small.&quot;

According to Belloc, the distributive state (the state which has implemented distributism) contains &quot;an agglomeration of families of varying wealth, but by far the greater number of owners of the means of production&quot;. This broader distribution does not extend to all property but only to productive property; that is, that property which produces wealth, namely, the things needed for man to survive. It includes land, tools, and so on. Distributism allows society to have public goods such as parks and transit systems. Distributists accept that wage labour will remain a small part of the economy, with small business owners hiring employees, usually young, inexperienced people.

=== Redistribution of wealth and productive assets ===
Distributism requires either direct or indirect distribution of the means of production (productive assets)⁠—in some ideological circles including the redistribution of wealth—to a wide portion of society instead of concentrating it in the hands of a minority of wealthy elites (as seen in its criticism of certain varieties of capitalism) or the hands of the state (as seen in its criticism of certain varieties of communism and socialism). More capitalist-oriented supporters support distributism-influenced social capitalism (also known as a social market economy), while more socialist-oriented supporters support distributism-influenced libertarian socialism. Examples of methods of distributism include direct productive property redistribution, taxation of excessive property ownership, and small-business subsidization.

=== Guild system ===
Distributists advocate in favour of the return of a guild system to help regulate industries to promote moral standards of professional conduct and economic equality among members of a guild. Such moral standards of professional conduct would typically focus on business conduct, working conditions and other issues in relation to industry specific matters such as workplace training standards.

=== Banks ===
Distributism favours cooperative and mutual banking institutions such as credit unions, building societies and mutual banks. This is considered to be the preferred alternative to private banks.

== Social theory ==
=== Human family ===
G. K. Chesterton considered one&#x27;s home and family the centrepiece of society. He recognized the family unit and home as centrepieces of living and believed that every man should have his property and home to enable him to raise and support his family. Distributists recognize that strengthening and protecting the family requires that society be nurturing.

=== Subsidiarity ===

Distributism puts great emphasis on the principle of subsidiarity. This principle holds that no larger unit (whether social, economic, or political) should perform a function that a smaller unit can perform. In &quot;Quadragesimo anno&quot;, Pope Pius XI provided the classical statement of the principle: &quot;Just as it is gravely wrong to take from individuals what they can accomplish by their own initiative and industry and give it to the community, so also it is an injustice and at the same time a grave evil and disturbance of right order to assign to a greater and higher association what lesser and subordinate organizations can do&quot;.

=== Social security ===
The Democratic Labour Party of Australia espouses distributism and does not hold the view of favouring the elimination of social security who, for instance, wish to &quot;[r]aise the level of student income support payments to the Henderson poverty line&quot;.

The American Solidarity Party has a platform of favouring an adequate social security system, stating: &quot;We advocate for social safety nets that adequately provide for the material needs of the most vulnerable in society&quot;.

== Politics ==
The position of distributists, when compared to other political philosophies, is somewhat paradoxical and complicated (see triangulation). Firmly entrenched in an organic but very English Catholicism, advocating culturally traditional and agrarian values, directly challenging the precepts of Whig history—Belloc was nonetheless an MP for the Liberal Party, and Chesterton once stated, &quot;As much as I ever did, more than I ever did, I believe in Liberalism. But there was a rosy time of innocence when I believed in Liberals&quot;.

Distributism does not favour one political order over another (political accidentalism). While some distributists such as Dorothy Day have been anarchists, it should be remembered that most Chestertonian distributists are opposed to the mere concept of anarchism. Chesterton thought that distributism would benefit from the discipline that theoretical analysis imposes and that distributism is best seen as a widely encompassing concept inside of which any number of interpretations and perspectives can fit. This concept should fit a political system broadly characterized by widespread ownership of productive property.

In the United States, the American Solidarity Party generally adheres to Distributist principles as its economic model. Ross Douthat and Reihan Salam view their &quot;Grand New Party&quot;, a roadmap for revising the Republican Party in the United States, as &quot;a book written in the distributist tradition&quot;.

The Brazilian political party, Humanist Party of Solidarity, was a distributist party, alongside the National Distributist Party in England, and the Democratic Labour Party in Australia.

In the first round of the 2024 Romanian presidential election, candidate Călin Georgescu, a independent candidate who advocates for a system based on distributism and sovereigntism received 23% of votes and qualified for the second round.

== Influence ==

=== E. F. Schumacher ===
Distributism is known to have influenced the economist E. F. Schumacher, a convert to Catholicism.

=== Mondragon Corporation ===
The Mondragon Corporation, based in the Basque Country in a region of Spain and France, was founded by a Catholic priest, Father José María Arizmendiarrieta, who seems to have been influenced by the same Catholic social and economic teachings that inspired Belloc, Chesterton, Father Vincent McNabb, and the other founders of distributism.

=== Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic ===
Distributist ideas were put into practice by The Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic, a group of artists and craftsmen who established a community in Ditchling, Sussex, England, in 1920, with the motto &quot;Men rich in virtue studying beautifulness living in peace in their houses&quot;. The guild sought to recreate an idealised medieval lifestyle in the manner of the Arts and Crafts Movement. It survived for almost 70 years until 1989.

=== Big Society ===
The Big Society was the flagship policy idea of the 2010 UK Conservative Party general election manifesto. Some distributists claim that the rhetorical marketing of this policy was influenced by aphorisms of the distributist ideology and promotes distributism. It purportedly formed a part of the legislative programme of the Conservative – Liberal Democrat Coalition Agreement.

== List of distributist parties ==

=== Current ===

* Australia – Democratic Labour Party
* Romania – Pirate Party Romania
* United Kingdom – National Distributist Party, British National Party, National Front
* United States – American Solidarity Party
* Mexico - Nationalist Front of Mexico

=== Historical ===
* United Kingdom – Distributist League (1926–1940), Third Way (1990–2006)
* Brazil – Humanist Party of Solidarity (1995–2019)

== Notable distributists ==
=== Historical ===

* Herbert Agar
* Hilaire Belloc

* L. Brent Bozell Jr.
* Cecil Chesterton
* G. K. Chesterton
* Seward Collins
* Dorothy Day
* Adam Doboszyński
* Peter Maurin
* Horacio de la Costa
* J. P. de Fonseka
* Eric Gill
* Douglas Hyde
* Gustavo Corção 
* Saunders Lewis
* Vincent McNabb
* Arthur Penty
* Hilary Pepler
* Óscar Romero
* William Purcell Witcutt
* Dorothy L. Sayers
=== Contemporary ===

* Dale Ahlquist
* Phillip Blond
* Allan C. Carlson
* David W. Cooney
* Charles A. Coulombe
* Sean Domencic
* Bill Kauffman
* Race Mathews
* Joseph Pearce
* Douglas Rushkoff
* John Sharpe
* Albert Bikaj
* John C. Médaille
* Richard Williamson
* Călin Georgescu
== Key texts ==
* Rerum novarum (1891), papal encyclical by Pope Leo XIII.
* Quadragesimo anno (1931), papal encyclical by Pope Pius XI.
* Centesimus Annus (1991), papal encyclical by Pope John Paul II.
* Evangelii gaudium (2013), apostolic exhortation by Pope Francis.
* &quot;What&#x27;s Wrong with the World&quot; (1910) by G. K. Chesterton – eText.
* &quot;The Outline of Sanity&quot; (1927) by G. K. Chesterton.
* &quot;Utopia of Usurers&quot; (1917) by G. K. Chesterton.
* &quot;The Servile State&quot; (1912) by Hilaire Belloc.
* &quot;An Essay on The Restoration of Property&quot; (1936) by Hilaire Belloc .
* &quot;Jobs of Our Own&quot; (1999) by Race Mathews .

== See also ==

; Related concepts
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

; Similar positions
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Boyle, David. to the Land: Distributism and the politics of life&quot; Steyning: The Real Press, 2019. 
* Cooney, Anthony. &quot;Distributism&quot;. 
* Kurland, Norman. &quot;The Just Third Way: Basic Principles of Economic and Social Justice&quot;, Center for Economic and Social Justice
* Sagar, S. &quot;Distributism&quot;. 
* Saltter, Alexander William. &quot;The Political Economy of Distributism: Property, Liberty, and the Common Good.&quot; Washington, DC. Catholic University of America Press, 2023.
* &quot;Shaw v Chesterton: a Debate between George Bernard Shaw and G. K. Chesterton&quot;. 
* &quot;Union Square Speech&quot; by Dorothy Day
* &quot;Distributism as a means of achieving third way economics&quot;, a paper for the Secular Party of Australia written by Richard Howard of the Humanist Society of New South Wales
* Pabst, Adrian. &quot;Pope Benedict&#x27;s call for a civil economy&quot;. &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 20 July 2009.

== External links ==
* The Distributist Review</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1229663" start="0" end="12" title="Distributism" label="Distributism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="19" end="34" title="economic theory" label="economic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="215" end="239" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="272" end="285" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="293" end="303" title="encyclical" label="encyclical"/>
<link wikidata="Q335987" start="310" end="323" title="Rerum novarum" label="Rerum novarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="341" end="353" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q596381" start="363" end="380" title="Quadragesimo anno" label="Quadragesimo anno"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="419" end="439" title="Christian Democratic" label="Christian Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="508" end="529" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="557" end="570" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="577" end="587" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="592" end="607" title="state socialism" label="state socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="813" end="824" title="cooperative" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q955214" start="843" end="862" title="mutual organization" label="mutual organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622439" start="876" end="903" title="Small and medium-sized enterprises" label="small to medium enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="917" end="932" title="competition law" label="anti-trust laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="986" end="1006" title="Christian democratic" label="Christian democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24263796" start="1037" end="1062" title="American Solidarity Party" label="American Solidarity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="1101" end="1122" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="1218" end="1235" title="right to property" label="right to property"/>
<link wikidata="Q260747" start="1268" end="1287" title="means of production" label="means of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q322294" start="1389" end="1399" title="statocracy" label="statocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131708" start="1421" end="1431" title="plutocracy" label="plutocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383947" start="1451" end="1465" title="corporatocracy" label="corporatocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137487" start="1553" end="1574" title="Cooperative economist" label="Cooperative economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278910" start="1575" end="1587" title="Race Mathews" label="Race Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518716" start="1640" end="1652" title="social order" label="social order"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="1721" end="1734" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="1741" end="1751" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="1756" end="1771" title="state socialism" label="state socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="1942" end="1952" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="2102" end="2124" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="European Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q150281" start="2370" end="2381" title="Dorothy Day" label="Dorothy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749" start="2424" end="2446" title="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon" label="Pierre-Joseph Proudhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q844212" start="2455" end="2464" title="Mutualism (economic theory)" label="mutualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="2499" end="2508" title="anarchist" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051103" start="2547" end="2571" title="Catholic Worker Movement" label="Catholic Worker Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852084" start="2612" end="2633" title="libertarian socialism" label="libertarian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q466938" start="2820" end="2832" title="subsidiarity" label="subsidiarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q815726" start="2837" end="2847" title="Social solidarity" label="solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="2890" end="2901" title="cooperative" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395324" start="2913" end="2928" title="family business" label="family business"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2983" end="2994" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3134" end="3142" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="3151" end="3167" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q333106" start="3172" end="3186" title="Hilaire Belloc" label="Hilaire Belloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q834554" start="3341" end="3362" title="political Catholicism" label="political Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3370" end="3376" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="3472" end="3482" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="3519" end="3532" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q335987" start="3551" end="3564" title="Rerum novarum" label="Rerum novarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643453" start="4091" end="4109" title="working conditions" label="working conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="4160" end="4168" title="Trade union" label="unionise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117368" start="4170" end="4176" title="Common ownership" label="Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="4181" end="4191" title="government ownership" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="4306" end="4322" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q333106" start="4327" end="4341" title="Hilaire Belloc" label="Hilaire Belloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976354" start="4414" end="4432" title="Friendly society" label="friendly societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870659" start="4806" end="4825" title="The American Review (literary journal)" label="The American Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958553" start="4857" end="4871" title="Seward Collins" label="Seward Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763395" start="4968" end="4985" title="The Servile State" label="The Servile State"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="5863" end="5879" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q260747" start="7311" end="7330" title="means of production" label="means of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155757" start="7394" end="7418" title="Redistribution of income and wealth" label="redistribution of wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="7571" end="7581" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="7659" end="7668" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="7673" end="7682" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="7753" end="7810" title="Social market economy" label="social capitalism (also known as a social market economy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852084" start="7885" end="7906" title="libertarian socialism" label="libertarian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111088" start="8682" end="8694" title="private bank" label="private bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="8739" end="8755" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q596381" start="9341" end="9358" title="Quadragesimo anno" label="Quadragesimo anno"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="9366" end="9378" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054871" start="9804" end="9840" title="Democratic Labour Party (Australia, 1980)" label="Democratic Labour Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24263796" start="10066" end="10091" title="American Solidarity Party" label="American Solidarity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840153" start="10433" end="10446" title="Triangulation (politics)" label="triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101794" start="10473" end="10480" title="Organic (model)" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135773" start="10490" end="10509" title="Catholic Church in England and Wales" label="English Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="10549" end="10557" title="Agrarianism" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660437" start="10603" end="10615" title="Whig history" label="Whig history"/>
<link wikidata="Q150281" start="10969" end="10980" title="Dorothy Day" label="Dorothy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="10991" end="11001" title="Anarchism" label="anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q24263796" start="11496" end="11521" title="American Solidarity Party" label="American Solidarity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369293" start="11590" end="11602" title="Ross Douthat" label="Ross Douthat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310120" start="11607" end="11619" title="Reihan Salam" label="Reihan Salam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11687" end="11724" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453205" start="11819" end="11847" title="Humanist Party of Solidarity" label="Humanist Party of Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11889" end="11916" title="National Distributist Party" label="National Distributist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054871" start="11937" end="11960" title="Democratic Labour Party (Australia, 1980)" label="Democratic Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q84029141" start="12002" end="12037" title="2024 Romanian presidential election" label="2024 Romanian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021363" start="12049" end="12064" title="Călin Georgescu" label="Călin Georgescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q912036" start="12143" end="12156" title="sovereigntism" label="sovereigntism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76526" start="12313" end="12329" title="E. F. Schumacher" label="E. F. Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q163327" start="12392" end="12413" title="Mondragon Corporation" label="Mondragon Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="12428" end="12442" title="Basque Country (historical territory)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366898" start="12517" end="12544" title="José María Arizmendiarrieta" label="José María Arizmendiarrieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="12592" end="12630" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social and economic teachings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402567" start="12672" end="12686" title="Vincent McNabb" label="Vincent McNabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738469" start="12816" end="12853" title="The Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic" label="The Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270518" start="12919" end="12928" title="Ditchling" label="Ditchling"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="13140" end="13164" title="Arts and Crafts Movement" label="Arts and Crafts Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q859284" start="13235" end="13246" title="Big Society" label="Big Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601047" start="13288" end="13336" title="List of UK Conservative Party general election manifestos" label="UK Conservative Party general election manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163113" start="13557" end="13608" title="Conservative – Liberal Democrat Coalition Agreement" label="Conservative – Liberal Democrat Coalition Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054871" start="13678" end="13701" title="Democratic Labour Party (Australia, 1980)" label="Democratic Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362565" start="13714" end="13734" title="Pirate Party Romania" label="Pirate Party Romania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13754" end="13781" title="National Distributist Party" label="National Distributist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q161269" start="13783" end="13805" title="British National Party" label="British National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q158093" start="13807" end="13821" title="National Front (UK)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q24263796" start="13840" end="13865" title="American Solidarity Party" label="American Solidarity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9053031" start="13877" end="13904" title="Nationalist Front of Mexico" label="Nationalist Front of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512294" start="13944" end="13963" title="Distributist League" label="Distributist League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785007" start="13977" end="13986" title="Third Way (UK organisation)" label="Third Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453205" start="14010" end="14038" title="Humanist Party of Solidarity" label="Humanist Party of Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785131" start="14102" end="14114" title="Herbert Agar" label="Herbert Agar"/>
<link wikidata="Q333106" start="14117" end="14131" title="Hilaire Belloc" label="Hilaire Belloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456366" start="14135" end="14154" title="L. Brent Bozell Jr." label="L. Brent Bozell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2943680" start="14157" end="14173" title="Cecil Chesterton" label="Cecil Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="14176" end="14192" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958553" start="14195" end="14209" title="Seward Collins" label="Seward Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q150281" start="14212" end="14223" title="Dorothy Day" label="Dorothy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9139489" start="14226" end="14242" title="Adam Doboszyński" label="Adam Doboszyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q711957" start="14245" end="14257" title="Peter Maurin" label="Peter Maurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902463" start="14260" end="14279" title="Horacio de la Costa" label="Horacio de la Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106730" start="14282" end="14298" title="J. P. de Fonseka" label="J. P. de Fonseka"/>
<link wikidata="Q551426" start="14301" end="14310" title="Eric Gill" label="Eric Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301625" start="14313" end="14325" title="Douglas Hyde (author)" label="Douglas Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905941" start="14328" end="14342" title="Gustavo Corção" label="Gustavo Corção"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420498" start="14346" end="14360" title="Saunders Lewis" label="Saunders Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402567" start="14363" end="14377" title="Vincent McNabb" label="Vincent McNabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799961" start="14380" end="14392" title="Arthur Penty" label="Arthur Penty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760944" start="14395" end="14408" title="Hilary Pepler" label="Hilary Pepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q293455" start="14411" end="14423" title="Óscar Romero" label="Óscar Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017128" start="14426" end="14449" title="William Purcell Witcutt" label="William Purcell Witcutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106740" start="14452" end="14469" title="Dorothy L. Sayers" label="Dorothy L. Sayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147581" start="14494" end="14507" title="Dale Ahlquist" label="Dale Ahlquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701399" start="14510" end="14523" title="Phillip Blond" label="Phillip Blond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730504" start="14526" end="14542" title="Allan C. Carlson" label="Allan C. Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074822" start="14563" end="14582" title="Charles A. Coulombe" label="Charles A. Coulombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909665" start="14601" end="14614" title="Bill Kauffman" label="Bill Kauffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278910" start="14617" end="14629" title="Race Mathews" label="Race Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q95103" start="14632" end="14645" title="Joseph Pearce" label="Joseph Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q717884" start="14648" end="14664" title="Douglas Rushkoff" label="Douglas Rushkoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257440" start="14667" end="14678" title="John Sharpe (publisher)" label="John Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q313347" start="14715" end="14733" title="Richard Williamson (bishop)" label="Richard Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021363" start="14736" end="14751" title="Călin Georgescu" label="Călin Georgescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278910" start="15408" end="15420" title="Race Mathews" label="Race Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053259" start="16020" end="16056" title="Catholic University of America Press" label="Catholic University of America Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q150281" start="16194" end="16205" title="Dorothy Day" label="Dorothy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056210" start="16294" end="16320" title="Secular Party of Australia" label="Secular Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176358" start="16354" end="16389" title="Humanist Society of New South Wales" label="Humanist Society of New South Wales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8807" wikidata="Q408376" url="?curid=8807" title="Dehydroepiandrosterone">
<text>Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), also known as androstenolone, is an endogenous steroid hormone precursor. It is one of the most abundant circulating steroids in humans. DHEA is produced in the adrenal glands, the gonads, and the brain. It functions as a metabolic intermediate in the biosynthesis of the androgen and estrogen sex steroids both in the gonads and in various other tissues. However, DHEA also has a variety of potential biological effects in its own right, binding to an array of nuclear and cell surface receptors, and acting as a neurosteroid and modulator of neurotrophic factor receptors.

In the United States, DHEA is sold as an over-the-counter supplement, and medication called prasterone.

==Biological function==

===As an androgen===
DHEA and other adrenal androgens such as androstenedione, although relatively weak androgens, are responsible for the androgenic effects of adrenarche, such as early pubic and axillary hair growth, adult-type body odor, increased oiliness of hair and skin, and mild acne. DHEA is potentiated locally via conversion into testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in the skin and hair follicles. Women with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS), who have a non-functional androgen receptor (AR) and are immune to the androgenic effects of DHEA and other androgens, have absent or only sparse/scanty pubic and axillary hair and body hair in general, demonstrating the role of DHEA and other androgens in body hair development at both adrenarche and pubarche.

===As an estrogen===
DHEA is a weak estrogen. In addition, it is transformed into potent estrogens such as estradiol in certain tissues such as the vagina, and thereby produces estrogenic effects in such tissues.

===As a neurosteroid===
As a neurosteroid and neurotrophin, DHEA has important effects in the central nervous system.

==Biological activity==

===Hormonal activity===

====Androgen receptor====
Although it functions as an endogenous precursor to more potent androgens such as testosterone and DHT, DHEA has been found to possess some degree of androgenic activity in its own right, acting as a low affinity (Ki = 1 μM), weak partial agonist of the androgen receptor (AR). However, its intrinsic activity at the receptor is quite weak, and on account of that, due to competition for binding with full agonists like testosterone, it can actually behave more like an antagonist depending on circulating testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT) levels, and hence, like an antiandrogen. However, its affinity for the receptor is very low, and for that reason, is unlikely to be of much significance under normal circumstances.

====Estrogen receptors====
In addition to its affinity for the androgen receptor, DHEA has also been found to bind to (and activate) the ERα and ERβ estrogen receptors with Ki values of 1.1 μM and 0.5 μM, respectively, and EC50 values of &gt;1 μM and 200 nM, respectively. Though it was found to be a partial agonist of the ERα with a maximal efficacy of 30–70%, the concentrations required for this degree of activation make it unlikely that the activity of DHEA at this receptor is physiologically meaningful. Remarkably however, DHEA acts as a full agonist of the ERβ with a maximal response similar to or actually slightly greater than that of estradiol, and its levels in circulation and local tissues in the human body are high enough to activate the receptor to the same degree as that seen with circulating estradiol levels at somewhat higher than their maximal, non-ovulatory concentrations; indeed, when combined with estradiol with both at levels equivalent to those of their physiological concentrations, overall activation of the ERβ was doubled.

====Other nuclear receptors====
DHEA does not bind to or activate the progesterone, glucocorticoid, or mineralocorticoid receptors. Other nuclear receptor targets of DHEA besides the androgen and estrogen receptors include the PPARα, PXR, and CAR. However, whereas DHEA is a ligand of the PPARα and PXR in rodents, it is not in humans. In addition to direct interactions, DHEA is thought to regulate a handful of other proteins via indirect, genomic mechanisms, including the enzymes CYP2C11 and 11β-HSD1 – the latter of which is essential for the biosynthesis of the glucocorticoids such as cortisol and has been suggested to be involved in the antiglucocorticoid effects of DHEA – and the carrier protein IGFBP1.

===Neurosteroid activity===

====Neurotransmitter receptors====
DHEA has been found to directly act on several neurotransmitter receptors, including acting as a positive allosteric modulator of the NMDA receptor, as a negative allosteric modulator of the GABAA receptor, and as an agonist of the σ1 receptor.

====Neurotrophin receptors====
In 2011, the surprising discovery was made that DHEA, as well as its sulfate ester, DHEA-S, directly bind to and activate TrkA and p75NTR, receptors of neurotrophins like nerve growth factor (NGF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), with high affinity. DHEA was subsequently also found to bind to TrkB and TrkC with high affinity, though it only activated TrkC not TrkB. DHEA and DHEA-S bound to these receptors with affinities in the low nanomolar range (around 5 nM), which were nonetheless approximately two orders of magnitude lower relative to highly potent polypeptide neurotrophins like NGF (0.01–0.1 nM). In any case, DHEA and DHEA-S both circulate at requisite concentrations to activate these receptors and were thus identified as important endogenous neurotrophic factors. They have since been labeled &quot;steroidal microneurotrophins&quot;, due to their small-molecule and steroidal nature relative to their polypeptide neurotrophin counterparts. Subsequent research has suggested that DHEA and/or DHEA-S may in fact be phylogenetically ancient &quot;ancestral&quot; ligands of the neurotrophin receptors from early on in the evolution of the nervous system. The findings that DHEA binds to and potently activates neurotrophin receptors may explain the positive association between decreased circulating DHEA levels with age and age-related neurodegenerative diseases.

====Microtubule-associated protein 2====
Similarly to pregnenolone, its synthetic derivative 3β-methoxypregnenolone (MAP-4343), and progesterone, DHEA has been found to bind to microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), specifically the MAP2C subtype (Kd = 27 μM). However, it is unclear whether DHEA increases binding of MAP2 to tubulin like pregnenolone.

====ADHD====
Some research has shown that DHEA levels are too low in people with ADHD, and treatment with methylphenidate or bupropion (stimulant type of medications) normalizes DHEA levels. 

===Other activity===

====G6PDH inhibitor====
DHEA is an uncompetitive inhibitor of (Ki = 17 μM; IC50 = 18.7 μM), and is able to lower levels and reduce NADPH-dependent free radical production. It is thought that this action may possibly be responsible for much of the antiinflammatory, antihyperplastic, chemopreventative, antihyperlipidemic, antidiabetic, and antiobesic, as well as certain immunomodulating activities of DHEA (with some experimental evidence to support this notion available). However, it has also been said that inhibition of G6PDH activity by DHEA &quot;in vivo&quot; has not been observed and that the concentrations required for DHEA to inhibit G6PDH &quot;in vitro&quot; are very high, thus making the possible contribution of G6PDH inhibition to the effects of DHEA uncertain.

====Cancer====
DHEA supplements have been promoted in supplement form for its claimed cancer prevention properties; there is no scientific evidence to support these claims.

====Miscellaneous====
DHEA has been found to competitively inhibit TRPV1.

==Biochemistry==
===Biosynthesis===
DHEA is produced in the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex under the control of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and by the gonads under the control of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). It is also produced in the brain. DHEA is synthesized from cholesterol via the enzymes cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme (CYP11A1; P450scc) and 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1), with pregnenolone and 17α-hydroxypregnenolone as intermediates. It is derived mostly from the adrenal cortex, with only about 10% being secreted from the gonads. Approximately 50 to 70% of circulating DHEA originates from desulfation of DHEA-S in peripheral tissues. DHEA-S itself originates almost exclusively from the adrenal cortex, with 95 to 100% being secreted from the adrenal cortex in women.

====Increasing endogenous production====
Regular exercise is known to increase DHEA production in the body. Calorie restriction has also been shown to increase DHEA in primates. Some theorize that the increase in endogenous DHEA brought about by calorie restriction is partially responsible for the longer life expectancy known to be associated with calorie restriction.

===Distribution===
In the circulation, DHEA is mainly bound to albumin, with a small amount bound to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG). The small remainder of DHEA not associated with albumin or SHBG is unbound and free in the circulation.

DHEA easily crosses the blood–brain barrier into the central nervous system.

===Metabolism===
DHEA is transformed into DHEA-S by sulfation at the C3β position via the sulfotransferase enzymes SULT2A1 and to a lesser extent SULT1E1. This occurs naturally in the adrenal cortex and during first-pass metabolism in the liver and intestines when exogenous DHEA is administered orally. Levels of DHEA-S in circulation are approximately 250 to 300 times those of DHEA. DHEA-S in turn can be converted back into DHEA in peripheral tissues via steroid sulfatase (STS).

The terminal half-life of DHEA is short at only 15 to 30 minutes. In contrast, the terminal half-life of DHEA-S is far longer, at 7 to 10 hours. As DHEA-S can be converted back into DHEA, it serves as a circulating reservoir for DHEA, thereby extending the duration of DHEA.

Metabolites of DHEA include DHEA-S, 7α-hydroxy-DHEA, 7β-hydroxy-DHEA, 7-keto-DHEA, 7α-hydroxyepiandrosterone, and 7β-hydroxyepiandrosterone, as well as androstenediol and androstenedione.

====Pregnancy====
During pregnancy, DHEA-S is metabolized into the sulfates of 16α-hydroxy-DHEA and 15α-hydroxy-DHEA in the fetal liver as intermediates in the production of the estrogens estriol and estetrol, respectively.

===Levels===
Prior to puberty in humans, DHEA and DHEA-S levels elevate upon differentiation of the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex. Peak levels of DHEA and DHEA-S are observed around age 20, which is followed by an age-dependent decline throughout life eventually back to prepubertal concentrations. Plasma levels of DHEA in adult men are 10 to 25 nM, in premenopausal women are 5 to 30 nM, and in postmenopausal women are 2 to 20 nM. Conversely, DHEA-S levels are an order of magnitude higher at 1–10 μM. Levels of DHEA and DHEA-S decline to the lower nanomolar and micromolar ranges in men and women aged 60 to 80 years.

DHEA levels are as follows:
* Adult men: 180–1250 ng/dL
* Adult women: 130–980 ng/dL
* Pregnant women: 135–810 ng/dL
* Prepubertal children (&lt;1 year): 26–585 ng/dL
* Prepubertal children (1–5 years): 9–68 ng/dL
* Prepubertal children (6–12 years): 11–186 ng/dL
* Adolescent boys (Tanner II–III): 25–300 ng/dL
* Adolescent girls (Tanner II–III): 69–605 ng/dL
* Adolescent boys (Tanner IV–V): 100–400 ng/dL
* Adolescent girls (Tanner IV–V): 165–690 ng/dL

===Measurement===
As almost all DHEA is derived from the adrenal glands, blood measurements of DHEA-S/DHEA are useful to detect excess adrenal activity as seen in adrenal cancer or hyperplasia, including certain forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Women with polycystic ovary syndrome tend to have elevated levels of DHEA-S.

==Chemistry==
DHEA, also known as androst-5-en-3β-ol-17-one, is a naturally occurring androstane steroid and a 17-ketosteroid. It is closely related structurally to androstenediol (androst-5-ene-3β,17β-diol), androstenedione (androst-4-ene-3,17-dione), and testosterone (androst-4-en-17β-ol-3-one). DHEA is the 5-dehydro analogue of epiandrosterone (5α-androstan-3β-ol-17-one) and is also known as 5-dehydroepiandrosterone or as δ5-epiandrosterone.

===Isomers===
The term &quot;dehydroepiandrosterone&quot; is ambiguous chemically because it does not include the specific positions within epiandrosterone at which hydrogen atoms are missing. DHEA itself is 5,6-didehydroepiandrosterone or 5-dehydroepiandrosterone. A number of naturally occurring isomers also exist and may have similar activities. Some isomers of DHEA are 1-dehydroepiandrosterone (1-androsterone) and 4-dehydroepiandrosterone. These isomers are also technically &quot;DHEA&quot;, since they are dehydroepiandrosterones in which hydrogens are removed from the epiandrosterone skeleton.

Dehydroandrosterone (DHA) is the 3α-epimer of DHEA and is also an endogenous androgen.

==History==
DHEA was first isolated from human urine in 1934 by Adolf Butenandt and Kurt Tscherning.

==See also==
* Epigenetic clock

==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q408376" start="0" end="22" title="Dehydroepiandrosterone" label="Dehydroepiandrosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q408376" start="24" end="28" title="Dehydroepiandrosterone" label="DHEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q408376" start="45" end="59" title="Dehydroepiandrosterone" label="androstenolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="67" end="77" title="endogenous" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q422137" start="78" end="93" title="steroid hormone" label="steroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="148" end="155" title="steroid" label="steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q712294" start="192" end="205" title="adrenal gland" label="adrenal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="212" end="217" title="gonad" label="gonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864654" start="253" end="275" title="metabolic intermediate" label="metabolic intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q851162" start="283" end="295" title="biosynthesis" label="biosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="303" end="311" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="316" end="324" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q422812" start="325" end="336" title="sex steroid" label="sex steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="378" end="384" title="tissue (biology)" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q422500" start="493" end="500" title="nuclear receptor" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476074" start="505" end="526" title="cell surface receptor" label="cell surface receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659374" start="545" end="557" title="neurosteroid" label="neurosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6996837" start="575" end="603" title="neurotrophic factor receptor" label="neurotrophic factor receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154971" start="648" end="664" title="over-the-counter" label="over-the-counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="665" end="675" title="dietary supplement" label="supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630367" start="699" end="709" title="prasterone" label="prasterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q411064" start="799" end="814" title="androstenedione" label="androstenedione"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774177" start="898" end="908" title="adrenarche" label="adrenarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q54795" start="924" end="929" title="pubic hair" label="pubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q340687" start="934" end="947" title="axillary hair" label="axillary hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328199" start="967" end="976" title="body odor" label="body odor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="1024" end="1028" title="acne" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="1078" end="1090" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q411054" start="1095" end="1114" title="dihydrotestosterone" label="dihydrotestosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q866324" start="1137" end="1150" title="hair follicle" label="hair follicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q473262" start="1164" end="1204" title="complete androgen insensitivity syndrome" label="complete androgen insensitivity syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q416601" start="1239" end="1256" title="androgen receptor" label="androgen receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167872" start="1394" end="1403" title="body hair" label="body hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q490608" start="1515" end="1523" title="pubarche" label="pubarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="1562" end="1570" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q422416" start="1633" end="1642" title="estradiol" label="estradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="1674" end="1680" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659374" start="1769" end="1781" title="neurosteroid" label="neurosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q420457" start="1786" end="1798" title="neurotrophin" label="neurotrophin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="1834" end="1856" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q247994" start="1974" end="1983" title="precursor (biochemistry)" label="precursor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066956" start="1992" end="1998" title="potency (pharmacology)" label="potent"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="2085" end="2093" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q899107" start="2139" end="2147" title="affinity (pharmacology)" label="affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q770260" start="2166" end="2181" title="partial agonist" label="partial agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q416601" start="2189" end="2206" title="androgen receptor" label="androgen receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671589" start="2226" end="2244" title="intrinsic activity" label="intrinsic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q912894" start="2307" end="2318" title="competitive inhibition" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507061" start="2323" end="2330" title="molecular binding" label="binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="2336" end="2348" title="full agonist" label="full agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q411054" start="2458" end="2477" title="dihydrotestosterone" label="dihydrotestosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q574820" start="2511" end="2523" title="antiandrogen" label="antiandrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14902310" start="2803" end="2806" title="Estrogen receptor alpha" label="ERα"/>
<link wikidata="Q15329133" start="2811" end="2814" title="Estrogen receptor beta" label="ERβ"/>
<link wikidata="Q416496" start="2815" end="2832" title="estrogen receptor" label="estrogen receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q286136" start="2889" end="2893" title="EC50" label="EC50"/>
<link wikidata="Q422416" start="3314" end="3323" title="estradiol" label="estradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q187082" start="3541" end="3550" title="ovulation" label="ovulatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14872994" start="3797" end="3809" title="progesterone receptor" label="progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14877410" start="3811" end="3825" title="glucocorticoid receptor" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454531" start="3830" end="3856" title="mineralocorticoid receptor" label="mineralocorticoid receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q422500" start="3865" end="3881" title="nuclear receptor" label="nuclear receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q419629" start="3954" end="3959" title="peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor" label="PPARα"/>
<link wikidata="Q409867" start="3961" end="3964" title="pregnane X receptor" label="PXR"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905078" start="3970" end="3973" title="constitutive androstane receptor" label="CAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q899107" start="4002" end="4008" title="ligand (biochemistry)" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="4146" end="4153" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="4203" end="4209" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014962" start="4211" end="4218" title="CYP2C11" label="CYP2C11"/>
<link wikidata="Q171604" start="4223" end="4231" title="11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1" label="11β-HSD1"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="4295" end="4309" title="glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="4319" end="4327" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774743" start="4373" end="4391" title="antiglucocorticoid" label="antiglucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q142943" start="4418" end="4433" title="carrier protein" label="carrier protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027673" start="4434" end="4440" title="Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 1" label="IGFBP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187783" start="4554" end="4579" title="neurotransmitter receptor" label="neurotransmitter receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649417" start="4604" end="4633" title="positive allosteric modulator" label="positive allosteric modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q414896" start="4641" end="4654" title="NMDA receptor" label="NMDA receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649417" start="4661" end="4690" title="negative allosteric modulator" label="negative allosteric modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q60147" start="4698" end="4712" title="GABAA receptor" label="GABAA receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="4724" end="4731" title="agonist" label="agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q408572" start="4739" end="4750" title="sigma-1 receptor" label="σ1 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505402" start="4868" end="4874" title="dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate" label="DHEA-S"/>
<link wikidata="Q14897694" start="4906" end="4910" title="TrkA" label="TrkA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14897872" start="4915" end="4921" title="p75NTR" label="p75NTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q420457" start="4936" end="4948" title="neurotrophin" label="neurotrophin"/>
<link wikidata="Q417782" start="4955" end="4974" title="nerve growth factor" label="nerve growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q123045" start="4985" end="5018" title="brain-derived neurotrophic factor" label="brain-derived neurotrophic factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14897782" start="5091" end="5095" title="TrkB" label="TrkB"/>
<link wikidata="Q14897880" start="5100" end="5104" title="TrkC" label="TrkC"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="5233" end="5242" title="nanomolar" label="nanomolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="5357" end="5368" title="polypeptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064187" start="5556" end="5575" title="neurotrophic factor" label="neurotrophic factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988322" start="5662" end="5676" title="small-molecule" label="small-molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="5934" end="5943" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="5951" end="5965" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6996837" start="6022" end="6043" title="neurotrophin receptor" label="neurotrophin receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755122" start="6149" end="6174" title="neurodegenerative disease" label="neurodegenerative disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q412158" start="6232" end="6244" title="pregnenolone" label="pregnenolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q27290371" start="6271" end="6293" title="3β-methoxypregnenolone" label="3β-methoxypregnenolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963" start="6310" end="6322" title="progesterone" label="progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q21174831" start="6355" end="6387" title="microtubule-associated protein 2" label="microtubule-associated protein 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q422492" start="6506" end="6513" title="tubulin" label="tubulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882889" start="6784" end="6807" title="uncompetitive inhibitor" label="uncompetitive inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q286779" start="6824" end="6828" title="IC50" label="IC50"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="6896" end="6908" title="free radical" label="free radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="6996" end="7012" title="antiinflammatory" label="antiinflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611758" start="7014" end="7030" title="growth inhibition" label="antihyperplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774590" start="7032" end="7049" title="anticarcinogen" label="chemopreventative"/>
<link wikidata="Q955332" start="7051" end="7069" title="lipid-lowering agent" label="antihyperlipidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q575062" start="7071" end="7083" title="antidiabetic" label="antidiabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303753" start="7089" end="7099" title="antiobesity" label="antiobesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427096" start="7120" end="7136" title="immunomodulator" label="immunomodulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="7303" end="7310" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="7408" end="7416" title="in vitro" label="in vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q413209" start="7772" end="7777" title="TRPV1" label="TRPV1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549771" start="7840" end="7856" title="zona reticularis" label="zona reticularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="7864" end="7878" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="7900" end="7927" title="adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="adrenocorticotropic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="7946" end="7951" title="gonad" label="gonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q318896" start="7974" end="8004" title="gonadotropin-releasing hormone" label="gonadotropin-releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="8072" end="8083" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="8092" end="8098" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q412483" start="8100" end="8138" title="cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme" label="cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q408305" start="8162" end="8189" title="17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase" label="17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase"/>
<link wikidata="Q412158" start="8206" end="8218" title="pregnenolone" label="pregnenolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666789" start="8223" end="8246" title="17α-hydroxypregnenolone" label="17α-hydroxypregnenolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864654" start="8250" end="8262" title="metabolic intermediate" label="intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="8295" end="8309" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="8355" end="8360" title="gonad" label="gonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332886" start="8711" end="8730" title="Calorie restriction" label="Calorie restriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="9001" end="9012" title="circulatory system" label="circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11721976" start="9038" end="9045" title="human serum albumin" label="albumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419613" start="9076" end="9104" title="sex hormone-binding globulin" label="sex hormone-binding globulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="9242" end="9261" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="9271" end="9293" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q994559" start="9348" end="9357" title="sulfation" label="sulfation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106916699" start="9386" end="9402" title="sulfotransferase" label="sulfotransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="9403" end="9409" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031784" start="9411" end="9418" title="SULT2A1" label="SULT2A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031757" start="9442" end="9449" title="SULT1E1" label="SULT1E1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330121" start="9506" end="9527" title="first-pass metabolism" label="first-pass metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="9535" end="9540" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="9545" end="9555" title="intestines" label="intestines"/>
<link wikidata="Q293000" start="9561" end="9570" title="exogenous" label="exogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q17832124" start="9755" end="9772" title="steroid sulfatase" label="steroid sulfatase"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="9785" end="9803" title="terminal half-life" label="terminal half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q725307" start="10038" end="10046" title="duration of action" label="duration"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="10057" end="10067" title="Metabolite" label="Metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q27155401" start="10093" end="10108" title="7α-hydroxy-DHEA" label="7α-hydroxy-DHEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q27271468" start="10110" end="10125" title="7β-hydroxy-DHEA" label="7β-hydroxy-DHEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642869" start="10127" end="10138" title="7-keto-DHEA" label="7-keto-DHEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q27158743" start="10140" end="10165" title="7α-hydroxyepiandrosterone" label="7α-hydroxyepiandrosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q27896214" start="10171" end="10196" title="7β-hydroxyepiandrosterone" label="7β-hydroxyepiandrosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817108" start="10209" end="10223" title="androstenediol" label="androstenediol"/>
<link wikidata="Q411064" start="10228" end="10243" title="androstenedione" label="androstenedione"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="10292" end="10303" title="metabolism" label="metabolized"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551082" start="10325" end="10341" title="16α-hydroxy-DHEA" label="16α-hydroxy-DHEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682138" start="10346" end="10362" title="15α-hydroxy-DHEA" label="15α-hydroxy-DHEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="10370" end="10375" title="fetus" label="fetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="10376" end="10381" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864654" start="10385" end="10397" title="metabolic intermediate" label="intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q409721" start="10434" end="10441" title="estriol" label="estriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401078" start="10446" end="10454" title="estetrol" label="estetrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q101065" start="10493" end="10500" title="puberty" label="puberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q210861" start="10548" end="10563" title="cellular differentiation" label="differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549771" start="10571" end="10587" title="zona reticularis" label="zona reticularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="10595" end="10609" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q366868" start="11781" end="11811" title="congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="congenital adrenal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q500816" start="11824" end="11849" title="polycystic ovary syndrome" label="polycystic ovary syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q901227" start="11957" end="11976" title="natural product" label="naturally occurring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846975" start="11977" end="11987" title="androstane" label="androstane"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="11988" end="11995" title="steroid" label="steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q929864" start="12002" end="12016" title="17-ketosteroid" label="17-ketosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817108" start="12056" end="12070" title="androstenediol" label="androstenediol"/>
<link wikidata="Q411064" start="12100" end="12115" title="androstenedione" label="androstenedione"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="12148" end="12160" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q898262" start="12204" end="12211" title="dehydrogenation" label="dehydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q485014" start="12212" end="12220" title="structural analog" label="analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382412" start="12224" end="12239" title="epiandrosterone" label="epiandrosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q27290720" start="12716" end="12740" title="1-dehydroepiandrosterone" label="1-dehydroepiandrosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637119" start="12762" end="12786" title="4-dehydroepiandrosterone" label="4-dehydroepiandrosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382412" start="12920" end="12935" title="epiandrosterone" label="epiandrosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130029" start="12947" end="12966" title="Dehydroandrosterone" label="Dehydroandrosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q926272" start="12983" end="12989" title="epimer" label="epimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="13082" end="13087" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327" start="13099" end="13114" title="Adolf Butenandt" label="Adolf Butenandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154683" start="13152" end="13168" title="Epigenetic clock" label="Epigenetic clock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8811" wikidata="Q2878" url="?curid=8811" title="Discrete Fourier transform">
<text>In mathematics, the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) converts a finite sequence of equally-spaced samples of a function into a same-length sequence of equally-spaced samples of the discrete-time Fourier transform (DTFT), which is a complex-valued function of frequency. The interval at which the DTFT is sampled is the reciprocal of the duration of the input sequence.  An inverse DFT (IDFT) is a Fourier series, using the DTFT samples as coefficients of complex sinusoids at the corresponding DTFT frequencies. It has the same sample-values as the original input sequence. The DFT is therefore said to be a frequency domain representation of the original input sequence. If the original sequence spans all the non-zero values of a function, its DTFT is continuous (and periodic), and the DFT provides discrete samples of one cycle. If the original sequence is one cycle of a periodic function, the DFT provides all the non-zero values of one DTFT cycle.

The DFT is used in the Fourier analysis of many practical applications. In digital signal processing, the function is any quantity or signal that varies over time, such as the pressure of a sound wave, a radio signal, or daily temperature readings, sampled over a finite time interval (often defined by a window function). In image processing, the samples can be the values of pixels along a row or column of a raster image. The DFT is also used to efficiently solve partial differential equations, and to perform other operations such as convolutions or multiplying large integers.

Since it deals with a finite amount of data, it can be implemented in computers by numerical algorithms or even dedicated hardware. These implementations usually employ efficient fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithms; so much so that the terms &quot;FFT&quot; and &quot;DFT&quot; are often used interchangeably. Prior to its current usage, the &quot;FFT&quot; initialism may have also been used for the ambiguous term &quot;finite Fourier transform&quot;.

==Definition==
The &quot;discrete Fourier transform&quot; transforms a sequence of &quot;N&quot; complex numbers formula_1 into another sequence of complex numbers, formula_2 which is defined by:

The transform is sometimes denoted by the symbol formula_3, as in formula_4 or formula_5 or formula_6.

 can be interpreted or derived in various ways, for example: can also be evaluated outside the domain formula_7, and that extended sequence is formula_8-periodic. Accordingly, other sequences of formula_8 indices are sometimes used, such as formula_10 (if formula_8 is even) and formula_12 (if formula_8 is odd), which amounts to swapping the left and right halves of the result of the transform.

The inverse transform is given by:
. is also formula_8-periodic (in index n). In , each formula_15 is a complex number whose polar coordinates are the amplitude and phase of a complex sinusoidal component formula_16 of function formula_17 (see Discrete Fourier series) The sinusoid&#x27;s frequency is formula_18 cycles per formula_8 samples.

The normalization factor multiplying the DFT and IDFT (here 1 and formula_20) and the signs of the exponents are the most common conventions. The only actual requirements of these conventions are that the DFT and IDFT have opposite-sign exponents and that the product of their normalization factors be formula_21 An uncommon normalization of formula_22 for both the DFT and IDFT makes the transform-pair unitary.

==Example==
This example demonstrates how to apply the DFT to a sequence of length formula_23 and the input vector

formula_24

Calculating the DFT of formula_25 using 

formula_26

results in
formula_27

==Properties==

===Linearity===
The DFT is a linear transform, i.e. if formula_28 and formula_29, then for any complex numbers formula_30:
:formula_31

===Time and frequency reversal===
Reversing the time (i.e. replacing formula_32 by formula_33) in formula_34 corresponds to reversing the frequency (i.e. formula_18 by formula_36). Mathematically, if formula_37 represents the vector x then

:if formula_28
:then formula_39

===Conjugation in time===
If formula_40 then formula_41.

===Real and imaginary part===
This table shows some mathematical operations on formula_34 in the time domain and the corresponding effects on its DFT formula_15 in the frequency domain.

=== Orthogonality ===
The vectors formula_44 form an orthogonal basis over the set of &quot;N&quot;-dimensional complex vectors:

:formula_45

where formula_46 is the Kronecker delta. (In the last step, the summation is trivial if formula_47, where it is and otherwise is a geometric series that can be explicitly summed to obtain zero.) This orthogonality condition can be used to derive the formula for the IDFT from the definition of the DFT, and is equivalent to the unitarity property below.

=== The Plancherel theorem and Parseval&#x27;s theorem ===
If formula_15 and formula_49 are the DFTs of formula_34 and formula_51 respectively then Parseval&#x27;s theorem states:

:formula_52

where the star denotes complex conjugation. The Plancherel theorem is a special case of Parseval&#x27;s theorem and states:

:formula_53

These theorems are also equivalent to the unitary condition below.

===Periodicity===
The periodicity can be shown directly from the definition:

: formula_54

Similarly, it can be shown that the IDFT formula leads to a periodic extension.

===Shift theorem===
Multiplying formula_34 by a &quot;linear phase&quot; formula_56 for some integer &quot;m&quot; corresponds to a &quot;circular shift&quot; of the output formula_15: formula_15 is replaced by formula_59, where the subscript is interpreted modulo &quot;N&quot; (i.e., periodically). Similarly, a circular shift of the input formula_34 corresponds to multiplying the output formula_15 by a linear phase. Mathematically, if formula_37 represents the vector x then

:if formula_28
:then formula_64
:and formula_65

===Circular convolution theorem and cross-correlation theorem===
The convolution theorem for the discrete-time Fourier transform (DTFT) indicates that a convolution of two sequences can be obtained as the inverse transform of the product of the individual transforms. An important simplification occurs when one of sequences is N-periodic, denoted here by formula_66 because formula_67 is non-zero at only discrete frequencies (see ), and therefore so is its product with the continuous function formula_68  That leads to a considerable simplification of the inverse transform.

:formula_69

where formula_70 is a periodic summation of the formula_71 sequence: formula_72

Customarily, the DFT and inverse DFT summations are taken over the domain formula_73. Defining those DFTs as formula_74 and formula_75, the result is:

:formula_76

In practice, the formula_71 sequence is usually length &quot;N&quot; or less, and formula_78 is a periodic extension of an N-length formula_79-sequence, which can also be expressed as a &quot;circular function&quot;:

:formula_80
Then the convolution can be written as:
&lt;/math&gt;

which gives rise to the interpretation as a &quot;circular&quot; convolution of formula_71 and formula_82 It is often used to efficiently compute their linear convolution. (see Circular convolution, Fast convolution algorithms, and Overlap-save)

Similarly, the cross-correlation of formula_71 and formula_78 is given by:

:formula_85

=== Uniqueness of the Discrete Fourier Transform ===

As seen above, the discrete Fourier transform has the fundamental property of carrying convolution into componentwise product. A natural question is whether it is the only one with this ability. It has been shown that any linear transform that turns convolution into pointwise product is the DFT up to a permutation of coefficients. Since the number of permutations of n elements equals n!, there exists exactly n! linear and invertible maps with the same fundamental property as the DFT with respect to convolution.

=== Convolution theorem duality ===

It can also be shown that:

:formula_86
::formula_87 which is the circular convolution of formula_88 and formula_89.

===Trigonometric interpolation polynomial===
The trigonometric interpolation polynomial
:formula_90

where the coefficients &quot;X&quot;&quot;k&quot; are given by the DFT of &quot;x&quot;&quot;n&quot; above, satisfies the interpolation property formula_91 for formula_92.

For even &quot;N&quot;, notice that the Nyquist component formula_93 is handled specially.

This interpolation is &quot;not unique&quot;: aliasing implies that one could add &quot;N&quot; to any of the complex-sinusoid frequencies (e.g. changing formula_94 to formula_95) without changing the interpolation property, but giving &quot;different&quot; values in between the formula_34 points. The choice above, however, is typical because it has two useful properties. First, it consists of sinusoids whose frequencies have the smallest possible magnitudes: the interpolation is bandlimited. Second, if the formula_34 are real numbers, then formula_98 is real as well.

In contrast, the most obvious trigonometric interpolation polynomial is the one in which the frequencies range from 0 to formula_99 (instead of roughly formula_100 to formula_101 as above), similar to the inverse DFT formula. This interpolation does &quot;not&quot; minimize the slope, and is &quot;not&quot; generally real-valued for real formula_34; its use is a common mistake.

=== The unitary DFT ===
Another way of looking at the DFT is to note that in the above discussion, the DFT can be expressed as the DFT matrix, a Vandermonde matrix,
introduced by Sylvester in 1867,
:formula_103
where formula_104 is a primitive &quot;N&quot;th root of unity.

For example, in the case when formula_105, formula_106, and
:formula_107
(which is a Hadamard matrix) or when formula_23 as in the above, formula_109, and
:formula_110

The inverse transform is then given by the inverse of the above matrix,
:formula_111

With unitary normalization constants formula_112, the DFT becomes a unitary transformation, defined by a unitary matrix:

:formula_113

where formula_114 is the determinant function. The determinant is the product of the eigenvalues, which are always formula_115 or formula_116 as described below. In a real vector space, a unitary transformation can be thought of as simply a rigid rotation of the coordinate system, and all of the properties of a rigid rotation can be found in the unitary DFT.

The orthogonality of the DFT is now expressed as an orthonormality condition (which arises in many areas of mathematics as described in root of unity):
:formula_117

If X is defined as the unitary DFT of the vector x, then
:formula_118

and the Parseval&#x27;s theorem is expressed as
:formula_119

If we view the DFT as just a coordinate transformation which simply specifies the components of a vector in a new coordinate system, then the above is just the statement that the dot product of two vectors is preserved under a unitary DFT transformation. For the special case formula_120, this implies that the length of a vector is preserved as well — this is just Plancherel theorem,
:formula_121

A consequence of the circular convolution theorem is that the DFT matrix diagonalizes any circulant matrix.

=== Expressing the inverse DFT in terms of the DFT ===
A useful property of the DFT is that the inverse DFT can be easily expressed in terms of the (forward) DFT, via several well-known &quot;tricks&quot;. (For example, in computations, it is often convenient to only implement a fast Fourier transform corresponding to one transform direction and then to get the other transform direction from the first.)

First, we can compute the inverse DFT by reversing all but one of the inputs (Duhamel &quot;et al.&quot;, 1988):

:formula_122

(As usual, the subscripts are interpreted modulo &quot;N&quot;; thus, for formula_123, we have formula_124.)

Second, one can also conjugate the inputs and outputs:

:formula_125

Third, a variant of this conjugation trick, which is sometimes preferable because it requires no modification of the data values, involves swapping real and imaginary parts (which can be done on a computer simply by modifying pointers). Define formula_126 as formula_34 with its real and imaginary parts swapped—that is, if formula_128 then formula_126 is formula_130. Equivalently, formula_126 equals formula_132. Then

:formula_133

That is, the inverse transform is the same as the forward transform with the real and imaginary parts swapped for both input and output, up to a normalization (Duhamel &quot;et al.&quot;, 1988).

The conjugation trick can also be used to define a new transform, closely related to the DFT, that is involutory—that is, which is its own inverse. In particular, formula_134 is clearly its own inverse: formula_135. A closely related involutory transformation (by a factor of formula_136) is formula_137, since the formula_138 factors in formula_139 cancel the 2. For real inputs formula_25, the real part of formula_141 is none other than the discrete Hartley transform, which is also involutory.

=== Eigenvalues and eigenvectors ===

The eigenvalues of the DFT matrix are simple and well-known, whereas the eigenvectors are complicated, not unique, and are the subject of ongoing research. Explicit formulas are given with a significant amount of number theory.

Consider the unitary form formula_142 defined above for the DFT of length &quot;N&quot;, where
:formula_143
This matrix satisfies the matrix polynomial equation:
:formula_144
This can be seen from the inverse properties above: operating formula_142 twice gives the original data in reverse order, so operating formula_142 four times gives back the original data and is thus the identity matrix. This means that the eigenvalues formula_147 satisfy the equation:
:formula_148
Therefore, the eigenvalues of formula_142 are the fourth roots of unity: formula_147 is +1, −1, +&quot;i&quot;, or −&quot;i&quot;.

Since there are only four distinct eigenvalues for this formula_151 matrix, they have some multiplicity. The multiplicity gives the number of linearly independent eigenvectors corresponding to each eigenvalue. (There are &quot;N&quot; independent eigenvectors; a unitary matrix is never defective.)

The problem of their multiplicity was solved by McClellan and Parks (1972), although it was later shown to have been equivalent to a problem solved by Gauss (Dickinson and Steiglitz, 1982). The multiplicity depends on the value of &quot;N&quot; modulo 4, and is given by the following table:

Otherwise stated, the characteristic polynomial of formula_142 is:
:formula_153

No simple analytical formula for general eigenvectors is known. Moreover, the eigenvectors are not unique because any linear combination of eigenvectors for the same eigenvalue is also an eigenvector for that eigenvalue. Various researchers have proposed different choices of eigenvectors, selected to satisfy useful properties like orthogonality and to have &quot;simple&quot; forms (e.g., McClellan and Parks, 1972; Dickinson and Steiglitz, 1982; Grünbaum, 1982; Atakishiyev and Wolf, 1997; Candan &quot;et al.&quot;, 2000; Hanna &quot;et al.&quot;, 2004; Gurevich and Hadani, 2008).

One method to construct DFT eigenvectors to an eigenvalue formula_147 is based on the linear combination of operators:

formula_155

For an arbitrary vector formula_156, vector formula_157 satisfies:

formula_158

hence, vector formula_159 is, indeed, the eigenvector of DFT matrix formula_142. Operators formula_161 project vectors onto subspaces which are orthogonal for each value of formula_147. That is, for two eigenvectors, formula_157 and formula_164 we have:

formula_165

However, in general, projection operator method does not produce orthogonal eigenvectors within one subspace. The operator formula_166 can be seen as a matrix, whose columns are eigenvectors of formula_142, but they are not orthogonal. When a set of vectors formula_168, spanning formula_169-dimensional space (where formula_169 is the multiplicity of eigenvalue formula_147) is chosen to generate the set of eigenvectors formula_172 to eigenvalue formula_147, the mutual orthogonality of formula_174 is not guaranteed. However, the orthogonal set can be obtained by further applying orthogonalization algorithm to the set formula_175, e.g. Gram-Schmidt process.

A straightforward approach to obtain DFT eigenvectors is to discretize an eigenfunction of the continuous Fourier transform,
of which the most famous is the Gaussian function.
Since periodic summation of the function means discretizing its frequency spectrum
and discretization means periodic summation of the spectrum,
the discretized and periodically summed Gaussian function yields an eigenvector of the discrete transform:
* formula_176

The closed form expression for the series can be expressed by Jacobi theta functions as
* formula_177

Several other simple closed-form analytical eigenvectors for special DFT period &quot;N&quot; were found (Kong, 2008 and Casper-Yakimov, 2024):

For DFT period &quot;N&quot; = 2&quot;L&quot; + 1 = 4&quot;K&quot; + 1, where &quot;K&quot; is an integer, the following is an eigenvector of DFT:
* formula_178

For DFT period &quot;N&quot; = 2&quot;L&quot; = 4&quot;K&quot;, where &quot;K&quot; is an integer, the following are eigenvectors of DFT:
* formula_179
* formula_180

For DFT period &quot;N&quot; = 4&quot;K&quot; - 1, where &quot;K&quot; is an integer, the following are eigenvectors of DFT:
* formula_181
* formula_182

The choice of eigenvectors of the DFT matrix has become important in recent years in order to define a discrete analogue of the fractional Fourier transform—the DFT matrix can be taken to fractional powers by exponentiating the eigenvalues (e.g., Rubio and Santhanam, 2005). For the continuous Fourier transform, the natural orthogonal eigenfunctions are the Hermite functions, so various discrete analogues of these have been employed as the eigenvectors of the DFT, such as the Kravchuk polynomials (Atakishiyev and Wolf, 1997). The &quot;best&quot; choice of eigenvectors to define a fractional discrete Fourier transform remains an open question, however.

=== Uncertainty principles ===
==== Probabilistic uncertainty principle ====
If the random variable is constrained by
:formula_183
then
:formula_184
may be considered to represent a discrete probability mass function of , with an associated probability mass function constructed from the transformed variable,
:formula_185

For the case of continuous functions formula_186 and formula_187, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle states that
:formula_188
where formula_189 and formula_190 are the variances of formula_191 and formula_192 respectively, with the equality attained in the case of a suitably normalized Gaussian distribution. Although the variances may be analogously defined for the DFT, an analogous uncertainty principle is not useful, because the uncertainty will not be shift-invariant. Still, a meaningful uncertainty principle has been introduced by Massar and Spindel.

However, the Hirschman entropic uncertainty will have a useful analog for the case of the DFT. The Hirschman uncertainty principle is expressed in terms of the Shannon entropy of the two probability functions.

In the discrete case, the Shannon entropies are defined as
:formula_193
and
:formula_194
and the entropic uncertainty principle becomes
:formula_195

The equality is obtained for formula_196 equal to translations and modulations of a suitably normalized Kronecker comb of period formula_197 where formula_197 is any exact integer divisor of formula_8. The probability mass function formula_200 will then be proportional to a suitably translated Kronecker comb of period formula_201.

==== Deterministic uncertainty principle ====
There is also a well-known deterministic uncertainty principle that uses signal sparsity (or the number of non-zero coefficients). Let formula_202 and formula_203 be the number of non-zero elements of the time and frequency sequences formula_204 and formula_205, respectively. Then,
:formula_206
As an immediate consequence of the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means, one also has formula_207. Both uncertainty principles were shown to be tight for specifically chosen &quot;picket-fence&quot; sequences (discrete impulse trains), and find practical use for signal recovery applications.

=== DFT of real and purely imaginary signals ===
* If formula_208 are real numbers, as they often are in practical applications, then the DFT formula_209 is even symmetric:
:formula_210, where formula_211 denotes complex conjugation.

It follows that for even formula_8 formula_213 and formula_214 are real-valued, and the remainder of the DFT is completely specified by just formula_215 complex numbers.
* If formula_208 are purely imaginary numbers, then the DFT formula_209 is odd symmetric:
:formula_218, where formula_211 denotes complex conjugation.

==Generalized DFT (shifted and non-linear phase)==
It is possible to shift the transform sampling in time and/or frequency domain by some real shifts &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot;, respectively. This is sometimes known as a generalized DFT (or GDFT), also called the shifted DFT or offset DFT, and has analogous properties to the ordinary DFT:

:formula_220

Most often, shifts of formula_221 (half a sample) are used.
While the ordinary DFT corresponds to a periodic signal in both time and frequency domains, formula_222 produces a signal that is anti-periodic in frequency domain (formula_223) and vice versa for formula_224.
Thus, the specific case of formula_225 is known as an &quot;odd-time odd-frequency&quot; discrete Fourier transform (or O2 DFT).
Such shifted transforms are most often used for symmetric data, to represent different boundary symmetries, and for real-symmetric data they correspond to different forms of the discrete cosine and sine transforms.

Another interesting choice is formula_226, which is called the centered DFT (or CDFT). The centered DFT has the useful property that, when &quot;N&quot; is a multiple of four, all four of its eigenvalues (see above) have equal multiplicities (Rubio and Santhanam, 2005)

The term GDFT is also used for the non-linear phase extensions of DFT. Hence, GDFT method provides a generalization for constant amplitude orthogonal block transforms including linear and non-linear phase types. GDFT is a framework
to improve time and frequency domain properties of the traditional DFT, e.g. auto/cross-correlations, by the addition of the properly designed phase shaping function (non-linear, in general) to the original linear phase functions (Akansu and Agirman-Tosun, 2010).

The discrete Fourier transform can be viewed as a special case of the z-transform, evaluated on the unit circle in the complex plane; more general z-transforms correspond to &quot;complex&quot; shifts &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; above.
==Multidimensional DFT==
The ordinary DFT transforms a one-dimensional sequence or array formula_34 that is a function of exactly one discrete variable &quot;n&quot;. The multidimensional DFT of a multidimensional array formula_228 that is a function of &quot;d&quot; discrete variables formula_229 for formula_230 in formula_231 is defined by:

:formula_232

where formula_233 as above and the &quot;d&quot; output indices run from formula_234. This is more compactly expressed in vector notation, where we define formula_235 and formula_236 as &quot;d&quot;-dimensional vectors of indices from 0 to formula_237, which we define as formula_238:

:formula_239

where the division formula_240 is defined as formula_241 to be performed element-wise, and the sum denotes the set of nested summations above.

The inverse of the multi-dimensional DFT is, analogous to the one-dimensional case, given by:

:formula_242

As the one-dimensional DFT expresses the input formula_34 as a superposition of sinusoids, the multidimensional DFT expresses the input as a superposition of plane waves, or multidimensional sinusoids. The direction of oscillation in space is formula_244. The amplitudes are formula_245. This decomposition is of great importance for everything from digital image processing (two-dimensional) to solving partial differential equations. The solution is broken up into plane waves.

The multidimensional DFT can be computed by the composition of a sequence of one-dimensional DFTs along each dimension. In the two-dimensional case formula_246 the formula_247 independent DFTs of the rows (i.e., along formula_248) are computed first to form a new array formula_249. Then the formula_250 independent DFTs of &quot;y&quot; along the columns (along formula_251) are computed to form the final result formula_252. Alternatively the columns can be computed first and then the rows. The order is immaterial because the nested summations above commute.

An algorithm to compute a one-dimensional DFT is thus sufficient to efficiently compute a multidimensional DFT. This approach is known as the &quot;row-column&quot; algorithm. There are also intrinsically multidimensional FFT algorithms.

=== The real-input multidimensional DFT ===
For input data formula_228 consisting of real numbers, the DFT outputs have a conjugate symmetry similar to the one-dimensional case above:

:formula_254

where the star again denotes complex conjugation and the formula_230-th subscript is again interpreted modulo formula_256 (for formula_257).

== Applications ==
The DFT has seen wide usage across a large number of fields; we only sketch a few examples below (see also the references at the end). All applications of the DFT depend crucially on the availability of a fast algorithm to compute discrete Fourier transforms and their inverses, a fast Fourier transform.

=== Spectral analysis ===

When the DFT is used for signal spectral analysis, the formula_37 sequence usually represents a finite set of uniformly spaced time-samples of some signal formula_259, where formula_260 represents time. The conversion from continuous time to samples (discrete-time) changes the underlying Fourier transform of formula_261 into a discrete-time Fourier transform (DTFT), which generally entails a type of distortion called aliasing. Choice of an appropriate sample-rate (see &quot;Nyquist rate&quot;) is the key to minimizing that distortion. Similarly, the conversion from a very long (or infinite) sequence to a manageable size entails a type of distortion called &quot;leakage&quot;, which is manifested as a loss of detail (a.k.a. resolution) in the DTFT. Choice of an appropriate sub-sequence length is the primary key to minimizing that effect. When the available data (and time to process it) is more than the amount needed to attain the desired frequency resolution, a standard technique is to perform multiple DFTs, for example to create a spectrogram. If the desired result is a power spectrum and noise or randomness is present in the data, averaging the magnitude components of the multiple DFTs is a useful procedure to reduce the variance of the spectrum (also called a periodogram in this context); two examples of such techniques are the Welch method and the Bartlett method; the general subject of estimating the power spectrum of a noisy signal is called spectral estimation.

A final source of distortion (or perhaps &quot;illusion&quot;) is the DFT itself, because it is just a discrete sampling of the DTFT, which is a function of a continuous frequency domain. That can be mitigated by increasing the resolution of the DFT. That procedure is illustrated at .
* The procedure is sometimes referred to as &quot;zero-padding&quot;, which is a particular implementation used in conjunction with the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm. The inefficiency of performing multiplications and additions with zero-valued &quot;samples&quot; is more than offset by the inherent efficiency of the FFT.
* As already stated, leakage imposes a limit on the inherent resolution of the DTFT, so there is a practical limit to the benefit that can be obtained from a fine-grained DFT.
Steps to Perform Spectral Analysis of Audio Signal

1.Recording and Pre-Processing the Audio Signal

Begin by recording the audio signal, which could be a spoken password, music, or any other sound. Once recorded, the audio signal is denoted as x[n], where n represents the discrete time index. To enhance the accuracy of spectral analysis, any unwanted noise should be reduced using appropriate filtering techniques.

2.Plotting the Original Time-Domain Signal

After noise reduction, the audio signal is plotted in the time domain to visualize its characteristics over time. This helps in understanding the amplitude variations of the signal as a function of time, which provides an initial insight into the signal&#x27;s behavior.

3.Transforming the Signal from Time Domain to Frequency Domain

The next step is to transform the audio signal from the time domain to the frequency domain using the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT). The DFT is defined as:

formula_262

where N is the total number of samples, k represents the frequency index, and X[k] is the complex-valued frequency spectrum of the signal. The DFT allows for decomposing the signal into its constituent frequency components, providing a representation that indicates which frequencies are present and their respective magnitudes.

4.Plotting the Magnitude Spectrum

The magnitude of the frequency-domain representation X[k] is plotted to analyze the spectral content. The magnitude spectrum shows how the energy of the signal is distributed across different frequencies, which is useful for identifying prominent frequency components. It is calculated as:

formula_263

=== Example ===
Analyze a discrete-time audio signal in the frequency domain using the DFT to identify its frequency components

==== Given Data ====
Let&#x27;s consider a simple discrete-time audio signal represented as:

formula_264

where n represents discrete time samples of the signal.

1.Time-Domain Signal Representation

The given time-domain signal is:

formula_265

===== 2.DFT Calculation =====
The DFT is calculated using the formula:

formula_262

where N is the number of samples (in this case, N=4).

Let&#x27;s compute X[k] for k=0,1,2,3

For k=0:

formula_267

formula_268

For k=1:

formula_269

formula_270

formula_271

For k=2:

formula_272

formula_273

formula_274

For k=3:

formula_275

formula_276

formula_277

===== 3.Magnitude Spectrum =====
The magnitude of X[k] represents the strength of each frequency component:

formula_278

formula_279

The resulting frequency components indicate the distribution of signal energy at different frequencies. The peaks in the magnitude spectrum correspond to dominant frequencies in the original signal.

=== Optics, diffraction, and tomography ===

The discrete Fourier transform is widely used with spatial frequencies in modeling the way that light, electrons, and other probes travel through optical systems and scatter from objects in two and three dimensions. The dual (direct/reciprocal) vector space of three dimensional objects further makes available a three dimensional reciprocal lattice, whose construction from translucent object shadows (via the Fourier slice theorem) allows tomographic reconstruction of three dimensional objects with a wide range of applications e.g. in modern medicine.

=== Filter bank ===
See and .

===Data compression===
The field of digital signal processing relies heavily on operations in the frequency domain (i.e. on the Fourier transform). For example, several lossy image and sound compression methods employ the discrete Fourier transform: the signal is cut into short segments, each is transformed, and then the Fourier coefficients of high frequencies, which are assumed to be unnoticeable, are discarded. The decompressor computes the inverse transform based on this reduced number of Fourier coefficients. (Compression applications often use a specialized form of the DFT, the discrete cosine transform or sometimes the modified discrete cosine transform.)
Some relatively recent compression algorithms, however, use wavelet transforms, which give a more uniform compromise between time and frequency domain than obtained by chopping data into segments and transforming each segment. In the case of JPEG2000, this avoids the spurious image features that appear when images are highly compressed with the original JPEG.

===Partial differential equations===
Discrete Fourier transforms are often used to solve partial differential equations, where again the DFT is used as an approximation for the Fourier series (which is recovered in the limit of infinite &quot;N&quot;). The advantage of this approach is that it expands the signal in complex exponentials formula_280, which are eigenfunctions of differentiation: formula_281. Thus, in the Fourier representation, differentiation is simple—we just multiply by formula_282. (However, the choice of formula_32 is not unique due to aliasing; for the method to be convergent, a choice similar to that in the trigonometric interpolation section above should be used.) A linear differential equation with constant coefficients is transformed into an easily solvable algebraic equation. One then uses the inverse DFT to transform the result back into the ordinary spatial representation. Such an approach is called a spectral method.

===Polynomial multiplication===

Suppose we wish to compute the polynomial product &quot;c&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) = &quot;a&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) · &quot;b&quot;(&quot;x&quot;). The ordinary product expression for the coefficients of &quot;c&quot; involves a linear (acyclic) convolution, where indices do not &quot;wrap around.&quot; This can be rewritten as a cyclic convolution by taking the coefficient vectors for &quot;a&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) and &quot;b&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) with constant term first, then appending zeros so that the resultant coefficient vectors a and b have dimension . Then,

:formula_284

Where c is the vector of coefficients for &quot;c&quot;(&quot;x&quot;), and the convolution operator formula_285 is defined so

:formula_286

But convolution becomes multiplication under the DFT:

:formula_287

Here the vector product is taken elementwise. Thus the coefficients of the product polynomial &quot;c&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) are just the terms 0, ..., deg(&quot;a&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)) + deg(&quot;b&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)) of the coefficient vector

:formula_288

With a fast Fourier transform, the resulting algorithm takes &quot;O&quot;(&quot;N&quot; log &quot;N&quot;) arithmetic operations. Due to its simplicity and speed, the Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm, which is limited to composite sizes, is often chosen for the transform operation. In this case, &quot;d&quot; should be chosen as the smallest integer greater than the sum of the input polynomial degrees that is factorizable into small prime factors (e.g. 2, 3, and 5, depending upon the FFT implementation).

====Multiplication of large integers====

The fastest known algorithms for the multiplication of very large integers use the polynomial multiplication method outlined above. Integers can be treated as the value of a polynomial evaluated specifically at the number base, with the coefficients of the polynomial corresponding to the digits in that base (ex. formula_289). After polynomial multiplication, a relatively low-complexity carry-propagation step completes the multiplication.

==== Convolution ====
When data is convolved with a function with wide support, such as for downsampling by a large sampling ratio, because of the Convolution theorem and the FFT algorithm, it may be faster to transform it, multiply pointwise by the transform of the filter and then reverse transform it. Alternatively, a good filter is obtained by simply truncating the transformed data and re-transforming the shortened data set.

==Some discrete Fourier transform pairs==

==Generalizations==

=== Representation theory ===
The DFT can be interpreted as a complex-valued representation of the finite cyclic group. In other words, a sequence of formula_32 complex numbers can be thought of as an element of formula_32-dimensional complex space formula_292 or equivalently a function formula_293 from the finite cyclic group of order formula_32 to the complex numbers, formula_295. So formula_293 is a class function on the finite cyclic group, and thus can be expressed as a linear combination of the irreducible characters of this group, which are the roots of unity.

From this point of view, one may generalize the DFT to representation theory generally, or more narrowly to the representation theory of finite groups.

More narrowly still, one may generalize the DFT by either changing the target (taking values in a field other than the complex numbers), or the domain (a group other than a finite cyclic group), as detailed in the sequel.

=== Other fields ===

Many of the properties of the DFT only depend on the fact that formula_297 is a primitive root of unity, sometimes denoted formula_298 or formula_299 (so that formula_300). Such properties include the completeness, orthogonality, Plancherel/Parseval, periodicity, shift, convolution, and unitarity properties above, as well as many FFT algorithms. For this reason, the discrete Fourier transform can be defined by using roots of unity in fields other than the complex numbers, and such generalizations are commonly called &quot;number-theoretic transforms&quot; (NTTs) in the case of finite fields. For more information, see number-theoretic transform and discrete Fourier transform (general).

=== Other finite groups ===

The standard DFT acts on a sequence &quot;x&quot;0, &quot;x&quot;1, ..., &quot;x&quot;&quot;N&quot;−1 of complex numbers, which can be viewed as a function {0, 1, ..., &quot;N&quot; − 1} → C. The multidimensional DFT acts on multidimensional sequences, which can be viewed as functions
:formula_301
This suggests the generalization to Fourier transforms on arbitrary finite groups, which act on functions &quot;G&quot; → C where &quot;G&quot; is a finite group. In this framework, the standard DFT is seen as the Fourier transform on a cyclic group, while the multidimensional DFT is a Fourier transform on a direct sum of cyclic groups.

Further, Fourier transform can be on cosets of a group.

==Alternatives==

 There are various alternatives to the DFT for various applications, prominent among which are wavelets. The analog of the DFT is the discrete wavelet transform (DWT). From the point of view of time–frequency analysis, a key limitation of the Fourier transform is that it does not include &quot;location&quot; information, only &quot;frequency&quot; information, and thus has difficulty in representing transients. As wavelets have location as well as frequency, they are better able to represent location, at the expense of greater difficulty representing frequency. For details, see comparison of the discrete wavelet transform with the discrete Fourier transform.

==See also==
* Companion matrix
* DFT matrix
* Fast Fourier transform
* FFTPACK
* FFTW
* Generalizations of Pauli matrices
* Least-squares spectral analysis
* List of Fourier-related transforms
* Multidimensional transform
* Zak transform
* Quantum Fourier transform

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* esp. section 30.2: The DFT and FFT, pp. 830–838.
* 
* (Note that this paper has an apparent typo in its table of the eigenvalue multiplicities: the +&quot;i&quot;/−&quot;i&quot; columns are interchanged. The correct table can be found in McClellan and Parks, 1972, and is easily confirmed numerically.)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Digital Signal Processing&quot; by Thomas Holton.

==External links==
* Interactive explanation of the DFT
* Matlab tutorial on the Discrete Fourier Transformation 
* Interactive flash tutorial on the DFT
* Mathematics of the Discrete Fourier Transform by Julius O. Smith III
* FFTW: Fast implementation of the DFT - coded in C and under General Public License (GPL)
* General Purpose FFT Package: Yet another fast DFT implementation in C &amp; FORTRAN, permissive license
* Explained: The Discrete Fourier Transform
* Discrete Fourier Transform
* Indexing and shifting of Discrete Fourier Transform
* Discrete Fourier Transform Properties
* Generalized Discrete Fourier Transform (GDFT) with Nonlinear Phase</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878" start="20" end="46" title="Discrete Fourier transform" label="discrete Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878" start="48" end="51" title="Discrete Fourier transform" label="DFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="98" end="105" title="Sampling (signal processing)" label="samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="111" end="119" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440048" start="181" end="212" title="discrete-time Fourier transform" label="discrete-time Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="232" end="246" title="complex number" label="complex-valued"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="397" end="411" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="455" end="462" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="463" end="471" title="Sine wave" label="sinusoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q786423" start="608" end="624" title="frequency domain" label="frequency domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365258" start="979" end="995" title="Fourier analysis" label="Fourier analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="1031" end="1056" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="1090" end="1096" title="signal (information theory)" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="1146" end="1156" title="sound wave" label="sound wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="1160" end="1165" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="1183" end="1194" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404885" start="1261" end="1276" title="window function" label="window function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="1282" end="1298" title="image processing" label="image processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="1333" end="1338" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="1367" end="1379" title="raster image" label="raster image"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="1423" end="1453" title="partial differential equations" label="partial differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q210857" start="1495" end="1506" title="convolution" label="convolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="1610" end="1618" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="1623" end="1642" title="numerical algorithm" label="numerical algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121567" start="1662" end="1670" title="digital circuit" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="1719" end="1741" title="fast Fourier transform" label="fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="1902" end="1912" title="initialism" label="initialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450384" start="1966" end="1990" title="Finite Fourier transform (disambiguation)" label="finite Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="2070" end="2078" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="2096" end="2110" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503302" start="2453" end="2461" title="periodic sequence" label="periodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15927242" start="2942" end="2965" title="Discrete Fourier series" label="Discrete Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="2987" end="2996" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829907" start="3171" end="3182" title="sign convention" label="conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306808" start="4385" end="4401" title="orthogonal basis" label="orthogonal basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="4499" end="4514" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306887" start="4606" end="4622" title="geometric series" label="geometric series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443036" start="4978" end="5001" title="Parseval&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Parseval&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="5047" end="5066" title="Complex conjugate" label="complex conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096184" start="5072" end="5090" title="Plancherel theorem" label="Plancherel theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="5661" end="5667" title="modular arithmetic" label="modulo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6002" end="6021" title="DTFT#Convolution" label="convolution theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440048" start="6030" end="6061" title="discrete-time Fourier transform" label="discrete-time Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168644" start="6547" end="6565" title="periodic summation" label="periodic summation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7233" end="7253" title="Circular convolution#Example" label="Circular convolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7255" end="7282" title="Convolution#Fast convolution algorithms" label="Fast convolution algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791834" start="7288" end="7300" title="Overlap-save method" label="Overlap-save"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302587" start="7318" end="7335" title="cross-correlation" label="cross-correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q464356" start="8168" end="8206" title="trigonometric interpolation polynomial" label="trigonometric interpolation polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501757" start="8433" end="8450" title="Nyquist frequency" label="Nyquist component"/>
<link wikidata="Q806263" start="8970" end="8981" title="bandlimited" label="bandlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204933" start="9574" end="9584" title="DFT matrix" label="DFT matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q579544" start="9588" end="9606" title="Vandermonde matrix" label="Vandermonde matrix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9608" end="9631" title="Generalizations of Pauli matrices#Construction: The clock and shift matrices" label="introduced by Sylvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q756747" start="9687" end="9716" title="roots of unity" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;th root of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422682" start="9804" end="9819" title="Hadamard matrix" label="Hadamard matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972470" start="9979" end="9986" title="unitary operator" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495534" start="10042" end="10064" title="unitary transformation" label="unitary transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178546" start="10135" end="10146" title="determinant" label="determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411166" start="10524" end="10535" title="orthonormal" label="orthonormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756747" start="10608" end="10621" title="root of unity" label="root of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443036" start="10717" end="10740" title="Parseval&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Parseval&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="10950" end="10961" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096184" start="11137" end="11155" title="Plancherel theorem" label="Plancherel theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11192" end="11220" title="#Circular convolution theorem and cross-correlation theorem" label="circular convolution theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q245457" start="11261" end="11277" title="circulant matrix" label="circulant matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="11858" end="11864" title="modular arithmetic" label="modulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="12222" end="12229" title="pointer (computer programming)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q846862" start="12729" end="12739" title="Involution (mathematics)" label="involutory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006531" start="13071" end="13097" title="discrete Hartley transform" label="discrete Hartley transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="13168" end="13178" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="13237" end="13248" title="eigenvector" label="eigenvector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787887" start="13527" end="13544" title="matrix polynomial" label="matrix polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q193794" start="13771" end="13786" title="identity matrix" label="identity matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q756747" start="13924" end="13938" title="roots of unity" label="roots of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="14090" end="14102" title="algebraic multiplicity" label="multiplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670" start="14141" end="14161" title="linearly independent" label="linearly independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251123" start="14286" end="14295" title="defective matrix" label="defective"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="14450" end="14455" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="14544" end="14550" title="modular arithmetic" label="modulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q849705" start="14614" end="14639" title="characteristic polynomial" label="characteristic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q215067" start="15006" end="15019" title="orthogonality" label="orthogonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q475239" start="16383" end="16403" title="Gram-Schmidt process" label="Gram-Schmidt process"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="16512" end="16529" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054475" start="16563" end="16580" title="Gaussian function" label="Gaussian function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168644" start="16588" end="16606" title="periodic summation" label="periodic summation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154787" start="16910" end="16931" title="Jacobi theta function" label="Jacobi theta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817582" start="17707" end="17735" title="fractional Fourier transform" label="fractional Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="17862" end="17890" title="continuous Fourier transform" label="continuous Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q658574" start="17938" end="17954" title="Hermite function" label="Hermite function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298931" start="18059" end="18079" title="Kravchuk polynomials" label="Kravchuk polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q869887" start="18431" end="18456" title="probability mass function" label="probability mass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="18634" end="18666" title="Heisenberg uncertainty principle" label="Heisenberg uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="18853" end="18874" title="Gaussian distribution" label="Gaussian distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380783" start="19151" end="19171" title="entropic uncertainty" label="entropic uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q204570" start="19288" end="19303" title="Entropy (information theory)" label="Shannon entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380783" start="19436" end="19456" title="entropic uncertainty" label="entropic uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="19593" end="19607" title="Kronecker comb" label="Kronecker comb"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="19784" end="19798" title="Kronecker comb" label="Kronecker comb"/>
<link wikidata="Q476167" start="20200" end="20244" title="Arithmetic–geometric mean" label="inequality of arithmetic and geometric means"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="20537" end="20548" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q126592" start="20624" end="20638" title="Even and odd functions" label="even symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="20680" end="20699" title="Complex conjugate" label="complex conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q126592" start="20947" end="20960" title="Even and odd functions" label="odd symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="21002" end="21021" title="Complex conjugate" label="complex conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877" start="21971" end="21977" title="discrete cosine transform" label="cosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q971039" start="21982" end="21986" title="discrete sine transform" label="sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q135810" start="22838" end="22849" title="z-transform" label="z-transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="23091" end="23096" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057996" start="23490" end="23496" title="coordinate vector" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q122518" start="24080" end="24090" title="plane wave" label="plane wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="24272" end="24296" title="digital image processing" label="digital image processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="24326" end="24356" title="partial differential equations" label="partial differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="24451" end="24462" title="function composition" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="24957" end="24964" title="commutative operation" label="commute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25172" end="25203" title="Fast Fourier transform#Multidimensional FFTs" label="multidimensional FFT algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="25291" end="25303" title="real numbers" label="real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="25847" end="25869" title="fast Fourier transform" label="fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555326" start="25924" end="25948" title="signal spectral analysis" label="signal spectral analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="26188" end="26205" title="continuous Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440048" start="26228" end="26259" title="discrete-time Fourier transform" label="discrete-time Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q868732" start="26320" end="26328" title="aliasing" label="aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273772" start="26378" end="26390" title="Nyquist rate" label="Nyquist rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431214" start="26569" end="26576" title="Spectral leakage" label="leakage"/>
<link wikidata="Q578970" start="26946" end="26957" title="spectrogram" label="spectrogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="27141" end="27149" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q587619" start="27181" end="27192" title="periodogram" label="periodogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980541" start="27251" end="27263" title="Welch method" label="Welch method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865378" start="27272" end="27287" title="Bartlett method" label="Bartlett method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555326" start="27370" end="27389" title="spectral estimation" label="spectral estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="27814" end="27836" title="fast Fourier transform" label="fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="28359" end="28364" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="28379" end="28384" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449227" start="28583" end="28604" title="Filter design" label="filtering techniques."/>
<link wikidata="Q179448" start="28656" end="28661" title="noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804840" start="28836" end="28852" title="function of time" label="function of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249438" start="31358" end="31379" title="Projection-slice theorem" label="Fourier slice theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564" start="31704" end="31709" title="lossy compression" label="lossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877" start="32126" end="32151" title="discrete cosine transform" label="discrete cosine transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268231" start="32169" end="32203" title="modified discrete cosine transform" label="modified discrete cosine transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867" start="32266" end="32283" title="wavelet transform" label="wavelet transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q931783" start="32448" end="32456" title="JPEG2000" label="JPEG2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="32562" end="32566" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="32658" end="32688" title="partial differential equations" label="partial differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="32746" end="32760" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33205" end="33232" title="#Trigonometric interpolation polynomial" label="trigonometric interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129902" start="33266" end="33294" title="linear differential equation" label="linear differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308831" start="33511" end="33526" title="spectral method" label="spectral method"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="34621" end="34643" title="fast Fourier transform" label="fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167446" start="34782" end="34808" title="Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm" label="Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q50707" start="34830" end="34839" title="composite number" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q130762" start="35180" end="35190" title="multiplication algorithms" label="algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="35228" end="35235" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210857" start="35640" end="35649" title="Convolution" label="convolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638931" start="35752" end="35771" title="Convolution theorem" label="Convolution theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="36179" end="36193" title="representation theory" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="36208" end="36220" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q986909" start="36508" end="36522" title="class function" label="class function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526854" start="36789" end="36827" title="representation theory of finite groups" label="representation theory of finite groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q756747" start="37155" end="37178" title="primitive root of unity" label="primitive root of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="37513" end="37519" title="field (mathematics)" label="fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q603880" start="37659" end="37671" title="finite field" label="finite field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006032" start="37700" end="37726" title="number-theoretic transform" label="number-theoretic transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006032" start="37731" end="37767" title="discrete Fourier transform (general)" label="discrete Fourier transform (general)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475803" start="38134" end="38179" title="Fourier transform on finite groups" label="Fourier transforms on arbitrary finite groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057968" start="38247" end="38259" title="finite group" label="finite group"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="38335" end="38347" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q831390" start="38608" end="38615" title="wavelet" label="wavelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414958" start="38647" end="38673" title="discrete wavelet transform" label="discrete wavelet transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806653" start="38707" end="38730" title="time–frequency analysis" label="time–frequency analysis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39098" end="39178" title="Discrete wavelet transform#Comparison with Fourier transform" label="comparison of the discrete wavelet transform with the discrete Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q814361" start="39196" end="39212" title="Companion matrix" label="Companion matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204933" start="39215" end="39225" title="DFT matrix" label="DFT matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="39228" end="39250" title="Fast Fourier transform" label="Fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425436" start="39253" end="39260" title="FFTPACK" label="FFTPACK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251820" start="39263" end="39267" title="FFTW" label="FFTW"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532423" start="39270" end="39303" title="Generalizations of Pauli matrices" label="Generalizations of Pauli matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q10569022" start="39306" end="39337" title="Least-squares spectral analysis" label="Least-squares spectral analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571111" start="39340" end="39374" title="List of Fourier-related transforms" label="List of Fourier-related transforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099178" start="39377" end="39403" title="Multidimensional transform" label="Multidimensional transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303763" start="39406" end="39419" title="Zak transform" label="Zak transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464944" start="39422" end="39447" title="Quantum Fourier transform" label="Quantum Fourier transform"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8815" wikidata="Q1053857" url="?curid=8815" title="Dual polyhedron">
<text>In geometry, every polyhedron is associated with a second dual structure, where the vertices of one correspond to the faces of the other, and the edges between pairs of vertices of one correspond to the edges between pairs of faces of the other. Such dual figures remain combinatorial or abstract polyhedra, but not all can also be constructed as geometric polyhedra. Starting with any given polyhedron, the dual of its dual is the original polyhedron.

Duality preserves the symmetries of a polyhedron. Therefore, for many classes of polyhedra defined by their symmetries, the duals belong to a corresponding symmetry class. For example, the regular polyhedrathe (convex) Platonic solids and (star) Kepler–Poinsot polyhedraform dual pairs, where the regular tetrahedron is self-dual. The dual of an isogonal polyhedron (one in which any two vertices are equivalent under symmetries of the polyhedron) is an isohedral polyhedron (one in which any two faces are equivalent [...]), and vice versa. The dual of an isotoxal polyhedron (one in which any two edges are equivalent [...]) is also isotoxal.

Duality is closely related to &quot;polar reciprocity&quot;, a geometric transformation that, when applied to a convex polyhedron, realizes the dual polyhedron as another convex polyhedron.

==Kinds of duality==
There are many kinds of duality. The kinds most relevant to elementary polyhedra are polar reciprocity and topological or abstract duality.

===Polar reciprocation===
In Euclidean space, the dual of a polyhedron formula_1 is often defined in terms of polar reciprocation about a sphere. Here, each vertex (pole) is associated with a face plane (polar plane or just polar) so that the ray from the center to the vertex is perpendicular to the plane, and the product of the distances from the center to each is equal to the square of the radius.

When the sphere has radius formula_2 and is centered at the origin (so that it is defined by the equation formula_3), then the polar dual of a convex polyhedron formula_1 is defined as

where formula_5 denotes the standard dot product of formula_6 and formula_7.

Typically when no sphere is specified in the construction of the dual, then the unit sphere is used, meaning formula_8 in the above definitions.

For each face plane of formula_1 described by the linear equation
formula_10
the corresponding vertex of the dual polyhedron formula_11 will have coordinates formula_12. Similarly, each vertex of formula_1 corresponds to a face plane of formula_11, and each edge line of formula_1 corresponds to an edge line of formula_11. The correspondence between the vertices, edges, and faces of formula_1 and formula_11 reverses inclusion. For example, if an edge of formula_1 contains a vertex, the corresponding edge of formula_11 will be contained in the corresponding face.

For a polyhedron with a center of symmetry, it is common to use a sphere centered on this point, as in the Dorman Luke construction (mentioned below). Failing that, for a polyhedron with a circumscribed sphere, inscribed sphere, or midsphere (one with all edges as tangents), this can be used. However, it is possible to reciprocate a polyhedron about any sphere, and the resulting form of the dual will depend on the size and position of the sphere; as the sphere is varied, so too is the dual form. The choice of center for the sphere is sufficient to define the dual up to similarity.

If a polyhedron in Euclidean space has a face plane, edge line, or vertex lying on the center of the sphere, the corresponding element of its dual will go to infinity. Since Euclidean space never reaches infinity, the projective equivalent, called extended Euclidean space, may be formed by adding the required &#x27;plane at infinity&#x27;. Some theorists prefer to stick to Euclidean space and say that there is no dual. Meanwhile, found a way to represent these infinite duals, in a manner suitable for making models (of some finite portion).

The concept of &quot;duality&quot; here is closely related to the duality in projective geometry, where lines and edges are interchanged. Projective polarity works well enough for convex polyhedra. But for non-convex figures such as star polyhedra, when we seek to rigorously define this form of polyhedral duality in terms of projective polarity, various problems appear.
Because of the definitional issues for geometric duality of non-convex polyhedra, argues that any proper definition of a non-convex polyhedron should include a notion of a dual polyhedron.

====Canonical duals====
Any convex polyhedron can be distorted into a canonical form, in which a unit midsphere (or intersphere) exists tangent to every edge, and such that the average position of the points of tangency is the center of the sphere. This form is unique up to congruences.

If we reciprocate such a canonical polyhedron about its midsphere, the dual polyhedron will share the same edge-tangency points, and thus will also be canonical. It is the canonical dual, and the two together form a canonical dual compound.

====Dorman Luke construction====
For a uniform polyhedron, each face of the dual polyhedron may be derived from the original polyhedron&#x27;s corresponding vertex figure by using the Dorman Luke construction.

===Topological duality===
Even when a pair of polyhedra cannot be obtained by reciprocation from each other, they may be called duals of each other as long as the vertices of one correspond to the faces of the other, and the edges of one correspond to the edges of the other, in an incidence-preserving way. Such pairs of polyhedra are still topologically or abstractly dual.

The vertices and edges of a convex polyhedron form a graph (the 1-skeleton of the polyhedron), embedded on the surface of the polyhedron (a topological sphere). This graph can be projected to form a Schlegel diagram on a flat plane. The graph formed by the vertices and edges of the dual polyhedron is the dual graph of the original graph.

More generally, for any polyhedron whose faces form a closed surface, the vertices and edges of the polyhedron form a graph embedded on this surface, and the vertices and edges of the (abstract) dual polyhedron form the dual graph of the original graph.

An abstract polyhedron is a certain kind of partially ordered set (poset) of elements, such that incidences, or connections, between elements of the set correspond to incidences between elements (faces, edges, vertices) of a polyhedron. Every such poset has a dual poset, formed by reversing all of the order relations. If the poset is visualized as a Hasse diagram, the dual poset can be visualized simply by turning the Hasse diagram upside down.

Every geometric polyhedron corresponds to an abstract polyhedron in this way, and has an abstract dual polyhedron. However, for some types of non-convex geometric polyhedra, the dual polyhedra may not be realizable geometrically.

==Self-dual polyhedra==
Topologically, a polyhedron is said to be self-dual if its dual has exactly the same connectivity between vertices, edges, and faces. Abstractly, they have the same Hasse diagram. Geometrically, it is not only topologically self-dual, but its polar reciprocal about a certain point, typically its centroid, is a similar figure. For example, the dual of a regular tetrahedron is another regular tetrahedron, reflected through the origin.

Every polygon is topologically self-dual, since it has the same number of vertices as edges, and these are switched by duality. But it is not necessarily self-dual (up to rigid motion, for instance). Every polygon has a regular form which is geometrically self-dual about its intersphere: all angles are congruent, as are all edges, so under duality these congruences swap. Similarly, every topologically self-dual convex polyhedron can be realized by an equivalent geometrically self-dual polyhedron, its canonical polyhedron, reciprocal about the center of the midsphere.

There are infinitely many geometrically self-dual polyhedra. The simplest infinite family is the pyramids. Another infinite family, elongated pyramids, consists of polyhedra that can be roughly described as a pyramid sitting on top of a prism (with the same number of sides). Adding a frustum (pyramid with the top cut off) below the prism generates another infinite family, and so on. There are many other convex self-dual polyhedra. For example, there are 6 different ones with 7 vertices and 16 with 8 vertices.

A self-dual non-convex icosahedron with hexagonal faces was identified by Brückner in 1900. Other non-convex self-dual polyhedra have been found, under certain definitions of non-convex polyhedra and their duals.

==Dual polytopes and tessellations==
Duality can be generalized to &quot;n&quot;-dimensional space and dual polytopes; in two dimensions these are called dual polygons.

The vertices of one polytope correspond to the (&quot;n&quot; − 1)-dimensional elements, or facets, of the other, and the &quot;j&quot; points that define a (&quot;j&quot; − 1)-dimensional element will correspond to &quot;j&quot; hyperplanes that intersect to give a (&quot;n&quot; − &quot;j&quot;)-dimensional element. The dual of an &quot;n&quot;-dimensional tessellation or honeycomb can be defined similarly.

In general, the facets of a polytope&#x27;s dual will be the topological duals of the polytope&#x27;s vertex figures. For the polar reciprocals of the regular and uniform polytopes, the dual facets will be polar reciprocals of the original&#x27;s vertex figure. For example, in four dimensions, the vertex figure of the 600-cell is the icosahedron; the dual of the 600-cell is the 120-cell, whose facets are dodecahedra, which are the dual of the icosahedron.

===Self-dual polytopes and tessellations===
The primary class of self-dual polytopes are regular polytopes with palindromic Schläfli symbols. All regular polygons, {a} are self-dual, polyhedra of the form {a,a}, 4-polytopes of the form {a,b,a}, 5-polytopes of the form {a,b,b,a}, etc.

The self-dual regular polytopes are:

* All regular polygons, {a}.
* Regular tetrahedron: {3,3}
* In general, all regular &quot;n&quot;-simplexes, {3,3...,3}
* The regular 24-cell in 4 dimensions, {3,4,3}.
* The great 120-cell {5,5/2,5} and the grand stellated 120-cell {5/2,5,5/2}
The self-dual (infinite) regular Euclidean honeycombs are:
* Apeirogon: {∞}
* Square tiling: {4,4}
* Cubic honeycomb: {4,3,4}
* In general, all regular &quot;n&quot;-dimensional Euclidean hypercubic honeycombs: {4,3...,3,4}.
The self-dual (infinite) regular hyperbolic honeycombs are:
* Compact hyperbolic tilings: {5,5}, {6,6}, ... {p,p}.
* Paracompact hyperbolic tiling: {∞,∞}
* Compact hyperbolic honeycombs: {3,5,3}, {5,3,5}, and {5,3,3,5}
* Paracompact hyperbolic honeycombs: {3,6,3}, {6,3,6}, {4,4,4}, and {3,3,4,3,3}

==See also==
* Conway polyhedron notation
* Dual polygon
* Self-dual graph
* Self-dual polygon

==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
*.
*.
*.


==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="3" end="11" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q172937" start="19" end="29" title="polyhedron" label="polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053857" start="58" end="62" title="Dual polyhedron" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q26401" start="84" end="92" title="Vertex (geometry)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064117" start="118" end="123" title="Face (geometry)" label="faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669958" start="288" end="306" title="Abstract polytope" label="abstract polyhedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="476" end="486" title="Symmetry" label="symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q188745" start="673" end="687" title="Platonic solid" label="Platonic solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023978" start="700" end="724" title="Kepler–Poinsot polyhedra" label="Kepler–Poinsot polyhedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="759" end="770" title="tetrahedron" label="tetrahedron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="774" end="783" title="#Self-dual polyhedra" label="self-dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071715" start="800" end="808" title="Isogonal figure" label="isogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847067" start="908" end="917" title="Isohedral figure" label="isohedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847026" start="1011" end="1019" title="Isotoxal figure" label="isotoxal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="1482" end="1497" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751490" start="1563" end="1582" title="polar reciprocation" label="polar reciprocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="2080" end="2091" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822352" start="2860" end="2878" title="center of symmetry" label="center of symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2943" end="2967" title="Dual uniform polyhedron#Dorman Luke construction" label="Dorman Luke construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="3444" end="3459" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q735346" start="4038" end="4045" title="duality (projective geometry)" label="duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q177409" start="4049" end="4068" title="projective geometry" label="projective geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477369" start="4605" end="4619" title="Canonical polyhedron" label="canonical form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477369" start="4637" end="4646" title="midsphere" label="midsphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471563" start="5105" end="5123" title="uniform polyhedron" label="uniform polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q598843" start="5223" end="5236" title="vertex figure" label="vertex figure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5250" end="5274" title="Uniform dual polyhedron#Dorman Luke construction" label="Dorman Luke construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="5707" end="5712" title="Graph theory" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154570" start="5718" end="5728" title="n-skeleton" label="1-skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004228" start="5853" end="5869" title="Schlegel diagram" label="Schlegel diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294516" start="5960" end="5970" title="dual graph" label="dual graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669958" start="6253" end="6272" title="Abstract polytope" label="abstract polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="6294" end="6315" title="partially ordered set" label="partially ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q901446" start="6602" end="6615" title="Hasse diagram" label="Hasse diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q901446" start="7120" end="7133" title="Hasse diagram" label="Hasse diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203075" start="7362" end="7390" title="reflection through the origin" label="reflected through the origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714886" start="7613" end="7625" title="regular polygon" label="regular form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477369" start="7899" end="7919" title="canonical polyhedron" label="canonical polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477369" start="7956" end="7965" title="midsphere" label="midsphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358290" start="8065" end="8073" title="Pyramid (geometry)" label="pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367153" start="8100" end="8117" title="elongated pyramid" label="elongated pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q180544" start="8205" end="8210" title="prism (geometry)" label="prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747980" start="8806" end="8814" title="polytope" label="polytope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310230" start="8852" end="8864" title="dual polygon" label="dual polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189295" start="9245" end="9254" title="Honeycomb (geometry)" label="honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745944" start="9433" end="9440" title="regular polytope" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887718" start="9445" end="9452" title="Uniform polytope" label="uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610844" start="9602" end="9610" title="600-cell" label="600-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18015071" start="9618" end="9629" title="Regular icosahedron" label="icosahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q736191" start="9663" end="9671" title="120-cell" label="120-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178296" start="9690" end="9701" title="dodecahedron" label="dodecahedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745944" start="9832" end="9848" title="regular polytope" label="regular polytope"/>
<link wikidata="Q12321" start="9855" end="9866" title="palindromic" label="palindromic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347011" start="9867" end="9882" title="Schläfli symbol" label="Schläfli symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q172937" start="9926" end="9935" title="polyhedron" label="polyhedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155148" start="9955" end="9965" title="4-polytope" label="4-polytope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639678" start="9988" end="9998" title="5-polytope" label="5-polytope"/>
<link wikidata="Q714886" start="10073" end="10088" title="regular polygon" label="regular polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="10106" end="10117" title="tetrahedron" label="tetrahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q331350" start="10165" end="10172" title="simplex" label="simplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q539008" start="10201" end="10208" title="24-cell" label="24-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598608" start="10241" end="10255" title="great 120-cell" label="great 120-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595272" start="10274" end="10298" title="grand stellated 120-cell" label="grand stellated 120-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189295" start="10354" end="10364" title="Honeycomb (geometry)" label="honeycombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779316" start="10372" end="10381" title="Apeirogon" label="Apeirogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128619" start="10389" end="10402" title="Square tiling" label="Square tiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192248" start="10412" end="10427" title="Cubic honeycomb" label="Cubic honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5957922" start="10499" end="10519" title="hypercubic honeycomb" label="hypercubic honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10569" end="10579" title="Coxeter diagram#Hyperbolic Coxeter groups" label="hyperbolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100401" start="10626" end="10631" title="Order-5 pentagonal tiling" label="{5,5}"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100403" start="10633" end="10638" title="Order-6 hexagonal tiling" label="{6,6}"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077470" start="10684" end="10689" title="Infinite-order apeirogonal tiling" label="{∞,∞}"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986731" start="10723" end="10730" title="Icosahedral honeycomb" label="{3,5,3}"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100404" start="10732" end="10739" title="Order-5 dodecahedral honeycomb" label="{5,3,5}"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077950" start="10745" end="10754" title="Order-5 120-cell honeycomb" label="{5,3,3,5}"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629794" start="10792" end="10799" title="Triangular tiling honeycomb" label="{3,6,3}"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629791" start="10801" end="10808" title="Order-6 hexagonal tiling honeycomb" label="{6,3,6}"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629804" start="10810" end="10817" title="Order-4 square tiling honeycomb" label="{4,4,4}"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903048" start="10823" end="10834" title="16-cell honeycomb honeycomb" label="{3,3,4,3,3}"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890115" start="10851" end="10877" title="Conway polyhedron notation" label="Conway polyhedron notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310230" start="10880" end="10892" title="Dual polygon" label="Dual polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294516" start="10895" end="10910" title="Self-dual graph" label="Self-dual graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q714886" start="10913" end="10930" title="Self-dual polygon" label="Self-dual polygon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8816" wikidata="Q80019" url="?curid=8816" title="Double bass">
<text>The double bass (), also known as the upright bass, the acoustic bass, the bull fiddle, or simply the bass, is the largest and lowest-pitched chordophone in the modern symphony orchestra (excluding rare additions such as the octobass). It has four or five strings, and its construction is in between that of the gamba and the violin family.

The bass is a standard member of the orchestra&#x27;s string section, along with violins, violas, and cellos, as well as the concert band, and is featured in concertos, solo, and chamber music in Western classical music. The bass is used in a range of other genres, such as jazz, blues, rock and roll, rockabilly, country music, bluegrass, tango, folk music and certain types of film and video game soundtracks.

The instrument&#x27;s exact lineage is still a matter of some debate, with scholars divided on whether the bass is derived from the viol or the violin family.

Being a transposing instrument, the bass is typically notated one octave higher than tuned to avoid excessive ledger lines below the staff. The double bass is the only modern bowed string instrument that is tuned in fourths (like a bass guitar, viol, or the lowest-sounding four strings of a standard guitar), rather than fifths, with strings usually tuned to E1, A1, D2 and G2.

The double bass is played with a bow (arco), or by plucking the strings (pizzicato), or via a variety of extended techniques. In orchestral repertoire and tango music, both arco and pizzicato are employed. In jazz, blues, and rockabilly, pizzicato is the norm. Classical music and jazz use the natural sound produced acoustically by the instrument, as does traditional bluegrass. In funk, blues, reggae, and related genres, the double bass is often amplified.

==Terminology==
A person who plays this instrument is called a &quot;bassist&quot;, &quot;double bassist&quot;, &quot;double bass player&quot;, &quot;contrabassist&quot;, &quot;contrabass player&quot; or &quot;bass player&quot;. The names contrabass and double bass refer (respectively) to the instrument&#x27;s range, and to its use one octave lower than the cello (i.e. the cello part was the main bass line, and the &quot;double bass&quot; originally played a copy of the cello part; only later was it given an independent part). The terms for the instrument among classical performers are contrabass (which comes from the instrument&#x27;s Italian name, ), string bass (to distinguish it from brass bass instruments in a concert band, such as tubas), or simply bass.

In jazz, blues, rockabilly and other genres outside of classical music, this instrument is commonly called the upright bass, standup bass or acoustic bass to distinguish it from the (usually electric) bass guitar. In folk and bluegrass music, the instrument is also referred to as a &quot;bass fiddle&quot; or &quot;bass violin&quot; (or more rarely as &quot;doghouse bass&quot; or &quot;bull fiddle&quot;). While not a member of the violin-family of instruments, the construction of the upright bass is quite different from that of the acoustic bass guitar, as the latter is a derivative of the electric bass guitar, and usually built like a larger and sturdier variant of a viola de gamba, its ancestor.

The double bass is sometimes confusingly called the violone, bass violin or bass viol.

==Description==
A typical double bass stands around from scroll to endpin. Whereas the traditional &quot;full-size&quot; ( size) bass stands on average , the more common size bass (which has become the most widely used size in the modern era, even among orchestral players) stands on average from scroll to endpin. Other sizes are also available, such as a size or size, which serve to accommodate a player&#x27;s height and hand size. These names of the sizes do not reflect the true size relative to a &quot;full size&quot; bass; a bass is not half the length of a bass, but is only about 15% smaller.

Double basses are typically constructed from several types of wood, including maple for the back, spruce for the top, and ebony for the fingerboard. It is uncertain whether the instrument is a descendant of the viola da gamba or of the violin, but it is traditionally aligned with the violin family. While the double bass is nearly identical in construction to other violin family instruments, it also embodies features found in the older viol family.

The standard notes of the open strings are E1, A1, D2, and G2, the same as an acoustic or electric bass guitar. However, the resonance of the wood, combined with the violin-like construction and long scale length gives the double bass a much richer tone than the bass guitar, in addition to the ability to use a bow, while the fretless fingerboard accommodates smooth glissandos and legatos.

==Playing style==
Like other violin and viol-family string instruments, the double bass is played either with a bow (arco) or by plucking the strings (pizzicato). When employing a bow, the player can either use it traditionally or strike the wood of the bow against the string. In orchestral repertoire and tango music, both arco and pizzicato are employed. In jazz, blues, and rockabilly, pizzicato is the norm, except for some solos and occasional written parts in modern jazz that call for bowing.

Bowed notes in the lowest register of the instrument produce a dark, heavy, mighty, or even menacing effect, when played with a fortissimo dynamic; however, the same low pitches played with a delicate pianissimo can create a sonorous, mellow accompaniment line. Classical bass students learn all of the different bow articulations used by other string section players (e.g., violin and cello), such as détaché, legato, staccato, sforzato, martelé (&quot;hammered&quot;-style), sul ponticello, sul tasto, tremolo, spiccato and sautillé. Some of these articulations can be combined; for example, the combination of sul ponticello and tremolo can produce eerie, ghostly sounds. Classical bass players do play pizzicato parts in orchestra, but these parts generally require simple notes (quarter notes, half notes, whole notes), rather than rapid passages.

Classical players perform both bowed and pizz notes using vibrato, an effect created by rocking or quivering the left hand finger that is contacting the string, which then transfers an undulation in pitch to the tone. Vibrato is used to add expression to string playing. In general, very loud, low-register passages are played with little or no vibrato, as the main goal with low pitches is to provide a clear fundamental bass for the string section. Mid- and higher-register melodies are typically played with more vibrato. The speed and intensity of the vibrato is varied by the performer for an emotional and musical effect.

In jazz, rockabilly and other related genres, much or all of the focus is on playing pizzicato. In jazz and jump blues, bassists are required to play rapid pizzicato walking basslines for extended periods. Jazz and rockabilly bassists develop virtuoso pizzicato techniques that enable them to play rapid solos that incorporate fast-moving triplet and sixteenth note figures. Pizzicato basslines performed by leading jazz professionals are much more difficult than the pizzicato basslines that classical bassists encounter in the standard orchestral literature, which are typically whole notes, half notes, quarter notes, and occasional eighth note passages. In jazz and related styles, bassists often add semi-percussive &quot;ghost notes&quot; into basslines, to add to the rhythmic feel and to add fills to a bassline.

The double bass player stands, or sits on a high stool, and leans the instrument against their body, turned slightly inward to put the strings comfortably in reach. This stance is a key reason for the bass&#x27;s sloped shoulders, which mark it apart from the other members of the violin family—the narrower shoulders facilitate playing the strings in their higher registers.

==History==
The double bass is generally regarded as a modern descendant of the violone (It. “large viol”), a member of the chordophone family that originated in Europe in the 15th century. Before the 20th century many double basses had only three strings, in contrast to the five to six strings typical of instruments in the viol family or the four strings of instruments in the violin family. The double bass&#x27;s proportions are dissimilar to those of the violin and cello; for example, it is deeper (the distance from front to back is proportionally much greater than the violin). In addition, while the violin has bulging shoulders, most double basses have shoulders carved with a more acute slope, like members of the viol family. Many very old double basses have had their shoulders cut or sloped to aid playing with modern techniques. Before these modifications, the design of their shoulders was closer to instruments of the violin family.

The double bass is the only modern bowed string instrument that is tuned in fourths (like a viol), rather than fifths (see Tuning below). The instrument&#x27;s exact lineage is still a matter of some debate, and the supposition that the double bass is a direct descendant of the viol family is one that has not been entirely resolved.

In his &quot;A New History of the Double Bass&quot;, Paul Brun asserts that the double bass has origins as the true bass of the violin family. He states that, while the exterior of the double bass may resemble the viola da gamba, the internal construction of the double bass is nearly identical to instruments in the violin family, and very different from the internal structure of viols.

Double bass professor Larry Hurst argues that the &quot;modern double bass is not a true member of either the violin or viol families&quot;. He says that &quot;most likely its first general shape was that of a violone, the largest member of the viol family. Some of the earliest basses extant are violones, (including C-shaped sound holes) that have been fitted with modern trappings.&quot; Some existing instruments, such as those by Gasparo da Salò, were converted from 16th-century six-string contrabass violoni.

==Design==

There are two major approaches to the design outline shape of the double bass: the &quot;violin form&quot; (shown in the labelled picture in the construction section); and the &quot;viola da gamba&quot; form (shown in the header picture of this article). A third less common design, called the &quot;busetto&quot; shape, can also be found, as can the even more rare &quot;guitar&quot; or &quot;pear&quot; shape. The back of the instrument can vary from being a round, carved back similar to that of the violin, to a flat and angled back similar to the viol family.

The double bass features many parts that are similar to members of the violin family, including a wooden, carved bridge to support the strings, two f-holes, a tailpiece into which the ball ends of the strings are inserted (with the tailpiece anchored around the endpin mount), an ornamental scroll near the pegbox, a nut with grooves for each string at the junction of the fingerboard and the pegbox and a sturdy, thick sound post, which transmits the vibrations from the top of the instrument to the hollow body and supports the pressure of the string tension. Unlike the rest of the violin family, the double bass still reflects influences, and can be considered partly derived, from the viol family of instruments, in particular the violone, the lowest-pitched and largest bass member of the viol family. For example, the bass is tuned in fourths, like a viol, rather than in fifths, which is the standard in the violin group. Also, notice that the &#x27;shoulders&#x27; meet the neck in a curve, rather than the sharp angle seen among violins. As with the other violin and viol family instruments that are played with a bow (and unlike mainly plucked or picked instruments like guitar), the double bass&#x27;s bridge has an arc-like, curved shape. This is done because with bowed instruments, the player must be able to play individual strings. If the double bass were to have a flat bridge, it would be impossible to bow the A and D strings individually.

The double bass also differs from members of the violin family in that the shoulders are typically sloped and the back is often angled (both to allow easier access to the instrument, particularly in the upper range). Machine tuners are always fitted, in contrast to the rest of the violin family, where traditional wooden friction pegs are still the primary means of tuning. Lack of standardization in design means that one double bass can sound and look very different from another.

===Construction===
The double bass is closest in construction to violins, but has some notable similarities to the violone, the largest and lowest-pitched member of the viol family. Unlike the violone, however, the fingerboard of the double bass is unfretted, and the double bass has fewer strings (the violone, like most viols, generally had six strings, although some specimens had five or four). The fingerboard is made of ebony on high-quality instruments; on less expensive student instruments, other woods may be used and then painted or stained black (a process called &quot;ebonizing&quot;). The fingerboard is radiused using a curve, for the same reason that the bridge is curved: if the fingerboard and bridge were to be flat, then a bassist would not be able to bow the inner two strings individually. By using a curved bridge and a curved fingerboard, the bassist can align the bow with any of the four strings and play them individually. Unlike the violin and viola, but like the cello, the bass fingerboard is somewhat flattened out underneath the E string (the C string on cello), this is commonly known as a Romberg bevel. The vast majority of fingerboards cannot be adjusted by the performer; any adjustments must be made by a luthier. A very small number of expensive basses for professionals have adjustable fingerboards, in which a screw mechanism can be used to raise or lower the fingerboard height.

An important distinction between the double bass and other members of the violin family is the construction of the pegbox and the tuning mechanism. While the violin, viola, and cello all use friction pegs for tuning adjustments (tightening and loosening the string tension to raise or lower the string&#x27;s pitch), the double bass has metal machine heads and gears. One of the challenges with tuning pegs is that the friction between the wood peg and the peg hole may become insufficient to hold the peg in place, particularly if the peg hole become worn and enlarged. The key on the tuning machine of a double bass turns a metal &quot;worm&quot;, which drives a worm gear that winds the string. Turning the key in one direction tightens the string (thus raising its pitch); turning the key the opposite direction reduces the tension on the string (thus lowering its pitch). While this development makes fine tuners on the tailpiece (important for violin, viola and cello players, as their instruments use friction pegs for major pitch adjustments) unnecessary, a very small number of bassists use them nevertheless. One rationale for using fine tuners on bass is that for instruments with the low C extension, the pulley system for the long string may not effectively transfer turns of the key into changes of string tension/pitch. At the base of the double bass is a metal rod with a spiked or rubberized end called the endpin, which rests on the floor. This endpin is generally thicker and more robust than that of a cello, because of the greater mass of the instrument.

The materials most often used in double bass construction for fully carved basses (the type used by professional orchestra bassists and soloists) are maple (back, neck, ribs), spruce (top), and ebony (fingerboard, tailpiece). The tailpiece may be made from other types of wood or non-wood materials. Less expensive basses are typically constructed with laminated (plywood) tops, backs, and ribs, or are hybrid models produced with laminated backs and sides and carved solid wood tops. Some 2010-era lower- to mid-priced basses are made of willow, student models constructed of Fiberglass were produced in the mid-20th century, and some (typically fairly expensive) basses have been constructed of carbon fiber.

Laminated (plywood) basses, which are widely used in music schools, youth orchestras, and in popular and folk music settings (including rockabilly, psychobilly, blues, etc.), are very resistant to humidity and heat, as well to the physical abuse they are apt to encounter in a school environment (or, for blues and folk musicians, to the hazards of touring and performing in bars). Another option is the hybrid body bass, which has a laminated back and a carved or solid wood top. It is less costly and somewhat less fragile (at least regarding its back) than a fully carved bass.

The soundpost and bass bar are components of the internal construction. All the parts of a double bass are glued together, except the soundpost, bridge, and tailpiece, which are held in place by string tension (although the soundpost usually remains in place when the instrument&#x27;s strings are loosened or removed, as long as the bass is kept on its back. Some luthiers recommend changing only one string at a time to reduce the risk of the soundpost falling). If the soundpost falls, a luthier is needed to put the soundpost back into position, as this must be done with tools inserted into the f-holes; moreover, the exact placement of the soundpost under the bridge is essential for the instrument to sound its best. Basic bridges are carved from a single piece of wood, which is customized to match the shape of the top of each instrument. The least expensive bridges on student instruments may be customized just by sanding the feet to match the shape of the instrument&#x27;s top. A bridge on a professional bassist&#x27;s instrument may be ornately carved by a luthier.

Professional bassists are more likely to have adjustable bridges, which have a metal screw mechanism. This enables the bassist to raise or lower the height of the strings to accommodate changing humidity or temperature conditions. The metal tuning machines are attached to the sides of the pegbox with metal screws. While tuning mechanisms generally differ from the higher-pitched orchestral stringed instruments, some basses have non-functional, ornamental tuning pegs projecting from the side of the pegbox, in imitation of the tuning pegs on a cello or violin.

====Travel instruments====
Several manufacturers make travel instruments, which are double basses that have features which reduce the size of the instrument so that the instrument will meet airline travel requirements. Travel basses are designed for touring musicians. One type of travel bass has a much smaller body than normal, while still retaining all of the features needed for playing. While these smaller-body instruments appear similar to electric upright basses, the difference is that small-body travel basses still have a fairly large hollow acoustic sound chamber, while many EUBs are solid body, or only have a small hollow chamber. A second type of travel bass has a hinged or removable neck and a regular sized body. The hinged or removable neck makes the instrument smaller when it is packed for transportation.

===Strings===
The history of the double bass is tightly coupled to the development of string technology, as it was the advent of overwound gut strings, which first rendered the instrument more generally practicable, as wound or overwound strings attain low notes within a smaller overall string diameter than non-wound strings. Professor Larry Hurst argues that had &quot;it not been for the appearance of the overwound gut string in the 1650s, the double bass would surely have become extinct&quot;, because thicknesses needed for regular gut strings made the lower-pitched strings almost unplayable and hindered the development of fluid, rapid playing in the lower register.

Prior to the 20th century, double bass strings were usually made of catgut; however, steel has largely replaced it, because steel strings hold their pitch better and yield more volume when played with the bow. Gut strings are also more vulnerable to changes of humidity and temperature, and break more easily than steel strings.

Gut strings are nowadays mostly used by bassists who perform in baroque ensembles, rockabilly bands, traditional blues bands, and bluegrass bands. In some cases, the low E and A are wound in silver, to give them added mass. Gut strings provide the dark, &quot;thumpy&quot; sound heard on 1940s and 1950s recordings. The late Jeff Sarli, a blues upright bassist, said that &quot;Starting in the 1950s, they began to reset the necks on basses for steel strings.&quot; Rockabilly and bluegrass bassists also prefer gut because it is much easier to perform the &quot;slapping&quot; upright bass style (in which the strings are percussively slapped and clicked against the fingerboard) with gut strings than with steel strings, because gut does not hurt the plucking fingers as much. A less expensive alternative to gut strings is nylon strings; the higher strings are pure nylon, and the lower strings are nylon wrapped in wire, to add more mass to the string, slowing the vibration, and thus facilitating lower pitches.

The change from gut to steel has also affected the instrument&#x27;s playing technique over the last hundred years. Steel strings can be set up closer to the fingerboard and, additionally, strings can be played in higher positions on the lower strings and still produce clear tone. The classic 19th century Franz Simandl method does not use the low E string in higher positions because older gut strings, set up high over the fingerboard, could not produce clear tone in these higher positions. However, with modern steel strings, bassists can play with clear tone in higher positions on the low E and A strings, particularly when they use modern lighter-gauge, lower-tension steel strings.

===Bows===
The double bass bow comes in two distinct forms (shown below). The &quot;French&quot; or &quot;overhand&quot; bow is similar in shape and implementation to the bow used on the other members of the orchestral string instrument family, while the &quot;German&quot; or &quot;Butler&quot; bow is typically broader and shorter, and is held in a &quot;hand shake&quot; (or &quot;hacksaw&quot;) position.

These two bows provide different ways of moving the arm and distributing force and weight on the strings. Proponents of the French bow argue that it is more maneuverable, due to the angle at which the player holds the bow. Advocates of the German bow claim that it allows the player to apply more arm weight on the strings. The differences between the two, however, are minute for a proficient player, and modern players in major orchestras use both bows.

====German bow====

The German bow (sometimes called the Butler bow) is the older of the two designs. The design of the bow and the manner of holding it descend from the older viol instrument family. With older viols, before frogs had screw threads to tighten the bow, players held the bow with two fingers between the stick and the hair to maintain tension of the hair. Proponents of the use of German bow claim that the German bow is easier to use for heavy strokes that require a lot of power.

Compared to the French bow, the German bow has a taller frog, and the player holds it with the palm angled upwards, as with the upright members of the viol family. When held in the traditionally correct manner, the thumb applies the necessary power to generate the desired sound. The index finger meets the bow at the point where the frog meets the stick. The index finger also applies an upward torque to the frog when tilting the bow. The little finger (or &quot;pinky&quot;) supports the frog from underneath, while the ring finger and middle finger rest in the space between the hair and the shaft.

====French bow====
The French bow was not widely popular until its adoption by 19th-century virtuoso Giovanni Bottesini. This style is more similar to the traditional bows of the smaller string family instruments. It is held as if the hand is resting by the side of the performer with the palm facing toward the bass. The thumb rests on the shaft of the bow, next to the frog while the other fingers drape on the other side of the bow. Various styles dictate the curve of the fingers and thumb, as do the style of piece; a more pronounced curve and lighter hold on the bow is used for virtuoso or more delicate pieces, while a flatter curve and sturdier grip on the bow sacrifices some power for easier control in strokes such as detaché, spiccato, and staccato.
====Bow construction and materials====
Double bass bows vary in length, ranging from . In general, a bass bow is shorter and heavier than a cello bow. Pernambuco, also known as Brazilwood, is regarded as an excellent quality stick material, but due to its scarcity and expense, other materials are increasingly being used. Inexpensive student bows may be constructed of solid fiberglass, which makes the bow much lighter than a wooden bow (even too light to produce a good tone, in some cases). Student bows may also be made of the less valuable varieties of brazilwood. Snakewood and carbon fiber are also used in bows of a variety of different qualities. The frog of the double bass bow is usually made out of ebony, although snakewood and buffalo horn are used by some luthiers. The frog is movable, as it can be tightened or loosened with a knob (like all violin family bows). The bow is loosened at the end of a practice session or performance. The bow is tightened before playing, until it reaches a tautness that is preferred by the player. The frog on a quality bow is decorated with mother of pearl inlay.

Bows have a leather wrapping on the wooden part of the bow near the frog. Along with the leather wrapping, there is also a wire wrapping, made of silver in quality bows. The hair is usually horsehair. Part of the regular maintenance of a bow is having the bow &quot;rehaired&quot; by a luthier with fresh horsehair and having the leather and wire wrapping replaced. The double bass bow is strung with either white or black horsehair, or a combination of the two (known as &quot;salt and pepper&quot;), as opposed to the customary white horsehair used on the bows of other string instruments. Some of the lowest-quality, lowest cost student bows are made with synthetic hair. Synthetic hair does not have the tiny &quot;barbs&quot; that real horsehair has, so it does not &quot;grip&quot; the string well or take rosin well.

====Rosin====

String players apply rosin to the bow hair so it &quot;grips&quot; the string and makes it vibrate. Double bass rosin is generally softer and stickier than violin rosin to allow the hair to grab the thicker strings better, but players use a wide variety of rosins that vary from quite hard (like violin rosin) to quite soft, depending on the weather, the humidity, and the preference of the player. The amount used generally depends on the type of music being performed as well as the personal preferences of the player. Some brands of rosin, such as Wiedoeft or Pop&#x27;s double bass rosin, are softer and more prone to melting in hot weather.

==Mechanism of sound production==
Owing to their relatively small diameters, the strings themselves do not move much air and therefore cannot produce much sound on their own. The vibrational energy of the strings must somehow be transferred to the surrounding air. 
To do this, the strings vibrate the bridge and this in turn vibrates the top surface. Very small amplitude but relatively large force variations (due to the cyclically varying tension in the vibrating string) at the bridge are transformed to larger amplitude ones by combination of bridge and body of the bass. The bridge transforms the high force, small amplitude vibrations to lower force higher amplitude vibrations on the top of the bass body. The top is connected to the back by means of a sound post, so the back also vibrates. Both the front and back transmit the vibrations to the air and act to match the impedance of the vibrating string to the acoustic impedance of the air.

==Specific sound and tone production mechanism==
Because the acoustic bass is a non-fretted instrument, any string vibration due to plucking or bowing will cause an audible sound due to the strings vibrating against the fingerboard near to the fingered position. This buzzing sound gives the note its character.

==Pitch==

The lowest note of a double bass is an E1 (on standard four-string basses) at approximately 41 Hz or a C1 (≈33 Hz), or sometimes B0 (≈31 Hz), when five strings are used. This is within about an octave above the lowest frequency that the average human ear can perceive as a distinctive pitch. The top of the instrument&#x27;s fingerboard range is typically near D5, two octaves and a fifth above the open pitch of the G string (G2), as shown in the range illustration found at the head of this article. Playing beyond the end of the fingerboard can be accomplished by pulling the string slightly to the side.

Double bass symphony parts sometimes indicate that the performer should play harmonics (also called flageolet tones), in which the bassist lightly touches the string–without pressing it onto the fingerboard in the usual fashion–in the location of a note and then plucks or bows the note. Bowed harmonics are used in contemporary music for their &quot;glassy&quot; sound. Both natural harmonics and artificial harmonics, where the thumb stops the note and the octave or other harmonic is activated by lightly touching the string at the relative node point, extend the instrument&#x27;s range considerably. Natural and artificial harmonics are used in plenty of virtuoso concertos for the double bass.

Orchestral parts from the standard Classical repertoire rarely demand the double bass exceed a two-octave and a minor third range, from E1 to G3, with occasional A3s appearing in the standard repertoire (an exception to this rule is Orff&#x27;s &quot;Carmina Burana&quot;, which calls for three octaves and a perfect fourth). The upper limit of this range is extended a great deal for 20th- and 21st-century orchestral parts (e.g., Prokofiev&#x27;s &quot;Lieutenant Kijé Suite&quot; (1933) bass solo, which calls for notes as high as D4 and E4). The upper range a virtuoso solo player can achieve using natural and artificial harmonics is hard to define, as it depends on the skill of the particular player. The high harmonic in the range illustration found at the head of this article may be taken as representative rather than normative.

Five-string instruments have an additional string, typically tuned to a low B below the E string (B0). On rare occasions, a higher string is added instead, tuned to the C above the G string (C3). Four-string instruments may feature the C extension extending the range of the E string downwards to C1 (sometimes B0).

Traditionally, the double bass is a transposing instrument. Since much of the double bass&#x27;s range lies below the standard bass clef, it is notated an octave higher than it sounds to avoid having to use excessive ledger lines below the staff. Thus, when double bass players and cellists are playing from a combined bass-cello part, as used in many Mozart and Haydn symphonies, they will play in octaves, with the basses one octave below the cellos. This transposition applies even when bass players are reading the tenor and treble clef (which are used in solo playing and some orchestral parts). The tenor clef is also used by composers for cello and low brass parts. The use of tenor or treble clef avoids excessive ledger lines above the staff when notating the instrument&#x27;s upper range. Other notation traditions exist. Italian solo music is typically written at the sounding pitch, and the &quot;old&quot; German method sounded an octave below where notation except in the treble clef, where the music was written at pitch.

==Tuning==

===Regular tuning===

The double bass is generally tuned in fourths, in contrast to other members of the orchestral string family, which are tuned in fifths (for example, the violin&#x27;s four strings are, from lowest-pitched to highest-pitched: G–D–A–E). The standard tuning (lowest-pitched to highest-pitched) for bass is E–A–D–G, starting from E below second low C (concert pitch). This is the same as the standard tuning of a bass guitar and is one octave lower than the four lowest-pitched strings of standard guitar tuning. Prior to the 19th-century, many double basses had only three strings; &quot;Giovanni Bottesini (1821–1889) favored the three-stringed instrument popular in Italy at the time&quot;, because &quot;the three-stringed instrument [was viewed as] being more sonorous&quot;. Many cobla bands in Catalonia still have players using traditional three-string double basses tuned A–D–G.

Throughout classical repertoire, there are notes that fall below the range of a standard double bass. Notes below low E appear regularly in the double bass parts found in later arrangements and interpretations of Baroque music. In the Classical era, the double bass typically doubled the cello part an octave below, occasionally requiring descent to C below the E of the four-string double bass. In the Romantic era and the 20th century, composers such as Wagner, Mahler, Busoni and Prokofiev also requested notes below the low E.

There are several methods for making these notes available to the player. Players with standard double basses (E–A–D–G) may play the notes below &quot;E&quot; an octave higher or if this sounds awkward, the entire passage may be transposed up an octave. The player may tune the low E string down to the lowest note required in the piece: D or C. Four-string basses may be fitted with a &quot;low-C extension&quot; (see below). Or the player may employ a five-string instrument, with the additional lower string tuned to C, or (more commonly in modern times) B, three octaves and a semitone below middle C. Several major European orchestras use basses with a fifth string.

===C extension===

Most professional orchestral players use four-string double basses with a &quot;C extension&quot;. This is an extra section of fingerboard mounted on the head of the bass. It extends the fingerboard under the lowest string and gives an additional four semitones of downward range. The lowest string is typically tuned down to C1, an octave below the lowest note on the cello (as it is quite common for a bass part to double the cello part an octave lower). More rarely this string may be tuned to a low B0, as a few works in the orchestral repertoire call for such a B, such as Respighi&#x27;s &quot;The Pines of Rome&quot;. In rare cases, some players have a low B extension, which has B as its lowest note. There are several varieties of extensions:

In the simplest mechanical extensions, there are no mechanical aids attached to the fingerboard extension except a locking nut or &quot;gate&quot; for the E note. To play the extension notes, the player reaches back over the area under the scroll to press the string to the fingerboard. The advantage of this &quot;fingered&quot; extension is that the player can adjust the intonation of all of the stopped notes on the extension, and there are no mechanical noises from metal keys and levers. The disadvantage of the &quot;fingered&quot; extension is that it can be hard to perform rapid alternations between low notes on the extension and notes on the regular fingerboard, such as a bassline that quickly alternates between G1 and D1.

The simplest type of mechanical aid is the use of wooden &quot;fingers&quot; or &quot;gates&quot; that can be closed to press the string down and fret the C, D, E, or E notes. This system is particularly useful for basslines that have a repeating pedal point such as a low D because once the note is locked in place with the mechanical finger the lowest string sounds a different note when played open.

The most complicated mechanical aid for use with extensions is the mechanical lever system nicknamed the &quot;machine&quot;. This lever system, which superficially resembles the keying mechanism of reed instruments such as the bassoon, mounts levers beside the regular fingerboard (near the nut, on the E-string side), which remotely activate metal &quot;fingers&quot; on the extension fingerboard. The most expensive metal lever systems also give the player the ability to &quot;lock&quot; down notes on the extension fingerboard, as with the wooden &quot;finger&quot; system. One criticism of these devices is that they may lead to unwanted metallic clicking noises.

Once a mechanical &quot;finger&quot; of the wooden &quot;finger&quot; extension or the metal &quot;finger&quot; machine extension is locked down or depressed, it is not easy to make microtonal pitch adjustments or glissando effects, as is possible with a hand-fingered extension.

Five-string basses, in which the lowest string is normally B0, may use either a two semitone extension, providing a low A, or the very rare low G extension.

===Other tuning variations===
A small number of bass players tune their strings in fifths, like a cello but an octave lower (C1–G1–D2–A2 low to high). This tuning was used by the jazz player Red Mitchell and is used by some classical players, notably the Canadian bassist Joel Quarrington. Advocates of tuning the bass in fifths point out that all of the other orchestral strings are tuned in fifths (violin, viola, and cello), so this puts the bass in the same tuning approach. Fifth tuning provides a bassist with a wider range of pitch than a standard E–A–D–G bass, as it ranges (without an extension) from C1 to A2. Some players who use fifths tuning who play a five-string bass use an additional high E3 string (thus, from lowest to highest: C–G–D–A–E). Some fifth tuning bassists who only have a four string instrument and who are mainly performing soloistic works use the G–D–A–E tuning, thus omitting the low C string but gaining a high E. Some fifth tuning bassists who use a five-string use a smaller scale instrument, thus making fingering somewhat easier. The Berlioz–Strauss Treatise on Instrumentation (first published in 1844) states that &quot;A good orchestra should have several four-string double-basses, some of them tuned in fifths and thirds.&quot; The book then shows a tuning of E1–G1–D2–A2) from bottom to top string. &quot;Together with the other double-basses tuned in fourths, a combination of open strings would be available, which would greatly increase the sonority of the orchestra.&quot;

In classical solo playing the double bass is usually tuned a whole tone higher (F1–B1–E2–A2). This higher tuning is called &quot;solo tuning&quot;, whereas the regular tuning is known as &quot;orchestral tuning&quot;. Solo tuning strings are generally thinner than regular strings. String tension differs so much between solo and orchestral tuning that a different set of strings is often employed that has a lighter gauge. Strings are always labelled for either solo or orchestral tuning and published solo music is arranged for either solo or orchestral tuning. Some popular solos and concerti, such as the &quot;Koussevitsky Concerto&quot; are available in both solo and orchestral tuning arrangements. Solo tuning strings can be tuned down a tone to play in orchestra pitch, but the strings often lack projection in orchestral tuning and their pitch may be unstable.

Some contemporary composers specify highly specialized scordatura (intentionally changing the tuning of the open strings). Changing the pitch of the open strings makes different notes available as pedal points and harmonics.
A variant and much less-commonly used form of solo tuning used in some Eastern European countries is (A1–D2–G2–C3), which omits the low E string from orchestral tuning and then adds a high C string. The tololoche in Mexico (a smaller variant of the double bass) also uses the A-D-G-C tuning. Some bassists with five-string basses use a high C3 string as the fifth string, instead of a low B0 string. Adding the high C string facilitates the performance of solo repertoire with a high tessitura (range). Another option is to utilize both a low C (or low B) extension and a high C string.

====Five strings====
When choosing a bass with a fifth string, the player may decide between adding a higher-pitched string (a high C string) or a lower-pitched string (typically a low B). To accommodate the additional fifth string, the fingerboard is usually slightly widened, and the top slightly thicker, to handle the increased tension. Most five-string basses are therefore larger in size than a standard four-string bass. Some five-stringed instruments are converted four-string instruments. Because these do not have wider fingerboards, some players find them more difficult to finger and bow. Converted four-string basses usually require either a new, thicker top, or lighter strings to compensate for the increased tension.

====Six strings====

The six-string double bass has both a high C and a low B, making it very useful, and it is becoming more practical after several updates. It is ideal for solo and orchestral playing because it has a more playable range. This can be achieved on a six-string violone in D by restringing it with double bass strings, making the tuning B0–E1–A1–D2–G2–C3.

==Playing and performance considerations==

===Body and hand position===

Double bassists either stand or sit to play the instrument. The instrument height is set by adjusting the endpin such that the player can reach the desired playing zones of the strings with bow or plucking hand. Bassists who stand and bow sometimes set the endpin by aligning the first finger in either first or half position with eye level, although there is little standardization in this regard. Players who sit generally use a stool about the height of the player&#x27;s trousers inseam length.

Traditionally, double bassists stood to play solo and sat to play in the orchestra or opera pit. Now, it is unusual for a player to be equally proficient in both positions, so some soloists sit (as with Joel Quarrington, Jeff Bradetich, Thierry Barbé, and others) and some orchestral bassists stand.

When playing in the instrument&#x27;s upper range (above G3, the G below middle C), the player shifts the hand from behind the neck and flattens it out, using the side of the thumb to press down the string. This technique—also used on the cello—is called &quot;thumb position&quot;. While playing in thumb position, few players use the fourth (little) finger, as it is usually too weak to produce reliable tone (this is also true for cellists), although some extreme chords or extended techniques, especially in contemporary music, may require its use.

===Physical considerations===
Rockabilly style can be very demanding on the plucking hand, due to rockabilly&#x27;s use of &quot;slapping&quot; on the fingerboard.
Performing on bass can be physically demanding, because the strings are under relatively high tension. Also, the space between notes on the fingerboard is large, due to scale length and string spacing, so players must hold their fingers apart for the notes in the lower positions and shift positions frequently to play basslines. As with all non-fretted string instruments, performers must learn to place their fingers precisely to produce the correct pitch. For bassists with shorter arms or smaller hands, the large spaces between pitches may present a significant challenge, especially in the lowest range, where the spaces between notes are largest. However, the increased use of playing techniques such as thumb position and modifications to the bass, such as the use of lighter-gauge strings at lower tension, have eased the difficulty of playing the instrument.

Bass parts have relatively fewer fast passages, double stops, or large jumps in range. These parts are usually given to the cello section, since the cello is a smaller instrument on which these techniques are more easily performed.

===Volume===
Despite the size of the instrument, it is not as loud as many other instruments, due to its low musical pitch. In a large orchestra, usually between four and eight bassists play the same bassline in unison to produce enough volume. In the largest orchestras, bass sections may have as many as ten or twelve players, but modern budget constraints make bass sections this large unusual.

When writing solo passages for the bass in orchestral or chamber music, composers typically ensure the orchestration is light so it does not obscure the bass. While amplification is rarely used in classical music, in some cases where a bass soloist performs a concerto with a full orchestra, subtle amplification called acoustic enhancement may be used. The use of microphones and amplifiers in a classical setting has led to debate within the classical community, as &quot;...purists maintain that the natural acoustic sound of [Classical] voices [or] instruments in a given hall should not be altered&quot;.

In many genres, such as jazz and blues, players use amplification via a specialized amplifier and loudspeakers. A piezoelectric pickup connects to the amplifier with a -inch cable. Bluegrass and jazz players typically use less amplification than blues, psychobilly, or jam band players. In the latter cases, high overall volume from other amplifiers and instruments may cause unwanted acoustic feedback, a problem exacerbated by the bass&#x27;s large surface area and interior volume. The feedback problem has led to technological fixes like electronic feedback eliminator devices (essentially an automated notch filter that identifies and reduces frequencies where feedback occurs) and instruments like the electric upright bass, which has playing characteristics like the double bass but usually little or no soundbox, which makes feedback less likely. Some bassists reduce the problem of feedback by lowering their onstage volume or playing further away from their bass amp speakers.

In rockabilly and psychobilly, percussively slapping the strings against the fingerboard is an important part of the bass playing style. Since piezoelectric pickups are not good at reproducing the sounds of strings being slapped against the fingerboard, bassists in these genres often use both piezoelectric pickups (for the low bass tone) and a miniature condenser mic (to pick up the percussive slapping sounds). These two signals are blended together using a simple mixer before the signal is sent to the bass amp.

===Transportation===
The double bass&#x27;s large size and relative fragility make it cumbersome to handle and transport. Most bassists use soft cases, referred to as gig bags, to protect the instrument during transport. These range from inexpensive, thin unpadded cases used by students (which only protect against scratches and rain) to thickly padded versions for professional players, which also protect against bumps and impacts. Some bassists carry their bow in a hard bow case; more expensive bass cases have a large pocket for a bow case. Players also may use a small cart and end pin-attached wheels to move the bass. Some higher-priced padded cases have wheels attached to the case. Another option found in higher-priced padded cases are backpack straps, to make it easier to carry the instrument.

Hard flight cases have cushioned interiors and tough exteriors of carbon fiber, graphite, fiberglass, or Kevlar. The cost of good hard cases–several thousand US dollars–and the high airline fees for shipping them tend to limit their use to touring professionals.

===Accessories===

Double bass players use various accessories to help them to perform and rehearse. Three types of mutes are used in orchestral music: a wooden mute that slides onto the bridge, a rubber mute that attaches to the bridge and a wire device with brass weights that fits onto the bridge. The player uses the mute when the Italian instruction &quot;con sordino&quot; (&quot;with mute&quot;) appears in the bass part, and removes it in response to the instruction &quot;senza sordino&quot; (&quot;without mute&quot;). With the mute on, the tone of the bass is quieter, darker, and more somber. Bowed bass parts with a mute can have a nasal tone. Players use a third type of mute, a heavy rubber practice mute, to practice quietly without disturbing others (e.g., in a hotel room).

A quiver is an accessory for holding the bow. It is often made of leather and it attaches to the bridge and tailpiece with ties or straps. It is used to hold the bow while a player plays pizzicato parts.

A wolf tone eliminator is used to lessen unwanted sympathetic vibrations in the part of a string between the bridge and the tailpiece which can cause tone problems for certain notes. It is a rubber tube cut down the side that is used with a cylindrical metal sleeve which also has a slot on the side. The metal cylinder has a screw and a nut that fastens the device to the string. Different placements of the cylinder along the string influence or eliminate the frequency at which the wolf tone occurs. It is essentially an attenuator that slightly shifts the natural frequency of the string (and/or instrument body) cutting down on the reverberation. The wolf tone occurs because the strings below the bridge sometimes resonate at pitches close to notes on the playing part of the string. When the intended note makes the below-the-bridge string vibrate sympathetically, a dissonant &quot;wolf note&quot; or &quot;wolf tone&quot; can occur. In some cases, the wolf tone is strong enough to cause an audible &quot;beating&quot; sound. The wolf tone often occurs with the note G on the bass.

In orchestra, instruments tune to an A played by the oboist. Due to the three-octave gap between the oboist&#x27;s tuning A and the open A string on the bass (for example, in an orchestra that tunes to 440 Hz, the oboist plays an A4 at 440 Hz and the open A1 of the bass is 55 Hz) it can be difficult to tune the bass by ear during the short period that the oboist plays the tuning note. Violinists, on the other hand, tune their A string to the same frequency as the oboist&#x27;s tuning note. There is a method commonly used to tune a double bass in this context by playing the A harmonic on the D string (which is only an octave below the oboe A) and then matching the harmonics of the other strings. However, this method is not foolproof, since some basses&#x27; harmonics are not perfectly in tune with the open strings. To ensure the bass is in tune, some bassists use an electronic tuner that indicates pitch on a small display. Bassists who play in styles that use a bass amp, such as blues, rockabilly, or jazz, may use a stompbox-format electronic tuner, which mutes the bass pickup during tuning.

A double bass stand is used to hold the instrument in place and raise it a few inches off the ground. A wide variety of stands are available, and there is no one common design.

==Classical repertoire==

===Solo works for double bass===

====1700s====
The double bass as a solo instrument enjoyed a period of popularity during the 18th century and many of the most popular composers from that era wrote pieces for the double bass. The double bass, then often referred to as the Violone, used different tunings from region to region. The &quot;Viennese tuning&quot; (A1–D2–F2–A2) was popular, and in some cases a fifth string or even sixth string was added (F1–A1–D2–F2–A2). The popularity of the instrument is documented in Leopold Mozart&#x27;s second edition of his Violinschule, where he writes &quot;One can bring forth difficult passages easier with the five-string violone, and I heard unusually beautiful performances of concertos, trios, solos, etc.&quot;
The earliest known concerto for double bass was written by Joseph Haydn 1763, and is presumed lost in a fire at the Eisenstadt library. The earliest known existing concertos are by Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf, who composed two concertos for the double bass and a Sinfonia Concertante for viola and double bass. Other composers that have written concertos from this period include Johann Baptist Wanhal, Franz Anton Hoffmeister (3 concertos), Leopold Kozeluch, Anton Zimmermann, Antonio Capuzzi, Wenzel Pichl (2 concertos), and Johannes Matthias Sperger (18 concertos). While many of these names were leading figures to the music public of their time, they are generally unknown by contemporary audiences. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart&#x27;s concert aria, &quot;Per questa bella mano&quot;, K.612 for bass, double bass obbligato, and orchestra contains impressive writing for solo double bass of that period. It remains popular among both singers and double bassists today.

The double bass eventually evolved to fit the needs of orchestras that required lower notes and a louder sound. The leading double bassists from the mid-to-late 18th century, such as Josef Kämpfer, Friedrich Pischelberger, and Johannes Mathias Sperger employed the &quot;Viennese&quot; tuning. Bassist Johann Hindle (1792–1862), who composed a concerto for the double bass, pioneered tuning the bass in fourths, which marked a turning point for the double bass and its role in solo works. Bassist Domenico Dragonetti was a prominent musical figure and an acquaintance of Haydn and Ludwig van Beethoven. His playing was known all the way from his homeland, Italy, to the Tsardom of Russia and he found a prominent place performing in concerts with the Philharmonic Society of London. Beethoven&#x27;s friendship with Dragonetti may have inspired him to write difficult, separate parts for the double bass in his symphonies, such as the impressive passages in the third movement of the Fifth Symphony, the second movement of the Seventh Symphony, and last movement of the Ninth Symphony. These parts do not double the cello part.

Dragonetti wrote ten concertos for the double bass and many solo works for bass and piano. During Rossini&#x27;s stay in London in the summer of 1824, he composed his popular Duetto for cello and double bass for Dragonetti and the cellist David Salomons. Dragonetti frequently played on a three string double bass tuned G–D–A from top to bottom. The use of only the top three strings was popular for bass soloists and principal bassists in orchestras in the 19th century, because it reduced the pressure on the wooden top of the bass, which was thought to create a more resonant sound. As well, the low E-strings used during the 19th century were thick cords made of gut, which were difficult to tune and play.

====1800s====

In the 19th century, the opera conductor, composer, and bassist Giovanni Bottesini was considered the &quot;Paganini of the double bass&quot; of his time, a reference to the violin virtuoso and composer. Bottesini&#x27;s bass concertos were written in the popular Italian opera style of the 19th century, which exploit the double bass in a way that was not seen beforehand. They require virtuosic runs and great leaps to the highest registers of the instrument, even into the realm of natural and artificial harmonics. Many 19th century and early 20th century bassists considered these compositions unplayable, but in the 2000s, they are frequently performed. During the same time, a prominent school of bass players in the Czech region arose, which included Franz Simandl, Theodore Albin Findeisen, Josef Hrabe, Ludwig Manoly, and Adolf Mišek. Simandl and Hrabe were also pedagogues whose method books and studies remain in use in the 2000s.

====1900s–present====
The leading figure of the double bass in the early 20th century was Serge Koussevitzky, best known as conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, who popularized the double bass in modern times as a solo instrument. Because of improvements to the double bass with steel strings and better set-ups, the bass is now played at a more advanced level than ever before and more and more composers have written works for the double bass. In the mid-century and in the following decades, many new concerti were written for the double bass, including Nikos Skalkottas&#x27;s Concerto (1942), Eduard Tubin&#x27;s Concerto (1948), Lars-Erik Larsson&#x27;s Concertino (1957), Gunther Schuller&#x27;s Concerto (1962), Hans Werner Henze&#x27;s Concerto (1966) and Frank Proto&#x27;s Concerto No. 1 (1968).

The &quot;Solo For Contrabass&quot; is one of the parts of John Cage&#x27;s &quot;Concert For Piano And Orchestra&quot; and can be played as a solo, or with any of the other parts both orchestral and/or piano. Similarly, his solo contrabass parts for the orchestral work &quot;Atlas Eclipticalis&quot; can also be performed as solos. Cage&#x27;s indeterminate works such as &quot;Variations I&quot;, &quot;Variations II&quot;, &quot;Fontana Mix&quot;, &quot;Cartridge Music&quot; et al. can be arranged for a solo contrabassist. His work &quot;26.1.1499 for a String Player&quot; is often realized by a solo contrabass player, although it can also be played by a violinist, violist, or cellist.

From the 1960s through the end of the century Gary Karr was the leading proponent of the double bass as a solo instrument and was active in commissioning or having hundreds of new works and concerti written especially for him. Karr was given Koussevitzky&#x27;s famous solo double bass by Olga Koussevitsky and played it in concerts around the world for 40 years before, in turn, giving the instrument to the International Society of Bassists for talented soloists to use in concert. Another important performer in this period, Bertram Turetzky, commissioned and premiered more than 300 double bass works.

In the 1970s, 1980 and 1990s, new concerti included Nino Rota&#x27;s &quot;Divertimento for Double Bass and Orchestra&quot; (1973), Alan Ridout&#x27;s concerto for double bass and strings (1974), Jean Françaix&#x27;s Concerto (1975), Frank Proto&#x27;s Concerto No. 2, Einojuhani Rautavaara&#x27;s &quot;Angel of Dusk&quot; (1980), Gian Carlo Menotti&#x27;s Concerto (1983), Christopher Rouse&#x27;s Concerto (1985), Henry Brant&#x27;s Ghost Nets (1988) and Frank Proto&#x27;s &quot;Carmen Fantasy for Double Bass and Orchestra&quot; (1991) and &quot;Four Scenes after Picasso&quot; Concerto No. 3 (1997). Peter Maxwell Davies&#x27; lyrical Strathclyde Concerto No. 7, for double bass and orchestra, dates from 1992.

In the first decade of the 21st century, new concerti include Frank Proto&#x27;s &quot;Nine Variants on Paganini&quot; (2002), Kalevi Aho&#x27;s Concerto (2005), John Harbison&#x27;s &quot;Concerto for Bass Viol&quot; (2006), André Previn&#x27;s Double Concerto for violin, double bass, and orchestra (2007) and John Woolrich&#x27;s &quot;To the Silver Bow&quot;, for double bass, viola and strings (2014).

Reinhold Glière wrote an Intermezzo and Tarantella for double bass and piano, Op. 9, No. 1 and No. 2 and a Praeludium and Scherzo for double bass and piano, Op. 32 No. 1 and No. 2. Paul Hindemith wrote a rhythmically challenging Double Bass Sonata in 1949. Frank Proto wrote his Sonata &quot;1963&quot; for Double Bass and Piano. In the Soviet Union, Mieczysław Weinberg wrote his Sonata No. 1 for double bass solo in 1971. Giacinto Scelsi wrote two double bass pieces called &quot;Nuits&quot; in 1972, and then in 1976, he wrote &quot;Maknongan&quot;, a piece for any low-voiced instrument, such as double bass, contrabassoon, or tuba. Vincent Persichetti wrote solo works—which he called &quot;Parables&quot;—for many instruments. He wrote Parable XVII for Double Bass, Op. 131 in 1974. Sofia Gubaidulina penned a Sonata for double bass and piano in 1975. In 1976 American minimalist composer Tom Johnson wrote &quot;Failing – a very difficult piece for solo string bass&quot; in which the player has to perform an extremely virtuosic solo on the bass whilst simultaneously reciting a text which says how very difficult the piece is and how unlikely he or she is to successfully complete the performance without making a mistake.

In 1977 Dutch-Hungarian composer Géza Frid wrote a set of variations on The Elephant from Saint-Saëns&#x27; &quot;Le Carnaval des Animaux&quot; for scordatura double bass and string orchestra. In 1987 Lowell Liebermann wrote his Sonata for Contrabass and Piano Op. 24. Fernando Grillo wrote the &quot;Suite No. 1&quot; for double bass (1983/2005). Jacob Druckman wrote a piece for solo double bass entitled &quot;Valentine&quot;. US double bass soloist and composer Bertram Turetzky (born 1933) has performed and recorded more than 300 pieces written by and for him. He writes chamber music, baroque music, classical, jazz, renaissance music, improvisational music and world music

US minimalist composer Philip Glass wrote a prelude focused on the lower register that he scored for timpani and double bass. Italian composer Sylvano Bussotti, whose composing career spans from the 1930s to the first decade of the 21st century, wrote a solo work for bass in 1983 entitled &quot;Naked Angel Face per contrabbasso&quot;. Fellow Italian composer Franco Donatoni wrote a piece called &quot;Lem for contrabbasso&quot; in the same year. In 1989, French composer Pascal Dusapin (born 1955) wrote a solo piece called &quot;In et Out&quot; for double bass. In 1996, the Sorbonne-trained Lebanese composer Karim Haddad composed &quot;Ce qui dort dans l&#x27;ombre sacrée&quot; (&quot;He who sleeps in the sacred shadows&quot;) for Radio France&#x27;s Presence Festival. Renaud Garcia-Fons (born 1962) is a French double bass player and composer, notable for drawing on jazz, folk, and Asian music for recordings of his pieces like &quot;Oriental Bass&quot; (1997).

Two significant recent works written for solo bass include, Mario Davidovsky&#x27;s Synchronisms No.11 for double bass and electronic sounds and Elliott Carter&#x27;s Figment III, for solo double bass. The German composer Gerhard Stäbler wrote &quot;Co-wie Kobalt&quot; (1989–90), &quot;...a music for double bass solo and grand orchestra&quot;. Charles Wuorinen added several important works to the repertoire, &quot;Spinoff&quot; trio for double bass, violin and conga drums, and &quot;Trio for Bass Instruments&quot; double bass, tuba and bass trombone, and in 2007 &quot;Synaxis&quot; for double bass, horn, oboe and clarinet with timpani and strings. The suite &quot;Seven Screen Shots&quot; for double bass and piano (2005) by Ukrainian composer Alexander Shchetynsky has a solo bass part that includes many unconventional methods of playing. The German composer Claus Kühnl wrote &quot;Offene Weite / Open Expanse&quot; (1998) and &quot;Nachtschwarzes Meer, ringsum…&quot; (2005) for double bass and piano.In 1997 Joel Quarrington commissioned the American / Canadian composer Raymond Luedeke to write his &quot;Concerto for Double Bass and Orchestra&quot;, a piece he performed with the Toronto Symphony Orchestra, with the Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra, and, in a version for small orchestra, with the Nova Scotia Symphony Orchestra. Composer Raymond Luedeke also composed a work for double bass, flute, and viola with narration, &quot;The Book of Questions&quot;, with text by Pablo Neruda.

In 2004 Italian double bassist and composer Stefano Scodanibbio made a double bass arrangement of Luciano Berio&#x27;s 2002 solo cello work &quot;Sequenza XIV&quot; with the new title &quot;Sequenza XIVb&quot;.

===Chamber music with double bass===
Since there is no established instrumental ensemble that includes the double bass, its use in chamber music has not been as exhaustive as the literature for ensembles such as the string quartet or piano trio. Despite this, there is a substantial number of chamber works that incorporate the double bass in both small and large ensembles.

There is a small body of works written for piano quintet with the instrumentation of piano, violin, viola, cello, and double bass. The most famous is Franz Schubert&#x27;s Piano Quintet in A major, known as &quot;The Trout Quintet&quot; for its set of variations in the fourth movement of Schubert&#x27;s &quot;Die Forelle&quot;. Other works for this instrumentation written from roughly the same period include those by Johann Nepomuk Hummel, George Onslow, Jan Ladislav Dussek, Louise Farrenc, Ferdinand Ries, Franz Limmer, Johann Baptist Cramer, and Hermann Goetz. Later composers who wrote chamber works for this quintet include Ralph Vaughan Williams, Colin Matthews, Jon Deak, Frank Proto, and John Woolrich. Slightly larger sextets written for piano, string quartet, and double bass have been written by Felix Mendelssohn, Mikhail Glinka, Richard Wernick, and Charles Ives.

In the genre of string quintets, there are a few works for string quartet with double bass. Antonín Dvořák&#x27;s String Quintet in G major, Op.77 and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart&#x27;s Serenade in G major, K.525 (&quot;Eine kleine Nachtmusik&quot;) are the most popular pieces in this repertoire, along with works by Miguel del Águila (&quot;Nostalgica&quot; for string quartet and bass), Darius Milhaud, Luigi Boccherini (3 quintets), Harold Shapero, and Paul Hindemith. Another example is Alistair Hinton&#x27;s String Quintet (1969–77), which also includes a major part for solo soprano; at almost 170 minutes in duration, it is almost certainly the largest such work in the repertoire.

Slightly smaller string works with the double bass include six string sonatas by Gioachino Rossini, for two violins, cello, and double bass written at the age of twelve over the course of three days in 1804. These remain his most famous instrumental works and have also been adapted for wind quartet. Rossini and Dragonetti composed duos for cello and double bass, as did Johannes Matthias Sperger, a major soloist on the &quot;Viennese&quot; tuning instrument of the 18th century. Franz Anton Hoffmeister wrote four String Quartets for Solo Double Bass, Violin, Viola, and Cello in D Major. Frank Proto has written a Trio for Violin, Viola and Double Bass (1974), 2 Duos for Violin and Double Bass (1967 and 2005), and &quot;The Games of October&quot; for Oboe/English Horn and Double Bass (1991).

Larger works that incorporate the double bass include Beethoven&#x27;s Septet in E major, Op. 20, one of his most famous pieces during his lifetime, which consists of clarinet, horn, bassoon, violin, viola, cello, and bass. When the clarinetist Ferdinand Troyer commissioned a work from Franz Schubert for similar forces, he added one more violin for his Octet in F major, D.803. Paul Hindemith used the same instrumentation as Schubert for his own Octet. In the realm of even larger works, Mozart included the double bass in addition to 12 wind instruments for his &quot;Gran Partita&quot; Serenade, K.361 and Martinů used the double bass in his nonet for wind quintet, violin, viola, cello and double bass.

Other examples of chamber works that use the double bass in mixed ensembles include Sergei Prokofiev&#x27;s Quintet in G minor, Op. 39 for oboe, clarinet, violin, viola, and double bass; Miguel del Águila&#x27;s &quot;Malambo&quot; for bass flute and piano and for string quartet, bass and bassoon; Erwin Schulhoff&#x27;s Concertino for flute/piccolo, viola, and double bass; Frank Proto&#x27;s &quot;Afro-American Fragments&quot; for bass clarinet, cello, double bass and narrator and Sextet for clarinet and strings; Fred Lerdahl&#x27;s Waltzes for violin, viola, cello, and double bass; Mohammed Fairouz&#x27;s Litany for double bass and wind quartet; Mario Davidovsky&#x27;s Festino for guitar, viola, cello, and double bass; and Iannis Xenakis&#x27;s Morsima-Amorsima for piano, violin, cello, and double bass. There are also new music ensembles that utilize the double bass such as Time for Three and PROJECT Trio.

===Orchestral passages and solos===

In the baroque and classical periods, composers typically had the double bass double the cello part in orchestral passages. A notable exception is Haydn, who composed solo passages for the double bass in his Symphonies No. 6 &quot;Le Matin&quot;, No. 7 &quot;Le midi&quot;, No. 8 &quot;Le Soir&quot;, No. 31 &quot;Horn Signal&quot;, and No. 45 &quot;Farewell&quot;—but who otherwise grouped bass and cello parts together. Beethoven paved the way for separate double bass parts, which became more common in the romantic era. The scherzo and trio from Beethoven&#x27;s Fifth Symphony are famous orchestral excerpts, as is the recitative at the beginning of the fourth movement of Beethoven&#x27;s Ninth Symphony. In many nineteenth century symphonies and concertos, the typical impact of separate bass and cello parts was that bass parts became simpler and cello parts got the melodic lines and rapid passage work.

A double bass section of a modern orchestra typically uses eight double bassists, usually in unison. Smaller orchestras may have four double basses, and in exceptional cases, bass sections may have as many as ten members. If some double bassists have low C extensions, and some have regular (low E) basses, those with the low C extensions may play some passages an octave below the regular double basses. Also, some composers write divided (divisi) parts for the basses, where upper and lower parts in the music are often assigned to &quot;outside&quot; (nearer the audience) and &quot;inside&quot; players. Composers writing divisi parts for bass often write perfect intervals, such as octaves and fifths, but in some cases use thirds and sixths.
Where a composition calls for a solo bass part, the principal bass invariably plays that part. The section leader (or principal) also determines the bowings, often based on bowings set out by the concertmaster. In some cases, the principal bass may use a slightly different bowing than the concertmaster, to accommodate the requirements of playing bass. The principal bass also leads entrances for the bass section, typically by lifting the bow or plucking hand before the entrance or indicating the entrance with the head, to ensure the section starts together. Major professional orchestras typically have an assistant principal bass player, who plays solos and leads the bass section if the principal is absent.

While orchestral bass solos are somewhat rare, there are some notable examples. Johannes Brahms, whose father was a double bass player, wrote many difficult and prominent parts for the double bass in his symphonies. Richard Strauss assigned the double bass daring parts, and his symphonic poems and operas stretch the instrument to its limits. &quot;The Elephant&quot; from Camille Saint-Saëns&#x27; &quot;The Carnival of the Animals&quot; is a satirical portrait of the double bass, and American virtuoso Gary Karr made his televised debut playing &quot;The Swan&quot; (originally written for the cello) with the New York Philharmonic conducted by Leonard Bernstein. The third movement of Gustav Mahler&#x27;s first symphony features a solo for the double bass that quotes the children&#x27;s song &quot;Frere Jacques&quot;, transposed into a minor key. Sergei Prokofiev&#x27;s &quot;Lieutenant Kijé Suite&quot; features a difficult and very high double bass solo in the &quot;Romance&quot; movement. Benjamin Britten&#x27;s &quot;The Young Person&#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra&quot; contains a prominent passage for the double bass section.

===Double bass ensembles===
Ensembles made up entirely of double basses, though relatively rare, also exist, and several composers have written or arranged for such ensembles. Compositions for four double basses exist by Gunther Schuller, Jacob Druckman, James Tenney, Claus Kühnl, Robert Ceely, Jan Alm, Bernhard Alt, Norman Ludwin, Frank Proto, Joseph Lauber, Erich Hartmann, Colin Brumby, Miloslav Gajdos and Theodore Albin Findeisen. David A. Jaffe&#x27;s &quot;Who&#x27;s on First?&quot;, commissioned by the Russian National Orchestra is scored for five double basses. Bertold Hummel wrote a &quot;Sinfonia piccola&quot; for eight double basses. Larger ensemble works include Galina Ustvolskaya&#x27;s Composition No. 2, &quot;Dies Irae&quot; (1973), for eight double basses, piano, and wooden cube, José Serebrier&#x27;s &quot;George and Muriel&quot; (1986), for solo bass, double bass ensemble, and chorus, and Gerhard Samuel&#x27;s &quot;What of my music!&quot; (1979), for soprano, percussion, and 30 double basses.

Double bass ensembles include L&#x27;Orchestre de Contrebasses (6 members), Bass Instinct (6 members), Bassiona Amorosa (6 members), the Chicago Bass Ensemble (4+ members), Ludus Gravis founded by Daniele Roccato and Stefano Scodanibbio, The Bass Gang (4 members), the London Double Bass Ensemble (6 members) founded by members of the Philharmonia Orchestra of London who produced the LP Music Interludes by London Double Bass Ensemble on Bruton Music records, Brno Double Bass Orchestra (14 members) founded by the double bass professor at Janáček Academy of Music and Performing Arts and principal double bass player at Brno Philharmonic Orchestra – Miloslav Jelinek, and the ensembles of Ball State University (12 members), Shenandoah University, and the Hartt School of Music. The Amarillo Bass Base of Amarillo, Texas once featured 52 double bassists, and The London Double Bass Sound, who have released a CD on Cala Records, have 10 players.

In addition, the double bass sections of some orchestras perform as an ensemble, such as the Chicago Symphony Orchestra&#x27;s Lower Wacker Consort. There is an increasing number of published compositions and arrangements for double bass ensembles, and the International Society of Bassists regularly features double bass ensembles (both smaller ensembles as well as very large &quot;mass bass&quot; ensembles) at its conferences, and sponsors the biennial David Walter Composition Competition, which includes a division for double bass ensemble works.

==Use in jazz==
Beginning around 1890, the early New Orleans jazz ensemble (which played a mixture of marches, ragtime, and Dixieland) was initially a marching band with a tuba or sousaphone (or occasionally bass saxophone) supplying the bass line. As the music moved into bars and brothels, the upright bass gradually replaced these wind instruments around the 1920s. Many early bassists doubled on both the &quot;brass bass (tuba)&quot; and &quot;string bass&quot;, as the instruments were then often referred to. Bassists played improvised &quot;walking&quot; bass lines—scale- and arpeggio-based lines that outlined the chord progression.

Because an unamplified upright bass is generally the quietest instrument in a jazz band, many players of the 1920s and 1930s used the &quot;slap style&quot;, slapping and pulling the strings to produce a rhythmic &quot;slap&quot; sound against the fingerboard. The slap style cuts through the sound of a band better than simply plucking the strings, and made the bass more easily heard on early sound recordings, as the recording equipment of that time did not favor low frequencies. For more about the slap style, see &quot;Modern playing styles&quot;, below.
Jazz bass players are expected to improvise an accompaniment line or solo for a given chord progression. They are also expected to know the rhythmic patterns that are appropriate for different styles (e.g., Afro-Cuban). Bassists playing in a big band must also be able to read written-out bass lines, as some arrangements have written bass parts.

Many upright bass players have contributed to the evolution of jazz. Examples include swing era players such as Jimmy Blanton, who played with Duke Ellington, and Oscar Pettiford, who pioneered the instrument&#x27;s use in bebop. Paul Chambers (who worked with Miles Davis on the famous &quot;Kind of Blue&quot; album) achieved renown for being one of the first jazz bassists to play bebop solos with the bow. Terry Plumeri furthered the development of arco (bowed) solos, achieving horn-like technical freedom and a clear, vocal bowed tone, while Charlie Haden, best known for his work with Ornette Coleman, defined the role of the bass in Free Jazz.

A number of other bassists, such as Ray Brown, Slam Stewart and Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen, were central to the history of jazz. Stewart, who was popular with the beboppers, played his solos with a bow combined with octave humming. Notably, Charles Mingus was a highly regarded composer as well as a bassist noted for his technical virtuosity and powerful sound. Scott LaFaro influenced a generation of musicians by liberating the bass from contrapuntal &quot;walking&quot; behind soloists instead favoring interactive, conversational melodies. Since the commercial availability of bass amplifiers in the 1950s, jazz bassists have used amplification to augment the natural volume of the instrument.

While the electric bass guitar was used intermittently in jazz as early as 1951, beginning in the 1970s bassist Bob Cranshaw, playing with saxophonist Sonny Rollins, and fusion pioneers Jaco Pastorius and Stanley Clarke began to commonly substitute the bass guitar for the upright bass. Apart from the jazz styles of jazz fusion and Latin-influenced jazz however, the upright bass is still the dominant bass instrument in jazz. The sound and tone of the plucked upright bass is distinct from that of the fretted bass guitar. The upright bass produces a different sound than the bass guitar, because its strings are not stopped by metal frets, instead having a continuous tonal range on the uninterrupted fingerboard. As well, bass guitars usually have a solid wood body, which means that their sound is produced by electronic amplification of the vibration of the strings, instead of the upright bass&#x27;s acoustic reverberation.

Demonstrative examples of the sound of a solo double bass and its technical use in jazz can be heard on the solo recordings &quot;Emerald Tears&quot; (1978) by Dave Holland or &quot;Emergence&quot; (1986) by Miroslav Vitouš. Holland also recorded an album with the representative title &quot;Music from Two Basses&quot; (1971) on which he plays with Barre Phillips while he sometimes switches to cello.

==Use in bluegrass and country==

The string bass is the most commonly used bass instrument in bluegrass music and is almost always plucked, though some modern bluegrass bassists have also used a bow. The bluegrass bassist is part of the rhythm section, and is responsible for keeping a steady beat, whether fast, slow, in , or time. The bass also maintains the chord progression and harmony. The Engelhardt-Link (formerly Kay) brands of plywood laminate basses have long been popular choices for bluegrass bassists. Most bluegrass bassists use the size bass, but the full-size and size basses are also used.
Early pre-bluegrass traditional music was often accompanied by the cello. The cellist Natalie Haas points out that in the US, you can find &quot;...old photographs, and even old recordings, of American string bands with cello&quot;. However, &quot;The cello dropped out of sight in folk music, and became associated with the orchestra.&quot; The cello did not reappear in bluegrass until the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century. Some contemporary bluegrass bands favor the electric bass, because it is easier to transport than the large and somewhat fragile upright bass. However, the bass guitar has a different musical sound. Many musicians feel the slower attack and percussive, woody tone of the upright bass gives it a more &quot;earthy&quot; or &quot;natural&quot; sound than an electric bass, particularly when gut strings are used.

Common rhythms in bluegrass bass playing involve (with some exceptions) plucking on beats 1 and 3 in time; beats 1 and 2 in time, and on the downbeat in time (waltz time). Bluegrass bass lines are usually simple, typically staying on the root and fifth of each chord throughout most of a song. There are two main exceptions to this rule. Bluegrass bassists often do a diatonic &quot;walkup&quot; or &quot;walkdown,&quot; in which they play every beat of a bar for one or two bars, typically when there is a chord change. In addition, if a bass player is given a solo, they may play a walking bass line with a note on every beat or play a pentatonic scale-influenced bassline.
An early bluegrass bassist to rise to prominence was Howard Watts (also known as Cedric Rainwater), who played with Bill Monroe&#x27;s Blue Grass Boys beginning in 1944. The classical bassist Edgar Meyer has frequently branched out into newgrass, old-time, jazz, and other genres.
&quot;My all-time favorite is Todd Phillips&quot;, proclaimed Union Station bassist Barry Bales in April 2005. &quot;He brought a completely different way of thinking about and playing bluegrass.

An upright bass was the standard bass instrument in traditional country western music. While the upright bass is still occasionally used in country music, the electric bass has largely replaced its bigger cousin in country music, especially in the more pop-infused country styles of the 1990s and 2000s, such as new country.

===Slap-style bass===
Slap-style bass is sometimes used in bluegrass bass playing. When bluegrass bass players slap the string by pulling it until it hits the fingerboard or hit the strings against the fingerboard, it adds the high-pitched percussive &quot;clack&quot; or &quot;slap&quot; sound to the low-pitched bass notes, sounding much like the clacks of a tap dancer. Slapping is a subject of minor controversy in the bluegrass scene. Even slapping experts such as Mike Bub say, &quot;Don&#x27;t slap on every gig&quot;, or in songs where it is not appropriate. As well, bluegrass bassists who play slap-style on live shows often slap less on records. Bub and his mentor Jerry McCoury rarely do slap bass on recordings. While bassists such as Jack Cook slap bass on the occasional faster &quot;Clinch Mountain Boys song&quot;, bassists such as Gene Libbea, Missy Raines, Jenny Keel, and Barry Bales [rarely] slap bass.

Bluegrass bassist Mark Schatz, who teaches slap bass in his &quot;Intermediate Bluegrass Bass&quot; DVD acknowledges that slap bass &quot;...has not been stylistically very predominant in the music I have recorded&quot;. He notes that &quot;Even in traditional bluegrass slap bass only appears sporadically and most of what I&#x27;ve done has been on the more contemporary side of that (Tony Rice, Tim O&#x27;Brien).&quot; Schatz states that he would be &quot;... more likely to use it [slap] in a live situation than on a recording—for a solo or to punctuate a particular place in a song or tune where I wouldn&#x27;t be obliterating someone&#x27;s solo&quot;. Another bluegrass method, &quot;Learn to Play Bluegrass Bass&quot;, by Earl Gately, also teaches bluegrass slap bass technique. German bassist Didi Beck plays rapid triplet slaps, as demonstrated in this video. 

==Use in popular music==
In the early 1950s, the upright bass was the standard bass instrument in the emerging style of rock and roll music, Marshall Lytle of Bill Haley &amp; His Comets being but one example. In the 1940s, a new style of dance music called rhythm and blues developed, incorporating elements of the earlier styles of blues and swing. Louis Jordan, the first innovator of this style, featured an upright bass in his group, the Tympany Five.

The upright bass remained an integral part of pop lineups throughout the 1950s, as the new genre of rock and roll was built largely upon the model of rhythm and blues, with strong elements also derived from jazz, country, and bluegrass. However, upright bass players using their instruments in these contexts faced inherent problems. They were forced to compete with louder horn instruments (and later amplified electric guitars), making bass parts difficult to hear. The upright bass is difficult to amplify in loud concert venue settings, because it can be prone to feedback &quot;howls&quot;. As well, the upright bass is large and awkward to transport, which also created transportation problems for touring bands. In some groups, the slap bass was utilized as band percussion in lieu of a drummer; such was the case with Bill Haley &amp; His Saddlemen (the forerunner group to the Comets), which did not use drummers on recordings and live performances until late 1952; prior to this the slap bass was relied on for percussion, including on recordings such as Haley&#x27;s versions of &quot;Rock the Joint&quot; and &quot;Rocket 88&quot;.

In 1951, Leo Fender released his Precision Bass, the first commercially successful electric bass guitar. The electric bass was easily amplified with its built-in magnetic pickups, easily portable (less than a foot longer than an electric guitar), and easier to play in tune than an upright bass, thanks to the metal frets. In the 1960s and 1970s bands were playing at louder volumes and performing in larger venues. The electric bass was able to provide the huge, highly amplified stadium-filling bass tone that the pop and rock music of this era demanded, and the upright bass receded from the limelight of the popular music scene.
The upright bass began making a comeback in popular music in the mid-1980s, in part due to a renewed interest in earlier forms of folk and country music, as part of the roots rock and Americana trends. In the 1990s, improvements in pickups and amplifier designs for electro-acoustic horizontal and upright basses made it easier for bassists to get a good, clear amplified tone from an acoustic instrument. Some popular bands decided to anchor their sound with an upright bass instead of an electric bass, such as the Barenaked Ladies. A trend for &quot;unplugged&quot; performances on MTV, in which rock bands performed with solely acoustic instruments, further helped to enhance the public&#x27;s interest in the upright bass and acoustic bass guitars.
Jim Creeggan of Barenaked Ladies primarily plays upright bass, although he has increasingly played bass guitar throughout the band&#x27;s career. Chris Wyse of alternative rock group Owl uses a combination of electric and double bass. Athol Guy of the Australian folk/pop group The Seekers plays an upright bass. Shannon Birchall, of the Australian folk-rock group the John Butler Trio, makes extensive use of upright basses, performing extended live solos in songs such as Betterman. On the 2008 album &quot;In Ear Park&quot; by the indie/pop band Department of Eagles, a bowed upright bass is featured quite prominently on the songs &quot;Teenagers&quot; and &quot;In Ear Park&quot;. Norwegian ompa-rock band Kaizers Orchestra use the upright bass exclusively both live and on their recordings.

French contemporary pop duet &quot;What a day&quot; uses double bass extended pizzicato technique with vocals and type writer

Hank Williams III&#x27;s bass players (Jason Brown, Joe Buck and Zach Shedd, most notably) have used upright basses for recording as well as during the country and Hellbilly sets of Hank III&#x27;s live performances before switching to electric bass for the Assjack set.

The late 1970s rockabilly-punk genre of psychobilly continued and expanded upon the rockabilly tradition of slap bass. Bassists such as Kim Nekroman and Geoff Kresge have developed the ability to play rapid slap bass that in effect turns the bass into a percussion instrument.

==Modern playing styles==

In popular music genres, the instrument is usually played with amplification and almost exclusively played with the fingers, &quot;pizzicato&quot; style. The pizzicato style varies between different players and genres. Some players perform with the sides of one, two, or three fingers, especially for walking basslines and slow tempo ballads, because this is purported to create a stronger and more solid tone. Some players use the more nimble tips of the fingers to play fast-moving solo passages or to pluck lightly for quiet tunes. The use of amplification allows the player to have more control over the tone of the instrument, because amplifiers have equalization controls that allow the bassist to accentuate certain frequencies (often the bass frequencies) while de-accentuating some frequencies (often the high frequencies, so that there is less finger noise).

An unamplified acoustic bass&#x27;s tone is limited by the frequency responsiveness of the instrument&#x27;s hollow body, which means that the very low pitches may not be as loud as the higher pitches. With an amplifier and equalization devices, a bass player can boost the low frequencies, which changes the frequency response. In addition, the use of an amplifier can increase the sustain of the instrument, which is particularly useful for accompaniment during ballads and for melodic solos with held notes.

In traditional jazz, swing, polka, rockabilly, and psychobilly music, it is sometimes played in the &quot;slap style&quot;. This is a vigorous version of pizzicato where the strings are &quot;slapped&quot; against the fingerboard between the main notes of the bass line, producing a snare drum-like percussive sound. The main notes are either played normally or by pulling the string away from the fingerboard and releasing it so that it bounces off the fingerboard, producing a distinctive percussive attack in addition to the expected pitch. Notable slap style bass players, whose use of the technique was often highly syncopated and virtuosic, sometimes interpolated two, three, four, or more slaps in between notes of the bass line.

==Double bassists==

===Historical===
* Domenico Dragonetti (1763–1846) Virtuoso, composer, conductor
* Giovanni Bottesini (1821–1889) Virtuoso, composer, conductor
* Franz Simandl (1840–1912) Virtuoso, composer, pedagogue
* Édouard Nanny (1872–1943) Virtuoso, composer
* Serge Koussevitzky (1874–1951) Virtuoso, composer, conductor

===Modern===
* François Rabbath (1931–) Virtuoso, composer
* Gary Karr (1941– ) Virtuoso
* Edgar Meyer (1960– ) Virtuoso, composer, teacher

===Contemporary (1900s)===

====Classical====
Some of the most influential contemporary classical double bass players are known as much for their contributions to pedagogy as for their performing skills, such as US bassist Oscar G. Zimmerman (1910–1987), known for his teaching at the Eastman School of Music and, for 44 summers at the Interlochen National Music Camp in Michigan and French bassist François Rabbath (b. 1931) who developed a new bass method that divided the entire fingerboard into six positions. Bassists noted for their virtuoso solo skills include American pedagogue and performer Gary Karr (b. 1941), Finnish composer Teppo Hauta-aho (b. 1941), Italian composer Fernando Grillo, and US player-composer Edgar Meyer. For a longer list, see the &quot;List of contemporary classical double bass players&quot;.

====Jazz====

Notable jazz bassists from the 1940s to the 1950s included bassist Jimmy Blanton (1918–1942) whose short tenure in the Duke Ellington Swing band (cut short by his death from tuberculosis) introduced new melodic and harmonic solo ideas for the instrument; bassist Ray Brown (1926–2002), known for backing Beboppers Dizzy Gillespie, Oscar Peterson, Art Tatum and Charlie Parker, and forming the Modern Jazz Quartet; hard bop bassist Ron Carter (born 1937), who has appeared on 3,500 albums make him one of the most-recorded bassists in jazz history, including LPs by Thelonious Monk and Wes Montgomery and many Blue Note Records artists; and Paul Chambers (1935–1969), a member of the Miles Davis Quintet (including the landmark modal jazz recording &quot;Kind of Blue&quot;) and many other 1950s and 1960s rhythm sections, was known for his virtuosic improvisations.
The experimental post 1960s era, and free jazz and jazz-rock fusion, produced several influential bassists. Charles Mingus (1922–1979), who was also a composer and bandleader, produced music that fused hard bop with black gospel music, free jazz, and classical music. Free jazz and post-bop bassist Charlie Haden (1937–2014) is best known for his long association with saxophonist Ornette Coleman, and for his role in the 1970s-era Liberation Music Orchestra, an experimental group. Eddie Gómez and George Mraz, who played with Bill Evans and Oscar Peterson, respectively, and are both acknowledged to have furthered expectations of pizzicato fluency and melodic phrasing. Fusion virtuoso Stanley Clarke (born 1951) is notable for his dexterity on both the upright bass and the electric bass. Terry Plumeri is noted for his horn-like arco fluency and vocal-sounding tone.

In the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century, one of the new &quot;young lions&quot; was Christian McBride (born 1972), who has performed with a range of veterans ranging from McCoy Tyner to fusion gurus Herbie Hancock and Chick Corea, and who has released albums such as 2003&#x27;s &quot;Vertical Vision&quot;. Another young bassist of note is Esperanza Spalding (born 1984) who, at 27 years of age, had already won a Grammy for Best New Artist.

====Other popular genres====

In addition to being a noted classical player, Edgar Meyer is well known in bluegrass and newgrass circles. Todd Phillips is another prominent bluegrass player. Well-known rockabilly bassists include Bill Black, Marshall Lytle (with Bill Haley &amp; His Comets) and Lee Rocker (with 1980s-era rockabilly revivalists the Stray Cats).

Notable rockabilly revivalists and psychobilly performers from the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century include Scott Owen (from the Australian band The Living End), Jimbo Wallace (from the US band Reverend Horton Heat), Kim Nekroman (Nekromantix), Patricia Day (HorrorPops), Geoff Kresge (Tiger Army, ex-AFI). Willie Dixon (1915–1992) was one of the most notable figures in the history of rhythm and blues. In addition to being an upright bassist, he wrote dozens of R&amp;B hits and worked as a producer. He also plays bass on numerous Chuck Berry&#x27;s rock and roll hits. Many other rockabilly bands like El Rio Trio (from the Netherlands) also use this instrument in their work. See also the List of double bassists in popular music.

==Pedagogy and training==
The pedagogy and training for the double bass varies widely by genre and country. Classical double bass has a history of pedagogy dating back several centuries, including teaching manuals, studies, and progressive exercises that help students to develop the endurance and accuracy of the left hand, and control for the bowing hand. Classical training methods vary by country: many of the major European countries are associated with specific methods (e.g., the Édouard Nanny method in France or the Franz Simandl method in Germany). In classical training, the majority of the instruction for the right hand focuses on the production of bowing tone; little time is spent studying the varieties of pizzicato tone.

In contrast, in genres that mainly or exclusively use pizzicato (plucking), such as jazz and blues, a great deal of time and effort is focused on learning the varieties of different pizzicato styles used for music of different styles of tempi. For example, in jazz, aspiring bassists have to learn how to perform a wide range of pizzicato tones, including using the sides of the fingers to create a full, deep sound for ballads, using the tips of the fingers for fast walking basslines or solos, and performing a variety of percussive &quot;ghost notes&quot; by raking muted or partially muted strings.

===Formal training===

Of all of the genres, classical and jazz have the most established and comprehensive systems of instruction and training. In the classical milieu, children can begin taking private lessons on the instrument and performing in children&#x27;s or youth orchestras. Teens who aspire to becoming professional classical bassists can continue their studies in a variety of formal training settings, including colleges, conservatories, and universities. Colleges offer certificates and diplomas in bass performance.

Conservatories, which are the standard musical training system in France and in Quebec (Canada) provide lessons and amateur orchestral experience for double bass players. Universities offer a range of double bass programs, including bachelor&#x27;s degrees, Master of Music degrees, and Doctor of Musical Arts degrees. As well, there are a variety of other training programs such as classical summer camps and orchestral, opera, or chamber music training festivals, which give students the opportunity to play a wide range of music.

Bachelor&#x27;s degrees in bass performance (referred to as B.Mus. or B.M.) are four-year programs that include individual bass lessons, amateur orchestra experience, and a sequence of courses in music history, music theory, and liberal arts courses (e.g., English literature), which give the student a more well-rounded education. Usually, bass performance students perform several recitals of solo double bass music, such as concertos, sonatas, and Baroque suites.

Master of music degrees (M.mus.) in double bass performance consist of private lessons, ensemble experience, coaching in playing orchestral double bass parts, and graduate courses in music history and music theory, along with one or two solo recitals. A Master&#x27;s degree in music (referred to as an M.Mus. or M.M.) is often a required credential for people who wish to become a professor of double bass at a university or conservatory.
Doctor of Musical Arts (referred to as D.M.A., DMA, D.Mus.A. or A.Mus.D.) degrees in double bass performance provide an opportunity for advanced study at the highest artistic and pedagogical level, requiring usually an additional 54+ credit hours beyond a master&#x27;s degree (which is about 30+ credits beyond a bachelor&#x27;s degree). For this reason, admission is highly selective. Examinations in music history, music theory, ear training/dictation, and an entrance examination-recital, are required. Students perform a number of recitals (around six), including a lecture-recital with an accompanying doctoral dissertation, advanced coursework, and a minimum B average are other typical requirements of a D.M.A. program.

Throughout the early history of jazz, double bass players either learned the instrument informally, or from getting classical training early on, as in the case of Ron Carter and Charles Mingus. In the 1980s and 1990s, colleges and universities began to introduce diplomas and degrees in jazz performance. Students in jazz diploma or Bachelor of Music programs take individual bass lessons, get experience in small jazz combos with coaching from an experienced player, and play in jazz big bands. As with classical training programs, jazz programs also include classroom courses in music history and music theory. In a jazz program, these courses focus on the different eras of jazz history. such as Swing, Bebop, and fusion. The theory courses focus on the musical skills used in jazz improvisation and in jazz comping (accompanying) and the composition of jazz tunes. There are also jazz summer camps and training festivals/seminars, which offer students the chance to learn new skills and styles.

===Informal training===
In other genres, such as blues, rockabilly, and psychobilly, the pedagogical systems and training sequences are not as formalized and institutionalized. There are not degrees in blues bass performance, or conservatories offering multiple-year diplomas in rockabilly bass. However, there are a range of books, playing methods, and, since the 1990s, instructional DVDs (e.g., on how to play rockabilly-style slap bass). As such, performers in these other genres tend to come from a variety of routes, including informal learning by using bass method books or DVDs, taking private lessons and coaching, and learning from records and CDs. In some cases, blues or rockabilly bassists may have obtained some initial training through the classical or jazz pedagogy systems (e.g., youth orchestra or high school big band). In genres such as tango, which use a lot of bowed passages and jazz-style pizzicato lines, the bassists tend to come from classical or jazz training routes.

==Careers==
Careers in double bass vary widely by genre and by region or country. Most bassists earn their living from a mixture of performance and teaching jobs. The first step to getting most performance jobs is by playing at an audition. In some styles of music, such as jazz-oriented stage bands, bassists may be asked to sight read printed music or perform standard pieces (e.g., a jazz standard such as &quot;Now&#x27;s the Time&quot;) with an ensemble. Similarly, in a rock or blues band, auditionees may be asked to play various rock or blues standards. An upright bassist auditioning for a blues band might be asked to play in a Swing-style walking bassline, a rockabilly-style &quot;slapping&quot; bassline (in which the strings are percussively struck against the fingerboard) and a 1950s ballad with long held notes. A person auditioning for a role as a bassist in some styles of pop or rock music may be expected to demonstrate the ability to perform harmony vocals as a backup singer. In some pop and rock groups, the bassist may be asked to play other instruments from time to time, such as electric bass, keyboards or acoustic guitar. The ability to play electric bass is widely expected in country groups, in case the band is performing a classic rock or new country song. 
===Classical music===
In classical music, bassists audition for playing jobs in orchestras and for admission into university or Conservatory programs or degrees. At a classical bass audition, the performer typically plays a movement from a J.S. Bach suite for solo cello or a movement from a bass concerto and a variety of excerpts from the orchestral literature. The excerpts are typically the most technically challenging parts of bass parts and bass solos from the orchestral literature. Some of the most commonly requested orchestral excerpts at bass auditions are from Beethoven&#x27;s Symphonies Nos. 5, 7 and 9; Strauss&#x27;s &quot;Ein Heldenleben&quot; and &quot;Don Juan&quot;; Mozart&#x27;s Symphonies Nos. 35, 39 and 40; Brahms&#x27; Symphonies Nos. 1 and 2; Stravinsky&#x27;s Pulcinella; Shostakovich&#x27;s Symphony No. 5; Ginastera&#x27;s &quot;Variaciones Concertante&quot;; Tchaikovsky&#x27;s Symphony No. 4; Mahler&#x27;s Symphony No. 2; J. S. Bach&#x27;s Suite No. 2 in B; Berlioz&#x27;s &quot;Symphonie Fantastique&quot;, Mendelssohn&#x27;s Symphony No. 4; and the bass solos from Verdi&#x27;s opera &quot;Otello&quot;, Mahler&#x27;s Symphony No. 1, Britten&#x27;s &quot;The Young Person&#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra&quot; and Prokofiev&#x27;s &quot;Lieutenant Kije Suite&quot;.

==See also==
* Bogdon Box Bass
* Double bass concerto
* Electric upright bass
* List of classical double bass players
* Octobass
* Piccolo bass
* Tololoche
* Triple contrabass viol

==References==
==External links==

* EarlyBass.com by Jerry Fuller 
* List of chamber music pieces with double bass
* Polish folk music double basses

==Further reading==

===General===

*Grodner, Murray, &quot;Comprehensive Catalog of books, recordings and videos for the double bass&quot;. Bloomington IN, Murray Grodner, 2000.
*Praetorius, Michael, &quot;Syntagma Musicum, Band II&quot;, Kassel, Bärenreiter, 2001. (Reprint of the first edition of 1619). ISBN 978-3-76181527-4.

===History===

*Billė, Isaia, &quot;Gli strumenti ad arco e i loro culturi.&quot; Rome, Ausonia. 1928. Pdf available at: https://www.vitoliuzzi.com/news-for-a-new-and-authentic-history-of-the-classic-bass/ .
*Boyden, David B., et al., &quot;The Violin Family&quot;, The New Grove Musical Instruments Series, London, Macmillan, 1989. .
*Brun, Paul, &quot;A New History of the Double Bass&quot;, Seillons source d&#x27;Argens, Paul Brun Productions, 2018. .
*Elgar, Raymond, &quot;Introduction to the Double Bass&quot;, published by the author, St Leonards on Sea, 1960.
*Elgar, Raymond, &quot;More About the Double Bass&quot;, published by the author, St Leonards on Sea, 1963.
*Elgar, Raymomd, &quot;Looking at the Double Bass&quot;, published by the author, St Leonards on Sea, 1967.
*Lohse, Jonas, &quot;Das Kontrabass-Buch&quot;, Friedberg, Jonas Lohse Verlag, 2020. .
*Martin, Thomas, Martin Lawrence and George Martin, &quot;The English Double Bass &quot;. Banbury, Arpeggio Publishing, 2018.
*Palmer, Fiona M. (1997). &quot;Domenico Dragonetti in England (1794-1846) : the career of a double bass virtuoso&quot;. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1997. ISBN 0-19-816591-9.
*Planyavsky, Alfred, &quot;Geschichte des Kontrabasses&quot;, Tutzing, Verlag Hans Schneider, 1984.
*Stanton, David H., &quot;The String (Double) Bass&quot;. Evanston IL, The Instrumentalist Company, 1982.
*West, Chris, &quot;The Paganini of the Double Bass - Bottesini in Britain.&quot; Independently published, 2021. ISBN 979-8747194595.

===Instruction methods and performance===

* Billè, Isaia, &quot;Nuovo metodo per contrabbasso&quot;. Milan: Ricordi, 1922
* Bradetich, Jeff, &quot;Double Bass: The Ultimate Challenge&quot;. Denton, TX: Music for All to Hear, 2016.
* Cruft, Eugene, &quot;The Eugene Cruft School of Double Bass Playing: A Method with a Repertoire&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1966.
* Goïlav, Yoan, &quot;La contrebasse: Une philosophie du jeu, histoire, pédagogie, technique / The Double Bass: A Philosophy of Playing, History, Pedagogy, Technique.&quot; Lévis, Quebec: Doberman-Yppan, 2003.
* Goldsby, John, &quot;The Jazz Bass Book: Technique and Tradition&quot;. San Francisco: Backbeat Books, 2002.
* O&#x27;Brien, Orin. &quot;Double-Bass Notebook: Ideas, Tips, and Pointers for the Complete Professional.&quot; New York: Carl Fisher, 2016. .
* Simandl, Franz, &quot;New Method for the Double Bass&quot;. Carl Fischer, 1984. 
* Tambroni, Peter, &quot;An Introduction to Double Bass Playing&quot;. Oak Park IL, www.MostlyBass.com, 2014.
* Trebbi, Alfredo, &quot;Il Contrabbasso - novissimo manuale semiserio.&quot; Milan: Casa Musicale Sonzogno, 2007. ISBN 978-88-87318-40-1.
* Turetzky, Bertram. &quot;The Contemporary Contrabass&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="4" end="15" title="Double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="38" end="50" title="Double bass" label="upright bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="56" end="69" title="Double bass" label="acoustic bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="75" end="86" title="Double bass" label="bull fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="102" end="106" title="Double bass" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="142" end="153" title="string instrument" label="chordophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="168" end="186" title="orchestra" label="symphony orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q692640" start="225" end="233" title="octobass" label="octobass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="396" end="410" title="string section" label="string section"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="423" end="430" title="violins" label="violins"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="432" end="438" title="violas" label="violas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="444" end="450" title="cellos" label="cellos"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="467" end="479" title="concert band" label="concert band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564778" start="500" end="509" title="Double bass concerto" label="concertos"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="521" end="534" title="chamber music" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="538" end="561" title="European classical music" label="Western classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="616" end="620" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="622" end="627" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="629" end="642" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="644" end="654" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="656" end="669" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="671" end="680" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q14390274" start="682" end="687" title="Tango music" label="tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="689" end="699" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="721" end="725" title="soundtrack" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062702" start="730" end="752" title="video game music" label="video game soundtracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40125" start="887" end="891" title="viol" label="viol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365097" start="899" end="912" title="violin family" label="violin family"/>
<link wikidata="Q217306" start="923" end="945" title="transposing instrument" label="transposing instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="981" end="987" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028629" start="1131" end="1138" title="Perfect fourth" label="fourths"/>
<link wikidata="Q40125" start="1160" end="1164" title="viol" label="viol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="1216" end="1222" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447602" start="1237" end="1243" title="Fifths tuning" label="fifths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584980" start="1258" end="1271" title="standard tuning" label="usually tuned"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362265" start="1275" end="1292" title="scientific pitch notation" label="E1, A1, D2 and G2"/>
<link wikidata="Q213460" start="1368" end="1377" title="pizzicato" label="pizzicato"/>
<link wikidata="Q946962" start="1400" end="1419" title="extended techniques" label="extended techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832321" start="1652" end="1673" title="traditional bluegrass" label="traditional bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434762" start="1744" end="1753" title="bass amplifier" label="amplified"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="2481" end="2493" title="concert band" label="concert band"/>
<link wikidata="Q131168" start="2503" end="2507" title="tuba" label="tuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="2729" end="2740" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="2745" end="2749" title="folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q424017" start="3065" end="3085" title="acoustic bass guitar" label="acoustic bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40125" start="3204" end="3218" title="viola de gamba" label="viola de gamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q667047" start="3287" end="3294" title="violone" label="violone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867994" start="3296" end="3307" title="bass violin" label="bass violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40125" start="3311" end="3320" title="bass viol" label="bass viol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40125" start="4139" end="4153" title="viola da gamba" label="viola da gamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q424017" start="4459" end="4467" title="Acoustic bass guitar" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="4471" end="4491" title="Electric Bass guitar" label="electric bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q471744" start="4749" end="4758" title="glissando" label="glissando"/>
<link wikidata="Q649116" start="4764" end="4770" title="legato" label="legato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4886" end="4896" title="String instrument#Bowing" label="bow (arco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q213460" start="4925" end="4934" title="pizzicato" label="pizzicato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5241" end="5252" title="Jazz#1980s–2000s" label="modern jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="5621" end="5635" title="string section" label="string section"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="5651" end="5657" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="5662" end="5667" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072007" start="5678" end="5685" title="détaché" label="détaché"/>
<link wikidata="Q649116" start="5687" end="5693" title="legato" label="legato"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="5695" end="5703" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q113558" start="5705" end="5713" title="sforzando (musical direction)" label="sforzato"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043755" start="5715" end="5722" title="martelé (bowstroke)" label="martelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="5753" end="5767" title="sul ponticello" label="sul ponticello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="5769" end="5778" title="sul tasto" label="sul tasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064632" start="5780" end="5787" title="tremolo" label="tremolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617171" start="5789" end="5797" title="spiccato" label="spiccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072007" start="5802" end="5810" title="sautillé" label="sautillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q377435" start="6188" end="6195" title="vibrato" label="vibrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879974" start="6540" end="6556" title="fundamental bass" label="fundamental bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="6565" end="6579" title="string section" label="string section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515757" start="6867" end="6877" title="jump blues" label="jump blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="6925" end="6937" title="walking bass" label="walking bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q630079" start="7486" end="7496" title="ghost note" label="ghost note"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414142" start="7559" end="7564" title="fill (music)" label="fills"/>
<link wikidata="Q667047" start="8038" end="8045" title="violone" label="violone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="8082" end="8100" title="Chordophone" label="chordophone family"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372854" start="9021" end="9027" title="Perfect fifth" label="fifths"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9033" end="9039" title="#Tuning" label="Tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365097" start="9374" end="9387" title="violin family" label="violin family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365097" start="9563" end="9576" title="violin family" label="violin family"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9658" end="9669" title="Larry Hurst" label="Larry Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q542586" start="10071" end="10086" title="Gasparo da Salò" label="Gasparo da Salò"/>
<link wikidata="Q830869" start="10844" end="10850" title="bridge (instrument)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q221712" start="10879" end="10885" title="f-hole" label="f-hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q896967" start="10890" end="10899" title="tailpiece" label="tailpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116074" start="11022" end="11028" title="scroll (music)" label="scroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085993" start="11151" end="11161" title="sound post" label="sound post"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149240" start="12409" end="12423" title="Machine head" label="Machine tuners"/>
<link wikidata="Q667047" start="12792" end="12799" title="violone" label="violone"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="12926" end="12935" title="fret" label="unfretted"/>
<link wikidata="Q156005" start="13103" end="13108" title="ebony" label="ebony"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13801" end="13808" title="Bernhard Romberg#:~:text=Romberg was born in Dinklage.&amp;amp;text=He also invented what is,children to play the instrument." label="Romberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q303790" start="14215" end="14221" title="pegbox" label="pegbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="14266" end="14271" title="viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q303790" start="14300" end="14304" title="tuning peg" label="pegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149240" start="14443" end="14455" title="machine head" label="machine head"/>
<link wikidata="Q12529" start="14765" end="14774" title="worm gear" label="worm gear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15292" end="15311" title="#C extension" label="the low C extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q550458" start="15563" end="15569" title="endpin" label="endpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="15827" end="15832" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="15853" end="15859" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q384943" start="16030" end="16038" title="laminate" label="laminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="16041" end="16048" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="16216" end="16222" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="16254" end="16264" title="Fiberglass" label="Fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="16374" end="16386" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059337" start="16457" end="16472" title="youth orchestra" label="youth orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085993" start="16975" end="16984" title="soundpost" label="soundpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q358459" start="16989" end="16997" title="bass bar" label="bass bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q303790" start="18511" end="18521" title="tuning peg" label="tuning peg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273167" start="19065" end="19086" title="electric upright bass" label="electric upright bass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19576" end="19585" title="Strings (music)#Winding" label="overwound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19785" end="19796" title="Larry Hurst" label="Larry Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147086" start="20193" end="20199" title="catgut" label="catgut"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="20519" end="20526" title="Baroque music" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="20568" end="20573" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364980" start="21018" end="21026" title="Slapping (music)" label="slapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q875068" start="21780" end="21793" title="Franz Simandl" label="Franz Simandl"/>
<link wikidata="Q204948" start="22192" end="22195" title="bow (music)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q204948" start="23257" end="23262" title="Bow (music)" label="frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q354101" start="24235" end="24253" title="Giovanni Bottesini" label="Giovanni Bottesini"/>
<link wikidata="Q42675898" start="25048" end="25058" title="Brazilwood" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="25273" end="25283" title="Glass-reinforced plastic" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q687883" start="25468" end="25477" title="Snakewood" label="Snakewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="25482" end="25494" title="Graphite-reinforced plastic" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979192" start="25639" end="25646" title="Bovinae" label="buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25669" end="25677" title=":wiktionary:luthier" label="luthiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085866" start="25683" end="25687" title="frog (music)" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q215865" start="25989" end="26004" title="mother of pearl" label="mother of pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="26159" end="26165" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q964736" start="26203" end="26212" title="horsehair" label="horsehair"/>
<link wikidata="Q762707" start="26299" end="26306" title="luthier" label="luthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q138937" start="26874" end="26879" title="rosin" label="rosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q975684" start="28421" end="28439" title="acoustic impedance" label="acoustic impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q351087" start="28988" end="29004" title="hearing range" label="lowest frequency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29463" end="29472" title="Harmonic#Harmonics on stringed instruments" label="harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="29486" end="29500" title="flageolet tone" label="flageolet tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="29770" end="29779" title="harmonics" label="harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q576006" start="29784" end="29803" title="artificial harmonic" label="artificial harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="30122" end="30142" title="classical music" label="Classical repertoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q253716" start="30338" end="30352" title="Carmina Burana (Orff)" label="Carmina Burana"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="30519" end="30528" title="Prokofiev" label="Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821685" start="30542" end="30563" title="Lieutenant Kijé Suite" label="Lieutenant Kijé Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q214970" start="30651" end="30659" title="virtuoso" label="virtuoso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31164" end="31175" title="#C extension" label="C extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q217306" start="31281" end="31303" title="transposing instrument" label="transposing instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="31372" end="31381" title="bass clef" label="bass clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="31764" end="31769" title="tenor clef" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="31774" end="31785" title="treble clef" label="treble clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028629" start="32356" end="32363" title="Perfect fourth" label="fourths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372854" start="32446" end="32452" title="Perfect fifth" label="fifths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571955" start="32666" end="32679" title="concert pitch" label="concert pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="32803" end="32825" title="guitar" label="standard guitar tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989770" start="33100" end="33105" title="cobla" label="cobla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="33115" end="33124" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="33214" end="33223" title="Classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="33416" end="33429" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque music"/>
<link wikidata="Q17723" start="33438" end="33447" title="Classical period (music)" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="33606" end="33614" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="33659" end="33665" title="Richard Wagner" label="Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="33667" end="33673" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q219551" start="33675" end="33681" title="Ferruccio Busoni" label="Busoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="33686" end="33695" title="Sergei Prokofiev" label="Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34150" end="34159" title="#C extension" label="see below"/>
<link wikidata="Q738785" start="34316" end="34324" title="semitone" label="semitone"/>
<link wikidata="Q843813" start="34331" end="34339" title="middle C" label="middle C"/>
<link wikidata="Q243837" start="35005" end="35013" title="Ottorino Respighi" label="Respighi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619858" start="35579" end="35591" title="stopped note" label="stopped note"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414254" start="36165" end="36176" title="pedal point" label="pedal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q471744" start="37207" end="37216" title="glissando" label="glissando"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447602" start="37515" end="37521" title="Fifths tuning" label="fifths"/>
<link wikidata="Q347932" start="37623" end="37635" title="Red Mitchell" label="Red Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213861" start="37704" end="37720" title="Joel Quarrington" label="Joel Quarrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836883" start="38520" end="38547" title="Treatise on Instrumentation" label="Treatise on Instrumentation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39569" end="39590" title="Koussevitsky Concerto" label="Koussevitsky Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053427" start="39881" end="39891" title="scordatura" label="scordatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414254" start="40023" end="40034" title="pedal point" label="pedal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814483" start="40254" end="40263" title="tololoche" label="tololoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q667047" start="41651" end="41658" title="violone" label="violone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213861" start="42523" end="42539" title="Joel Quarrington" label="Joel Quarrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173397" start="42541" end="42555" title="Jeff Bradetich" label="Jeff Bradetich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798813" start="42882" end="42896" title="thumb position" label="thumb position"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="43693" end="43710" title="string instrument" label="string instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="44559" end="44564" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="44642" end="44650" title="bassline" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367000" start="44944" end="44957" title="orchestration" label="orchestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674682" start="45161" end="45181" title="acoustic enhancement" label="acoustic enhancement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="45485" end="45490" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434762" start="45524" end="45545" title="bass instrument amplification" label="specialized amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q13627677" start="45705" end="45716" title="psychobilly" label="psychobilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="45721" end="45729" title="jam band" label="jam band"/>
<link wikidata="Q716215" start="45837" end="45854" title="audio feedback" label="acoustic feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q386022" start="46059" end="46071" title="notch filter" label="notch filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273167" start="46160" end="46181" title="electric upright bass" label="electric upright bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="46796" end="46809" title="condenser mic" label="condenser mic"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="46909" end="46914" title="audio mixer" label="mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523658" start="47126" end="47133" title="gig bag" label="gig bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="47834" end="47846" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="47848" end="47856" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="47858" end="47868" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q207344" start="47873" end="47879" title="Kevlar" label="Kevlar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48148" end="48153" title="mute (music)#String" label="mutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q673031" start="49032" end="49041" title="wolf tone" label="wolf tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357982" start="49554" end="49564" title="attenuation" label="attenuator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571955" start="50324" end="50330" title="concert pitch" label="440 Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298056" start="51000" end="51016" title="electronic tuner" label="electronic tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434762" start="51097" end="51105" title="bass amp" label="bass amp"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="51153" end="51161" title="effects pedal" label="stompbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q667047" start="51709" end="51716" title="Violone" label="Violone"/>
<link wikidata="Q156280" start="51955" end="51969" title="Leopold Mozart" label="Leopold Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="52254" end="52266" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q78522" start="52376" end="52404" title="Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf" label="Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136846" start="52459" end="52479" title="Sinfonia concertante" label="Sinfonia Concertante"/>
<link wikidata="Q450670" start="52576" end="52597" title="Johann Baptist Wanhal" label="Johann Baptist Wanhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q706138" start="52599" end="52622" title="Franz Anton Hoffmeister" label="Franz Anton Hoffmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q693843" start="52638" end="52654" title="Leopold Kozeluch" label="Leopold Kozeluch"/>
<link wikidata="Q595923" start="52656" end="52672" title="Anton Zimmermann" label="Anton Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q362907" start="52674" end="52689" title="Antonio Capuzzi" label="Antonio Capuzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344731" start="52691" end="52703" title="Wenzel Pichl" label="Wenzel Pichl"/>
<link wikidata="Q387481" start="52723" end="52748" title="Johannes Matthias Sperger" label="Johannes Matthias Sperger"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="52901" end="52924" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166839" start="52952" end="52973" title="Per questa bella mano" label="Per questa bella mano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012827" start="53009" end="53018" title="obbligato" label="obbligato"/>
<link wikidata="Q504490" start="53662" end="53681" title="Domenico Dragonetti" label="Domenico Dragonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="53746" end="53766" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292443" start="53916" end="53946" title="Philharmonic Society of London" label="Philharmonic Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="54392" end="54399" title="Rossini" label="Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q354101" start="55085" end="55103" title="Giovanni Bottesini" label="Giovanni Bottesini"/>
<link wikidata="Q66075" start="55129" end="55137" title="Niccolò Paganini" label="Paganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9748" start="55247" end="55255" title="concerto" label="concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="55293" end="55298" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q576006" start="55518" end="55537" title="artificial harmonic" label="artificial harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185573" start="55745" end="55757" title="Czech lands" label="Czech region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699283" start="55834" end="55847" title="Ludwig Manoly" label="Ludwig Manoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q363422" start="55853" end="55864" title="Adolf Mišek" label="Adolf Mišek"/>
<link wikidata="Q353449" start="56055" end="56073" title="Serge Koussevitzky" label="Serge Koussevitzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q864369" start="56106" end="56131" title="Boston Symphony Orchestra" label="Boston Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q452352" start="56529" end="56545" title="Nikos Skalkottas" label="Nikos Skalkottas"/>
<link wikidata="Q434931" start="56570" end="56582" title="Eduard Tubin" label="Eduard Tubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q968672" start="56607" end="56624" title="Lars-Erik Larsson" label="Lars-Erik Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q704154" start="56651" end="56667" title="Gunther Schuller" label="Gunther Schuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q76915" start="56692" end="56709" title="Hans Werner Henze" label="Hans Werner Henze"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453141" start="56737" end="56748" title="Frank Proto" label="Frank Proto"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="56839" end="56848" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153307" start="57885" end="57918" title="International Society of Bassists" label="International Society of Bassists"/>
<link wikidata="Q828508" start="58004" end="58020" title="Bertram Turetzky" label="Bertram Turetzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q214665" start="58135" end="58144" title="Nino Rota" label="Nino Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636817" start="58215" end="58226" title="Alan Ridout" label="Alan Ridout"/>
<link wikidata="Q39319" start="58279" end="58292" title="Jean Françaix" label="Jean Françaix"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453141" start="58317" end="58328" title="Frank Proto" label="Frank Proto"/>
<link wikidata="Q433592" start="58352" end="58373" title="Einojuhani Rautavaara" label="Einojuhani Rautavaara"/>
<link wikidata="Q270662" start="58415" end="58433" title="Gian Carlo Menotti" label="Gian Carlo Menotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q125217" start="58458" end="58475" title="Christopher Rouse (composer)" label="Christopher Rouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606553" start="58500" end="58511" title="Henry Brant" label="Henry Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q139223" start="58689" end="58709" title="Peter Maxwell Davies" label="Peter Maxwell Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622039" start="58724" end="58744" title="Strathclyde Concerto" label="Strathclyde Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q521079" start="58928" end="58938" title="Kalevi Aho" label="Kalevi Aho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527585" start="58963" end="58976" title="John Harbison" label="John Harbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q155712" start="59027" end="59039" title="André Previn" label="André Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333082" start="59113" end="59126" title="John Woolrich" label="John Woolrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q316795" start="59209" end="59224" title="Reinhold Glière" label="Reinhold Glière"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="59390" end="59404" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q919127" start="59560" end="59579" title="Mieczysław Weinberg" label="Mieczysław Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q456751" start="59633" end="59648" title="Giacinto Scelsi" label="Giacinto Scelsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269450" start="59846" end="59865" title="Vincent Persichetti" label="Vincent Persichetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q165668" start="59998" end="60015" title="Sofia Gubaidulina" label="Sofia Gubaidulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364087" start="60104" end="60115" title="Tom Johnson (composer)" label="Tom Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621" start="60475" end="60484" title="Géza Frid" label="Géza Frid"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="60532" end="60543" title="Saint-Saëns" label="Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q941724" start="60556" end="60579" title="Le Carnaval des Animaux" label="Le Carnaval des Animaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053427" start="60590" end="60600" title="scordatura" label="scordatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366356" start="60643" end="60660" title="Lowell Liebermann" label="Lowell Liebermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352821" start="60790" end="60804" title="Jacob Druckman" label="Jacob Druckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q828508" start="60908" end="60924" title="Bertram Turetzky" label="Bertram Turetzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q189729" start="61147" end="61159" title="Philip Glass" label="Philip Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q981837" start="61267" end="61283" title="Sylvano Bussotti" label="Sylvano Bussotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q550236" start="61485" end="61500" title="Franco Donatoni" label="Franco Donatoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q516845" start="61598" end="61612" title="Pascal Dusapin" label="Pascal Dusapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370588" start="61738" end="61750" title="Karim Haddad" label="Karim Haddad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362232" start="61902" end="61920" title="Renaud Garcia-Fons" label="Renaud Garcia-Fons"/>
<link wikidata="Q322790" start="62158" end="62174" title="Mario Davidovsky" label="Mario Davidovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q318835" start="62243" end="62257" title="Elliott Carter" label="Elliott Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q431940" start="62320" end="62335" title="Gerhard Stäbler" label="Gerhard Stäbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q961861" start="62444" end="62460" title="Charles Wuorinen" label="Charles Wuorinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033246" start="62850" end="62871" title="Alexander Shchetynsky" label="Alexander Shchetynsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098651" start="62967" end="62978" title="Claus Kühnl" label="Claus Kühnl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213861" start="63119" end="63135" title="Joel Quarrington" label="Joel Quarrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q14252969" start="63182" end="63197" title="Raymond Luedeke" label="Raymond Luedeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q684435" start="63293" end="63319" title="Toronto Symphony Orchestra" label="Toronto Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425688" start="63330" end="63358" title="Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra" label="Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63408" end="63438" title="Nova Scotia Symphony Orchestra" label="Nova Scotia Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="63584" end="63596" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q325166" start="63643" end="63662" title="Stefano Scodanibbio" label="Stefano Scodanibbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q221450" start="63697" end="63710" title="Luciano Berio" label="Luciano Berio"/>
<link wikidata="Q130536261" start="63745" end="63757" title="Sequenza XIV" label="Sequenza XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="64027" end="64041" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414262" start="64045" end="64055" title="piano trio" label="piano trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746023" start="64230" end="64243" title="piano quintet" label="piano quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="64337" end="64351" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349941" start="64404" end="64417" title="Trout Quintet" label="Trout Quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q630565" start="64498" end="64509" title="Die Forelle" label="Die Forelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151953" start="64608" end="64629" title="Johann Nepomuk Hummel" label="Johann Nepomuk Hummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q380935" start="64631" end="64644" title="George Onslow (composer)" label="George Onslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q357172" start="64646" end="64665" title="Jan Ladislav Dussek" label="Jan Ladislav Dussek"/>
<link wikidata="Q442198" start="64667" end="64681" title="Louise Farrenc" label="Louise Farrenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q213558" start="64683" end="64697" title="Ferdinand Ries" label="Ferdinand Ries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083124" start="64699" end="64711" title="Franz Limmer" label="Franz Limmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q455212" start="64713" end="64734" title="Johann Baptist Cramer" label="Johann Baptist Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61841" start="64740" end="64753" title="Hermann Goetz" label="Hermann Goetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="64820" end="64842" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356593" start="64844" end="64858" title="Colin Matthews" label="Colin Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270606" start="64860" end="64868" title="Jon Deak" label="Jon Deak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333082" start="64887" end="64900" title="John Woolrich" label="John Woolrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="64998" end="65015" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q181885" start="65017" end="65031" title="Mikhail Glinka" label="Mikhail Glinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329895" start="65033" end="65048" title="Richard Wernick" label="Richard Wernick"/>
<link wikidata="Q309648" start="65054" end="65066" title="Charles Ives" label="Charles Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="65161" end="65175" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Antonín Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="65220" end="65243" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q12025" start="65285" end="65307" title="Eine kleine Nachtmusik" label="Eine kleine Nachtmusik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844882" start="65383" end="65400" title="Miguel del Águila" label="Miguel del Águila"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="65455" end="65469" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q189766" start="65471" end="65487" title="Luigi Boccherini" label="Luigi Boccherini"/>
<link wikidata="Q553560" start="65502" end="65516" title="Harold Shapero" label="Harold Shapero"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="65522" end="65536" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="65838" end="65855" title="Gioachino Rossini" label="Gioachino Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q387481" start="66129" end="66154" title="Johannes Matthias Sperger" label="Johannes Matthias Sperger"/>
<link wikidata="Q706138" start="66239" end="66262" title="Franz Anton Hoffmeister" label="Franz Anton Hoffmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="66611" end="66620" title="Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443915" start="66802" end="66818" title="Ferdinand Troyer" label="Ferdinand Troyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="66844" end="66858" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="66937" end="66951" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q674006" start="67129" end="67141" title="Gran Partita" label="Gran Partita"/>
<link wikidata="Q223258" start="67168" end="67175" title="Bohuslav Martinů" label="Martinů"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928277" start="67204" end="67209" title="nonet (music)" label="nonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="67351" end="67367" title="Sergei Prokofiev" label="Sergei Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844882" start="67454" end="67471" title="Miguel del Águila" label="Miguel del Águila"/>
<link wikidata="Q89540" start="67566" end="67581" title="Erwin Schulhoff" label="Erwin Schulhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495769" start="67786" end="67798" title="Fred Lerdahl" label="Fred Lerdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6893076" start="67857" end="67873" title="Mohammed Fairouz" label="Mohammed Fairouz"/>
<link wikidata="Q322790" start="67922" end="67938" title="Mario Davidovsky" label="Mario Davidovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q152880" start="68001" end="68015" title="Iannis Xenakis" label="Iannis Xenakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249352" start="68174" end="68186" title="PROJECT Trio" label="PROJECT Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q209534" start="68754" end="68761" title="scherzo" label="scherzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q281643" start="68766" end="68770" title="Trio (music)" label="trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q188709" start="68776" end="68807" title="Beethoven&amp;#x27;s Fifth Symphony" label="Beethoven&amp;#x27;s Fifth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q11989" start="68904" end="68935" title="Beethoven&amp;#x27;s Ninth Symphony" label="Beethoven&amp;#x27;s Ninth Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="69174" end="69183" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q176224" start="69233" end="69239" title="unison" label="unison"/>
<link wikidata="Q189962" start="69800" end="69816" title="perfect interval" label="perfect interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="70684" end="70699" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="70820" end="70835" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="70978" end="70997" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q941724" start="71010" end="71037" title="The Carnival of the Animals" label="The Carnival of the Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q711951" start="71110" end="71119" title="Gary Karr" label="Gary Karr"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="71218" end="71239" title="New York Philharmonic" label="New York Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="71253" end="71270" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="71294" end="71307" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q163553" start="71315" end="71329" title="Symphony No. 1 (Mahler)" label="first symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="71459" end="71475" title="Sergei Prokofiev" label="Sergei Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821685" start="71489" end="71504" title="Lieutenant Kijé (Prokofiev)" label="Lieutenant Kijé"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="71606" end="71622" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q630779" start="71636" end="71682" title="The Young Person&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra" label="The Young Person&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q704154" start="71969" end="71985" title="Gunther Schuller" label="Gunther Schuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352821" start="71987" end="72001" title="Jacob Druckman" label="Jacob Druckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q715379" start="72003" end="72015" title="James Tenney" label="James Tenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098651" start="72017" end="72028" title="Claus Kühnl" label="Claus Kühnl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352380" start="72110" end="72124" title="Erich Hartmann (musician)" label="Erich Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144924" start="72126" end="72138" title="Colin Brumby" label="Colin Brumby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230485" start="72186" end="72200" title="David A. Jaffe" label="David A. Jaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q561080" start="72323" end="72337" title="Bertold Hummel" label="Bertold Hummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q255300" start="72430" end="72448" title="Galina Ustvolskaya" label="Galina Ustvolskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275680" start="72554" end="72568" title="José Serebrier" label="José Serebrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q325166" start="72992" end="73011" title="Stefano Scodanibbio" label="Stefano Scodanibbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670333" start="73044" end="73071" title="London Double Bass Ensemble" label="London Double Bass Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q117871486" start="73214" end="73234" title="Bruton Music" label="Bruton Music records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683103" start="73316" end="73360" title="Janáček Academy of Music and Performing Arts" label="Janáček Academy of Music and Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657707" start="73397" end="73424" title="Brno Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Brno Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q805122" start="73466" end="73487" title="Ball State University" label="Ball State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799245" start="73502" end="73523" title="Shenandoah University" label="Shenandoah University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738950" start="73533" end="73554" title="Hartt School of Music" label="Hartt School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q51691" start="73582" end="73597" title="Amarillo, Texas" label="Amarillo, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050470" start="73817" end="73843" title="Chicago Symphony Orchestra" label="Chicago Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153307" start="73981" end="74014" title="International Society of Bassists" label="International Society of Bassists"/>
<link wikidata="Q185652" start="74389" end="74396" title="ragtime" label="ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="74402" end="74411" title="Dixieland" label="Dixieland"/>
<link wikidata="Q499387" start="74458" end="74468" title="sousaphone" label="sousaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q810551" start="74486" end="74500" title="bass saxophone" label="bass saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131168" start="74705" end="74709" title="tuba" label="tuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="74821" end="74851" title="Walking bassline" label="&amp;quot;walking&amp;quot; bass lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="74902" end="74919" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q939947" start="75943" end="75956" title="Jimmy Blanton" label="Jimmy Blanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="75974" end="75988" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q497183" start="75994" end="76009" title="Oscar Pettiford" label="Oscar Pettiford"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="76054" end="76059" title="bebop" label="bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q541659" start="76061" end="76074" title="Paul Chambers" label="Paul Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="76092" end="76103" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q283221" start="76124" end="76136" title="Kind of Blue" label="Kind of Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704919" start="76241" end="76254" title="Terry Plumeri" label="Terry Plumeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q319283" start="76379" end="76392" title="Charlie Haden" label="Charlie Haden"/>
<link wikidata="Q208797" start="76423" end="76438" title="Ornette Coleman" label="Ornette Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q211781" start="76472" end="76481" title="Free Jazz" label="Free Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q354542" start="76520" end="76529" title="Ray Brown (musician)" label="Ray Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370114" start="76531" end="76543" title="Slam Stewart" label="Slam Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q520796" start="76548" end="76577" title="Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen" label="Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q107432" start="76728" end="76742" title="Charles Mingus" label="Charles Mingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q707857" start="76850" end="76862" title="Scott LaFaro" label="Scott LaFaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434762" start="77069" end="77083" title="bass amplifier" label="bass amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q887868" start="77299" end="77311" title="Bob Cranshaw" label="Bob Cranshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q299208" start="77338" end="77351" title="Sonny Rollins" label="Sonny Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q211136" start="77373" end="77387" title="Jaco Pastorius" label="Jaco Pastorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q453406" start="77392" end="77406" title="Stanley Clarke" label="Stanley Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="77823" end="77827" title="fret" label="fret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444844" start="78250" end="78263" title="Emerald Tears" label="Emerald Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q504671" start="78280" end="78292" title="Dave Holland (bassist)" label="Dave Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370530" start="78302" end="78311" title="Emergence (Miroslav Vitouš album)" label="Emergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q558162" start="78328" end="78343" title="Miroslav Vitouš" label="Miroslav Vitouš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279617" start="78412" end="78433" title="Music from Two Basses" label="Music from Two Basses"/>
<link wikidata="Q327053" start="78470" end="78484" title="Barre Phillips" label="Barre Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737385" start="78947" end="78950" title="Kay Musical Instrument Company" label="Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962170" start="80386" end="80394" title="walkdown" label="walkdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="80565" end="80577" title="walking bass" label="walking bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170042" start="80773" end="80784" title="Bill Monroe" label="Bill Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q731734" start="80849" end="80860" title="Edgar Meyer" label="Edgar Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="80894" end="80902" title="Progressive bluegrass" label="newgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812568" start="80968" end="80981" title="Todd Phillips (musician)" label="Todd Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="81199" end="81220" title="country western music" label="country western music"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="81275" end="81288" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252931" start="81931" end="81939" title="Mike Bub" label="Mike Bub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252931" start="82137" end="82150" title="Jerry McCoury" label="Jerry McCoury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879960" start="82323" end="82335" title="Missy Raines" label="Missy Raines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863989" start="82353" end="82364" title="Barry Bales" label="Barry Bales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773688" start="83402" end="83416" title="Marshall Lytle" label="Marshall Lytle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914477" start="83420" end="83447" title="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets" label="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="83519" end="83535" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q461011" start="83612" end="83624" title="Louis Jordan" label="Louis Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001165" start="83704" end="83716" title="Tympany Five" label="Tympany Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="83819" end="83832" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="84131" end="84146" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q716215" start="84287" end="84295" title="Audio feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354892" start="84815" end="84829" title="Rock the Joint" label="Rock the Joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638487" start="84846" end="84855" title="Rocket 88" label="Rocket 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q297469" start="84873" end="84883" title="Leo Fender" label="Leo Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q727758" start="84897" end="84911" title="Precision Bass" label="Precision Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="84947" end="84960" title="electric bass" label="electric bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q572648" start="85026" end="85041" title="magnetic pickup" label="magnetic pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929352" start="85666" end="85676" title="roots rock" label="roots rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407862" start="85681" end="85690" title="Americana (music)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q371997" start="86014" end="86030" title="Barenaked Ladies" label="Barenaked Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="86082" end="86085" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q424017" start="86228" end="86248" title="acoustic bass guitar" label="acoustic bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15506258" start="86251" end="86263" title="Jim Creeggan" label="Jim Creeggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q371997" start="86267" end="86283" title="Barenaked Ladies" label="Barenaked Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675586" start="86397" end="86407" title="Chris Wyse" label="Chris Wyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962342" start="86434" end="86437" title="Owl (band)" label="Owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q507903" start="86486" end="86495" title="Athol Guy" label="Athol Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q592387" start="86529" end="86540" title="The Seekers" label="The Seekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q738697" start="86564" end="86580" title="Shannon Birchall" label="Shannon Birchall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442656" start="86620" end="86636" title="John Butler Trio" label="John Butler Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252664" start="86760" end="86771" title="In Ear Park" label="In Ear Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260247" start="86800" end="86820" title="Department of Eagles" label="Department of Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q598508" start="86962" end="86979" title="Kaizers Orchestra" label="Kaizers Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q741600" start="87176" end="87193" title="Hank Williams III" label="Hank Williams III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208835" start="87228" end="87236" title="Joe Buck (musician)" label="Joe Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809111" start="87434" end="87441" title="Assjack" label="Assjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196781" start="87584" end="87596" title="Kim Nekroman" label="Kim Nekroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395293" start="87601" end="87613" title="Geoff Kresge" label="Geoff Kresge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434762" start="87816" end="87829" title="bass instrument amplifier" label="amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q213460" start="87884" end="87893" title="pizzicato" label="pizzicato"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="89156" end="89161" title="Swing (genre)" label="swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="89163" end="89168" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364980" start="89241" end="89251" title="Slapping (music)" label="slap style"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="89418" end="89428" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q504490" start="89913" end="89932" title="Domenico Dragonetti" label="Domenico Dragonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q214970" start="89945" end="89953" title="Virtuoso" label="Virtuoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q354101" start="89977" end="89995" title="Giovanni Bottesini" label="Giovanni Bottesini"/>
<link wikidata="Q875068" start="90040" end="90053" title="Franz Simandl" label="Franz Simandl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922" start="90086" end="90095" title="pedagogue" label="pedagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q274409" start="90098" end="90111" title="Édouard Nanny" label="Édouard Nanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q353449" start="90145" end="90163" title="Serge Koussevitzky" label="Serge Koussevitzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q322222" start="90222" end="90238" title="François Rabbath" label="François Rabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q711951" start="90268" end="90277" title="Gary Karr" label="Gary Karr"/>
<link wikidata="Q731734" start="90298" end="90309" title="Edgar Meyer" label="Edgar Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106334" start="90571" end="90589" title="Oscar G. Zimmerman" label="Oscar G. Zimmerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278284" start="90633" end="90656" title="Eastman School of Music" label="Eastman School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047142" start="90684" end="90695" title="Interlochen" label="Interlochen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="90719" end="90727" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q322222" start="90747" end="90763" title="François Rabbath" label="François Rabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q711951" start="90949" end="90958" title="Gary Karr" label="Gary Karr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412817" start="90987" end="91002" title="Teppo Hauta-aho" label="Teppo Hauta-aho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613475" start="91117" end="91167" title="List of contemporary classical double bass players" label="List of contemporary classical double bass players"/>
<link wikidata="Q939947" start="91257" end="91270" title="Jimmy Blanton" label="Jimmy Blanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="91309" end="91323" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="91364" end="91376" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q354542" start="91453" end="91462" title="Ray Brown (musician)" label="Ray Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="91504" end="91519" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q105349" start="91521" end="91535" title="Oscar Peterson" label="Oscar Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q109053" start="91537" end="91546" title="Art Tatum" label="Art Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="91551" end="91565" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q830379" start="91583" end="91602" title="Modern Jazz Quartet" label="Modern Jazz Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181010" start="91604" end="91612" title="hard bop" label="hard bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="91755" end="91770" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q298601" start="91775" end="91789" title="Wes Montgomery" label="Wes Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q885833" start="91799" end="91816" title="Blue Note Records" label="Blue Note Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q541659" start="91830" end="91843" title="Paul Chambers" label="Paul Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851373" start="91873" end="91892" title="Miles Davis Quintet" label="Miles Davis Quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q283221" start="91944" end="91956" title="Kind of Blue" label="Kind of Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="92040" end="92053" title="improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107432" start="92164" end="92178" title="Charles Mingus" label="Charles Mingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q806349" start="92220" end="92230" title="bandleader" label="bandleader"/>
<link wikidata="Q181010" start="92258" end="92266" title="hard bop" label="hard bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="92278" end="92290" title="gospel music" label="gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q211781" start="92292" end="92301" title="free jazz" label="free jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q211781" start="92324" end="92333" title="Free jazz" label="Free jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q319283" start="92355" end="92368" title="Charlie Haden" label="Charlie Haden"/>
<link wikidata="Q208797" start="92437" end="92452" title="Ornette Coleman" label="Ornette Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q319283" start="92488" end="92514" title="Liberation Music Orchestra" label="Liberation Music Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q948613" start="92539" end="92550" title="Eddie Gómez" label="Eddie Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389764" start="92555" end="92566" title="George Mraz" label="George Mraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q208205" start="92584" end="92594" title="Bill Evans" label="Bill Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q105349" start="92599" end="92613" title="Oscar Peterson" label="Oscar Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="92729" end="92735" title="Jazz fusion" label="Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q453406" start="92745" end="92759" title="Stanley Clarke" label="Stanley Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704919" start="92849" end="92862" title="Terry Plumeri" label="Terry Plumeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q732319" start="93023" end="93040" title="Christian McBride" label="Christian McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q318619" start="93110" end="93121" title="McCoy Tyner" label="McCoy Tyner"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="93138" end="93152" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q192465" start="93157" end="93168" title="Chick Corea" label="Chick Corea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922811" start="93224" end="93239" title="Vertical Vision" label="Vertical Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q238705" start="93280" end="93298" title="Esperanza Spalding" label="Esperanza Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="93354" end="93360" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q731734" start="93460" end="93471" title="Edgar Meyer" label="Edgar Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="93489" end="93498" title="Bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="93503" end="93511" title="Progressive bluegrass" label="newgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q362824" start="93521" end="93534" title="Todd Phillips" label="Todd Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="93585" end="93595" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q861962" start="93613" end="93623" title="Bill Black" label="Bill Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773688" start="93625" end="93639" title="Marshall Lytle" label="Marshall Lytle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914477" start="93646" end="93673" title="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets" label="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574351" start="93679" end="93689" title="Lee Rocker" label="Lee Rocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161663" start="93733" end="93743" title="Stray Cats" label="Stray Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115066" start="93865" end="93875" title="Scott Owen" label="Scott Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423098" start="93902" end="93916" title="The Living End" label="The Living End"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143806" start="93919" end="93932" title="Jimbo Wallace" label="Jimbo Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273740" start="93951" end="93971" title="Reverend Horton Heat" label="Reverend Horton Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196781" start="93974" end="93986" title="Kim Nekroman" label="Kim Nekroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q257712" start="93988" end="93999" title="Nekromantix" label="Nekromantix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028888" start="94002" end="94014" title="Patricia Day" label="Patricia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q782745" start="94016" end="94026" title="HorrorPops" label="HorrorPops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395293" start="94029" end="94041" title="Geoff Kresge" label="Geoff Kresge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164080" start="94043" end="94053" title="Tiger Army" label="Tiger Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q292061" start="94058" end="94061" title="AFI (band)" label="AFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q204092" start="94064" end="94076" title="Willie Dixon" label="Willie Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="94143" end="94159" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="94291" end="94302" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097827" start="94451" end="94491" title="List of double bassists in popular music" label="List of double bassists in popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q274409" start="94981" end="94994" title="Édouard Nanny" label="Édouard Nanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q875068" start="95019" end="95032" title="Franz Simandl" label="Franz Simandl"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="95043" end="95050" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="96369" end="96383" title="Music school" label="Conservatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287517" start="96656" end="96678" title="Doctor of Musical Arts" label="Doctor of Musical Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838815" start="96963" end="96969" title="B.Mus." label="B.Mus."/>
<link wikidata="Q2401337" start="97396" end="97402" title="M.mus." label="M.mus."/>
<link wikidata="Q2401337" start="97674" end="97680" title="M.Mus." label="M.Mus."/>
<link wikidata="Q1292520" start="100768" end="100776" title="audition" label="audition"/>
<link wikidata="Q882254" start="100863" end="100873" title="sight reading" label="sight read"/>
<link wikidata="Q591990" start="100924" end="100937" title="jazz standard" label="jazz standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="101195" end="101203" title="bassline" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364980" start="101224" end="101244" title="Slap bass" label="&amp;quot;slapping&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939193" start="101501" end="101515" title="harmony vocals" label="harmony vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="101521" end="101534" title="backup singer" label="backup singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="101793" end="101805" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="101853" end="101868" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q756843" start="102068" end="102098" title="J.S. Bach suite for solo cello" label="J.S. Bach suite for solo cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="102402" end="102411" title="Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q10450274" start="102447" end="102454" title="Strauss" label="Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304650" start="102468" end="102483" title="Ein Heldenleben" label="Ein Heldenleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="102516" end="102522" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="102561" end="102567" title="Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="102599" end="102609" title="Stravinsky" label="Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="102629" end="102641" title="Shostakovich" label="Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q311389" start="102665" end="102674" title="Ginastera" label="Ginastera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="102719" end="102730" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="102754" end="102760" title="Mahler" label="Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="102820" end="102827" title="Berlioz" label="Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q462313" start="102841" end="102862" title="Symphonie Fantastique" label="Symphonie Fantastique"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="102870" end="102881" title="Mendelssohn" label="Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="102929" end="102934" title="Verdi" label="Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172324" start="102954" end="102960" title="Otello" label="Otello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="102968" end="102974" title="Mahler" label="Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="102998" end="103005" title="Britten" label="Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q630779" start="103019" end="103065" title="The Young Person&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra" label="The Young Person&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="103076" end="103085" title="Prokofiev" label="Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821685" start="103099" end="103120" title="Lieutenant Kije Suite" label="Lieutenant Kije Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937543" start="103144" end="103159" title="Bogdon Box Bass" label="Bogdon Box Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564778" start="103162" end="103182" title="Double bass concerto" label="Double bass concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273167" start="103185" end="103206" title="Electric upright bass" label="Electric upright bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613475" start="103209" end="103246" title="List of classical double bass players" label="List of classical double bass players"/>
<link wikidata="Q692640" start="103249" end="103257" title="Octobass" label="Octobass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564890" start="103260" end="103272" title="Piccolo bass" label="Piccolo bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814483" start="103275" end="103284" title="Tololoche" label="Tololoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843503" start="103287" end="103309" title="Triple contrabass viol" label="Triple contrabass viol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723295" start="104964" end="104982" title="Alfred Planyavsky" label="Planyavsky, Alfred"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8817" wikidata="Q506314" url="?curid=8817" title="Deicide (band)">
<text>Deicide is an American death metal band from Tampa, Florida. Formed in 1987 by drummer/composer Steve Asheim and guitarist brothers Eric and Brian Hoffman as &quot;Carnage&quot;, then hiring bassist/vocalist/lyricist Glen Benton and becoming &quot;Amon&quot;. They changed the band name to Deicide in 1989. The band rose to mainstream success in 1992 with their second album &quot;Legion&quot;, and is credited as the second-best-selling death metal band of the Soundscan Era, after Cannibal Corpse.

Since their debut album in 1990, Deicide has released thirteen studio albums, one live album, two compilation albums and two live DVDs. In November 2003, their first two albums, &quot;Deicide&quot; and &quot;Legion&quot;, were ranked second and third place respectively in best-selling death metal albums of the SoundScan era. Deicide is known for their lyrics, which cover topics such as Satanism, anti-Christianity and blasphemy. Their lyrics have resulted in bans, lawsuits and criticism from religious groups and the general public.

==History==
===Formation and early years (1987–1989)===
 Deicide was formed in Tampa, Florida on July 21, 1987, after guitarist Brian Hoffman called Glen Benton, replying to an advertisement the latter had placed in a local music magazine. Hoffman and his brother, along with drummer Steve Asheim, had previously played together as the band &quot;Carnage&quot;, which was in need of a bassist and vocalist. Carnage played cover songs by Slayer, Exodus, Celtic Frost and Dark Angel.

The new band, called Amon, consisted of Benton (bass and vocals), Hoffman, Hoffman&#x27;s brother Eric (guitars) and Steve Asheim (drums). Within a month, they had recorded the &quot;Feasting the Beast&quot; 8-track demo in Benton&#x27;s garage and had started playing the occasional gig in the Tampa area. In 1989, Amon recorded their second demo, &quot;Sacrificial&quot;, at Morrisound with producer Scott Burns.

Malevolent Creation guitarist Phil Fasciana recalls an early Carnage show: &quot;It was like Slayer intensified a thousand times. [...] I guess Carnage had hollowed out a mannequin and filled it with fuckin&#x27; blood and guts from a butcher shop... and then they threw the fuckin&#x27; thing on the floor. Morbid Angel had these pit bulls with them back then and they were just tearing the meat up. It was a really weird scene, man. There was blood and meat everywhere.&quot; The Hoffman brothers said that they would let the animal visera sit in the sun all day prior to its use in their stage theatrics.

===As Deicide (1989–2004)===

While still under the name Carnage, Benton reportedly stormed into Roadrunner Records&#x27; A&amp;R man Monte Conner&#x27;s office and slammed the demo down on his desk, belting out &quot;sign us, you fucking asshole!&quot; The next day contracts were issued to the band. This version of events was partially later denied by Benton, who claimed he indeed visited the office but never used profanities. In 1989 the band&#x27;s name was changed to Deicide at the request of Roadrunner Records due to multiple other bands already using &quot;Carnage&quot; as a band name.

Deicide then released their self-titled debut album, also produced by Scott Burns at Morrisound, in 1990. Their debut featured re-recorded versions of all six of the &quot;Sacrificial&quot; tunes that had secured them their record deal. The band did not tour on the album because Glen Benton felt the band was worth more than the monetary offers they were receiving from promoters.

Deicide&#x27;s second full-length album &quot;Legion&quot; was released on June 9, 1992.

In 1992, Deicide was on tour in Europe with Atrocity from Germany and Gorefest, a Dutch death metal band. In Stockholm, during the Gorefest set, a bomb was discovered on-stage. It exploded in the club in which they were playing. The bomb was located to the rear of the stage, behind a heavy, fireproof door. The explosion was big enough to deform the door and blow it off its hinges. Deicide managed to play three songs before the police decided to stop the concert and evacuate the club. At first, Benton blamed that attack on the Norwegian black metal scene, where Deicide&#x27;s brand of death metal was despised by some. Many people blamed animal rights activists who were angered at Deicide&#x27;s lyrical themes of animal sacrifice.

On November 25, 2004, the Hoffmans departed from the band due to animosity relating to royalties and publishing. According to Benton in 2006, &quot;When they got their first publishing checks and didn&#x27;t get paid for all the songs me and Steve wrote, they fucking quit. And now we gotta deal with Eric threatening Steve, driving to his house and screaming outside his window at 10:30 at night, making threatening phone calls, talking shit on Blabbermouth about Steve&#x27;s dad dying, and all this other bullshit. Eric knows better than to come over here, though — he knows I shoot first and ask questions later.&quot; Benton also said, &quot;It&#x27;s a better band now because they&#x27;re gone. They&#x27;re just a couple of losers, and they rode on me and Steve&#x27;s coattails for all these years.&quot; The Hoffman brothers later went on to reform Amon. They later attempted to sue Glen Benton for the rights to the Deicide name. Eric Hoffman recalled, &quot;We were actually going to use the Deicide name [for the new band], but [Glen and Steve] got on the bandwagon faster than us. [...] They basically took the name, and Glen writes all the lyrics, so the kids are familiar with that.&quot; Benton told Decibel, &quot;They can&#x27;t do a goddamned thing to me, dude. I own the fucking name. They went behind my back and filed on my trademark, so I&#x27;m in the process of suing them to get their names off it. And I will win. They abandoned their jobs, and now they wanna come back. Well, there&#x27;s no coming back, man. Sorry.&quot; According to Eric Hoffman, &quot;Benton says if he sees me, he&#x27;s gonna shoot me and ask questions later. He hates me more than Jesus.&quot; Benton remarked, &quot;It&#x27;s just like a bad… When you&#x27;re in a bad marriage, it just ain&#x27;t working out. So people have to go on their way.&quot;

===Post-Hoffman brothers period (2004–present)===

Shortly after, the guitar roles were then filled by former Cannibal Corpse guitarist Jack Owen, and Vital Remains guitarist Dave Suzuki. Following the tour, Suzuki was replaced by guitarist Ralph Santolla. Santolla stated he was a Catholic, which had received a small amount of shock and ridicule from some metal fans. In spite of this, Deicide&#x27;s eighth studio album &quot;The Stench of Redemption&quot;, which was released on August 22, 2006, received positive reviews from critics, who praised the album&#x27;s guitar work and emphasis on melody.In January 2007, Benton left the European tour and returned home to the United States as a result of legal issues at home. Asheim announced that Seth van Loo, from opening act Severe Torture, and Garbaty &quot;Yaha&quot;, from the Polish death metal band Dissenter, would be replacing Benton starting on January 9 in the Netherlands, until Benton could rejoin the tour. Benton rejoined the band in Paris on January 13. On May 24, 2007, it was announced Ralph Santolla had left Deicide. Subsequently, he joined Florida&#x27;s Obituary and appeared on their album &quot;Xecutioner&#x27;s Return&quot; as well as the tour. On July 20, 2007, guitarist Jack Owen announced that Deicide would be &quot;on hiatus&quot; and he had temporarily joined Ohio-based deathrash band Estuary for touring purposes. The band embarked on a Balkan tour, dubbed &quot;Balkans AssassiNation Tour&quot;, in October 2007 alongside Krisiun, Incantation and Inactive Messiah. Owen called the tour a &quot;death metal vacation.&quot;

By November 2007, Deicide began work on their ninth studio album at Florida&#x27;s Morrisound Studios. Entitled &quot;Till Death Do Us Part&quot;, the follow-up to &quot;The Stench of Redemption&quot;, promised to be the band&#x27;s &quot;most savage and aggressive [offering] to date&quot;, according to a press release. Drummer Steve Asheim recorded drum tracks and Benton started recording vocals in December 2007. In April 2008, two songs off the album were posted online. It was finally released on April 28, 2008. As the record was coming out, Benton considered retiring from music, in the midst of personal matters including a custody battle.

On January 6, 2009, Deicide posted a blog on their official Myspace page saying they had signed a worldwide record deal with Century Media, with Ralph Santolla returning to the band for a European tour. They were said to be working on material for a summer 2010 release. In early 2009, they toured with Vital Remains and Order of Ennead. Guitarist Kevin Quirion of Order of Ennead joined the band in the summer of 2009. In June 2010, Glen Benton revealed that the next Deicide album was to be titled &quot;To Hell with God&quot;. It was produced by Mark Lewis at Audiohammer Studios in Sanford, Florida, and was released on February 15, 2011. The eleventh studio album &quot;In the Minds of Evil&quot; was released on November 26, 2013. On October 9, 2014, The Village Voice reported that Deicide had started working on new material for their twelfth studio album.

By November 2016, it became apparent that guitarist Jack Owen was no longer in the band, and had been replaced by Monstrosity guitarist Mark English without an official announcement. Owen said, &quot;it was a problem with new stuff I was writing. I walked into practice and Steve had re-recorded it and changed notes here and there for three or four songs that I had. It was stupid at the time. But he&#x27;s, like, &#x27;Hey, I changed the notes so I get writing credit.&#x27; And I&#x27;m, like, &#x27;That&#x27;s not how the songs go, though.&#x27; And Glen&#x27;s like, &#x27;It is now.&#x27; [Laughs] So I literally walked out and ghosted them. [Laughs] Later on, it was like, &#x27;Hey, dude, you&#x27;re out.&#x27;&quot; Benton said Ashiem took two of Owen’s tracks and turned them into &quot;one good song.&quot; Ashiem recounted, &quot;We were just kind of writing the record, and we were going over the songs. Me and Glen, we were, like, &#x27;We wanna redo the songs.&#x27; It&#x27;s like we had completed them — about nine or twelve, whatever how many songs. They were all right, but we weren&#x27;t really psyched about them. So we decided to rewrite them. And Jack didn&#x27;t really like it. And he kind of left one day and just never came back. So that was that. [...] I haven&#x27;t talked to the guy in almost a year.&quot; Benton later expressed regret for “being a smartass” during the incident. Owen went on to join Six Feet Under in February 2017. Benton has stated that the band has “no hard feelings” towards Owen and that they were happy for him in joining Six Feet Under.

On March 10, 2017, Deicide announced a short U.S. tour which would begin in May and also issued an update on the album: &quot;the new record is almost completed, right now its down to scheduling, this run of shows were setting up is to introduce and work in our new guitarist Mark English, that and I need a break from this thing called Florida…&quot;. Deicide&#x27;s twelfth studio album, &quot;Overtures of Blasphemy,&quot; was released on September 14, 2018.

On June 6, 2018, former guitarist Ralph Santolla died due to complications following a heart attack and was taken off life support since being in a coma for a week.

In February 2019, Deicide parted ways with Mark English and replaced him with Autumn&#x27;s End vocalist/guitarist Chris Cannella.

On April 17, 2021, the band performed in front of an audience of full capacity at The Verona in New Port Richey amid the COVID-19 pandemic, as all restrictions for businesses were lifted and mask mandate enforcements for local cities in Florida were removed as the state was moved into Stage 3 in late September 2020. A U.S. tour followed soon after, with Kataklysm, Internal Bleeding and Begat the Nephilim.

On January 19, 2022, Chris Cannella left the band and was replaced by new guitarist Taylor Nordberg. The thirteenth album &quot;Banished by Sin&quot; was released through Reigning Phoenix Music on April 26, 2024. It was the &quot;album of the month&quot; on metallian.com. The band toured Europe in 2024.

==Musical style and legacy==
Deicide have been called &quot;Florida’s most notorious and despised death metal export.&quot; The band&#x27;s first three studio albums -- Deicide, Legion and Once Upon the Cross -- are considered classics in the death metal genre. Dom Lawson of Metal Hammer wrote, “in terms of defining the sound of Floridian death metal in the early 90s, few bands are either as iconic or as notorious.” Despite this, frontman Glen Benton prefers not to use the &quot;death metal&quot; terminology. Greg Prato of AllMusic loosely referred to Deicide as blackened death metal. Additionally, Deicide&#x27;s albums following their debut album have been called brutal death metal. According to Benton, Deicide was initially influenced by extreme metal acts such as Venom, Possessed and Death.

Music journalist T Coles assessed, &quot;though few would accuse Deicide of having pop sensibilities, there was something fun and catchy about them. This is in part thanks to Glen Benton&#x27;s vocals; individual words are barked out, retaining the evil vibe, and the staccato delivery builds tension before breaking it back down with chaotic guitar solos.&quot; Benton&#x27;s high shrieks have drawn comparisons to black metal. Both the Hoffman brothers tended to play technical solos at fast speeds and with overlapping riffs, which allowed Deicide to achieve the definitive heavy sound and complex song structures the band would become known for. Their guitar tone preferences heard on early Deicide releases have been noted for their extreme high frequency. According to Zeke Ferrington of Gear Gods, &quot;It sounds like they plugged their pedals into a BBE Sonic Maximizer, then straight into the [mixing desk] with a HPF at 800hz and an upper mid boost.&quot;

Deicide&#x27;s lyrics express vehement anti-Christian themes, with song titles including &quot;Death to Jesus&quot;, &quot;Fuck Your God&quot;, &quot;Kill the Christian&quot;, &quot;Behead the Prophet&quot; and &quot;Scars of the Crucifix&quot;, &quot;Christ Don&#x27;t Care&quot; and among others. Drummer Asheim said, &quot;The whole point of Satanic music is to blaspheme against the Church&quot;, &quot;I don&#x27;t believe in or worship a devil. Life is short enough without having to waste it doing this whole organized praying, hoping, wishing-type thing on some superior being&quot;.

==Controversy and censorship==
Deicide has received considerable controversy throughout their career. Most of the controversy surrounded frontman Benton for a rash of shocking interviews and wild statements. Benton has repeatedly branded an inverted cross into his forehead on at least 12 different occasions. During an interview with &quot;NME&quot; magazine, he shot and killed a squirrel with a pellet gun to prevent any further damage to his electrical system in the attic at the location the interview was held. This act garnered negative attention from critics and some animal rights activists. Benton had professed beliefs in theistic Satanism during Deicide&#x27;s early years, claimed to slaughter rodents for fun, and that he held beliefs in demonic possession and that he was possessed. Such statements had eventually been concluded as tongue-in-cheek and little more than sensationalism by band members questioned alternatively. Additionally, Benton claimed in the early 1990s that he would commit suicide at the age of 33 to &quot;mirror&quot; a lifespan opposite that of Jesus Christ. However, he passed that age in 2000 and did not commit suicide, rebutting in 2006 that these statements had been &quot;asinine remarks&quot; and that &quot;only cowards and losers&quot; choose to kill themselves.

Deicide has been banned from playing in several venues (such as Valparaiso, Chile over a promotional poster featuring Jesus Christ with a bullet hole in his forehead) and with various festivals such as Hellfest, after several graves had been spray-painted with &quot;When Satan Rules His World&quot;, a reference to a song from Deicide&#x27;s 1995 album &quot;Once upon the Cross&quot;. In addition, their music video for &quot;Homage for Satan&quot;, which features blood-splattered zombies on a rampaging mission to capture a priest, was banned from UK music TV channel Scuzz.

Deicide also caused controversy when Benton tossed rotting animal meat into the crowd. Benton recalled, “I didn’t think playing shows with rotting meat as part of our set-up was gonna cause that much of a shitstorm. Within three shows of that stuff I had the authorities bearing down on me, so it was a very short-lived moment in Deicide history.”

==Band members==

===Current members===
*Steve Asheim – drums , guitars 
*Glen Benton – bass, lead vocals 
*Kevin Quirion – guitars, backing vocals 
*Taylor Nordberg – guitars, backing vocals 
=== Former members ===
*Eric Hoffman – guitars 
*Brian Hoffman – guitars 
*Ralph Santolla – guitars 
*Jack Owen – guitars 
*Mark English – guitars 
*Chris Cannella – guitars, backing vocals 
=== Live members ===
*Dave Suzuki – guitars 
*Seth Van Loo – vocals 
*Dariusz &quot;Garbaty Yaha&quot; Kułpiński – bass, lead vocals 
===Recording timeline===
===Timeline===
==Discography==

*&quot;Deicide&quot; (1990)
*&quot;Legion&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Once upon the Cross&quot; (1995)
*&quot;Serpents of the Light&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Insineratehymn&quot; (2000)
*&quot;In Torment in Hell&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Scars of the Crucifix&quot; (2004)
*&quot;The Stench of Redemption&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Till Death Do Us Part&quot; (2008)
*&quot;To Hell with God&quot; (2011)
*&quot;In the Minds of Evil&quot; (2013)
*&quot;Overtures of Blasphemy&quot; (2018)
*&quot;Banished by Sin&quot; (2024)

==References==
==Further reading==
*Mudrian, Albert (2004). &quot;Choosing Death:The Improbable History of Death Metal and Grindcore&quot;, Feral House, .

==External links==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q506314" start="0" end="7" title="Deicide (band)" label="Deicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="23" end="34" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="45" end="59" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585625" start="96" end="108" title="Steve Asheim" label="Steve Asheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q559273" start="217" end="228" title="Glen Benton" label="Glen Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812794" start="381" end="387" title="Legion (Deicide album)" label="Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067041" start="462" end="475" title="Soundscan Era" label="Soundscan Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q485231" start="483" end="498" title="Cannibal Corpse" label="Cannibal Corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q950015" start="685" end="692" title="Deicide (album)" label="Deicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067041" start="813" end="822" title="SoundScan" label="SoundScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="890" end="898" title="Satanism" label="Satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="900" end="917" title="anti-Christianity" label="anti-Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="922" end="931" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="1118" end="1132" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q559273" start="1188" end="1199" title="Glen Benton" label="Glen Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585625" start="1323" end="1335" title="Steve Asheim" label="Steve Asheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="1476" end="1482" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q728170" start="1484" end="1490" title="Exodus (band)" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="1492" end="1504" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362401" start="1509" end="1519" title="Dark Angel (band)" label="Dark Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585625" start="1639" end="1651" title="Steve Asheim" label="Steve Asheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="1730" end="1737" title="Multitrack recording" label="8-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402032" start="1899" end="1909" title="Morrisound Recording" label="Morrisound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034379" start="1924" end="1935" title="Scott Burns (producer)" label="Scott Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q908396" start="1938" end="1957" title="Malevolent Creation" label="Malevolent Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q309001" start="2246" end="2258" title="Morbid Angel" label="Morbid Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18628" start="2644" end="2662" title="Roadrunner Records" label="Roadrunner Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="2669" end="2676" title="A&amp;amp;R" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q10332002" start="2681" end="2693" title="Monte Conner" label="Monte Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q950015" start="3175" end="3198" title="Deicide (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812794" start="3576" end="3582" title="Legion (Deicide album)" label="Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q708206" start="3664" end="3672" title="Atrocity (band)" label="Atrocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q954348" start="3690" end="3698" title="Gorefest" label="Gorefest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="3729" end="3738" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="4162" end="4173" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q629420" start="4264" end="4287" title="Animal rights movement" label="animal rights activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181834" start="5577" end="5584" title="Decibel (magazine)" label="Decibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q485231" start="6327" end="6342" title="Cannibal Corpse" label="Cannibal Corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088413" start="6353" end="6362" title="Jack Owen" label="Jack Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534819" start="6368" end="6381" title="Vital Remains" label="Vital Remains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229959" start="6392" end="6403" title="Dave Suzuki" label="Dave Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q652847" start="6458" end="6472" title="Ralph Santolla" label="Ralph Santolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660701" start="6646" end="6670" title="The Stench of Redemption" label="The Stench of Redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q652847" start="7274" end="7288" title="Ralph Santolla" label="Ralph Santolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q334537" start="7346" end="7354" title="Obituary (band)" label="Obituary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558017" start="7389" end="7413" title="Xecutioner&amp;#x27;s Return" label="Xecutioner&amp;#x27;s Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088413" start="7469" end="7478" title="Jack Owen" label="Jack Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="7574" end="7583" title="deathrash" label="deathrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q937907" start="7728" end="7735" title="Krisiun" label="Krisiun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116390" start="7737" end="7748" title="Incantation (American band)" label="Incantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402032" start="7912" end="7930" title="Morrisound Recording" label="Morrisound Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551014" start="7947" end="7968" title="Till Death Do Us Part (Deicide album)" label="Till Death Do Us Part"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660701" start="7999" end="8023" title="The Stench of Redemption" label="The Stench of Redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585625" start="8159" end="8171" title="Steve Asheim" label="Steve Asheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q158867" start="8605" end="8618" title="Century Media" label="Century Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q648660" start="8986" end="9002" title="To Hell with God" label="To Hell with God"/>
<link wikidata="Q15140350" start="9155" end="9175" title="In the Minds of Evil" label="In the Minds of Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="9237" end="9254" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179040" start="9460" end="9471" title="Monstrosity (band)" label="Monstrosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585625" start="9620" end="9625" title="Steve Asheim" label="Steve"/>
<link wikidata="Q559273" start="9902" end="9906" title="Glen Benton" label="Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q735091" start="10783" end="10797" title="Six Feet Under (band)" label="Six Feet Under"/>
<link wikidata="Q57234173" start="11341" end="11363" title="Overtures of Blasphemy" label="Overtures of Blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q986178" start="11802" end="11817" title="New Port Richey, Florida" label="New Port Richey"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="11827" end="11844" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q944379" start="12062" end="12071" title="Kataklysm" label="Kataklysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q126372362" start="12287" end="12309" title="Reigning Phoenix Music" label="Reigning Phoenix Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="12482" end="12489" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="12520" end="12531" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q950015" start="12591" end="12598" title="Deicide (album)" label="Deicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812794" start="12600" end="12606" title="Legion (Deicide album)" label="Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933242" start="12611" end="12630" title="Once upon the Cross" label="Once Upon the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="12665" end="12676" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="12698" end="12710" title="Metal Hammer" label="Metal Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430045" start="12753" end="12774" title="Floridian death metal" label="Floridian death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q559273" start="12865" end="12876" title="Glen Benton" label="Glen Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="12951" end="12959" title="Allmusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599472" start="12991" end="13012" title="blackened death metal" label="blackened death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265866" start="13095" end="13113" title="brutal death metal" label="brutal death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q465978" start="13172" end="13185" title="extreme metal" label="extreme metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192861" start="13199" end="13204" title="Venom (band)" label="Venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q830761" start="13206" end="13215" title="Possessed (band)" label="Possessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q192843" start="13220" end="13225" title="Death (metal band)" label="Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="13311" end="13314" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="13496" end="13504" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446979" start="13571" end="13582" title="guitar solo" label="guitar solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="13644" end="13655" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="13750" end="13755" title="riffs" label="riffs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13884" end="13895" title="Tone (musical instrument)#Amplified instruments" label="guitar tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15115271" start="13974" end="13988" title="high frequency" label="high frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042815" start="14022" end="14031" title="Gear Gods" label="Gear Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="14073" end="14079" title="Guitar pedals" label="pedals"/>
<link wikidata="Q208163" start="14091" end="14106" title="Signal processing" label="Sonic Maximizer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14131" end="14143" title="[mixing desk" label="[mixing desk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413664" start="14178" end="14181" title="Audio frequency" label="mid"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="14235" end="14249" title="anti-Christian" label="anti-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="14583" end="14589" title="Christian Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q611126" start="15030" end="15044" title="Cross of St. Peter" label="inverted cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="15130" end="15133" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q193427" start="15187" end="15197" title="Air gun" label="pellet gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478965" start="15422" end="15439" title="theistic Satanism" label="theistic Satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993049" start="15636" end="15651" title="tongue-in-cheek" label="tongue-in-cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q427532" start="15673" end="15687" title="sensationalism" label="sensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33986" start="16166" end="16176" title="Valparaiso" label="Valparaiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="16220" end="16232" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q247500" start="16304" end="16312" title="Hellfest" label="Hellfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933242" start="16462" end="16481" title="Once upon the Cross" label="Once upon the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439631" start="16674" end="16679" title="Scuzz" label="Scuzz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585625" start="17072" end="17084" title="Steve Asheim" label="Steve Asheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q559273" start="17105" end="17116" title="Glen Benton" label="Glen Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q652847" start="17299" end="17313" title="Ralph Santolla" label="Ralph Santolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088413" start="17326" end="17335" title="Jack Owen" label="Jack Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229959" start="17437" end="17448" title="Dave Suzuki" label="Dave Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q950015" start="17613" end="17620" title="Deicide (album)" label="Deicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812794" start="17641" end="17647" title="Legion (Deicide album)" label="Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933242" start="17668" end="17687" title="Once upon the Cross" label="Once upon the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932786" start="17708" end="17729" title="Serpents of the Light" label="Serpents of the Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932481" start="17750" end="17764" title="Insineratehymn" label="Insineratehymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q673197" start="17785" end="17803" title="In Torment in Hell" label="In Torment in Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q776136" start="17824" end="17845" title="Scars of the Crucifix" label="Scars of the Crucifix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660701" start="17866" end="17890" title="The Stench of Redemption" label="The Stench of Redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551014" start="17911" end="17932" title="Till Death Do Us Part (Deicide album)" label="Till Death Do Us Part"/>
<link wikidata="Q648660" start="17953" end="17969" title="To Hell with God" label="To Hell with God"/>
<link wikidata="Q15140350" start="17990" end="18010" title="In the Minds of Evil" label="In the Minds of Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q57234173" start="18031" end="18053" title="Overtures of Blasphemy" label="Overtures of Blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252407" start="18074" end="18089" title="Banished by Sin" label="Banished by Sin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8822" wikidata="Q5219101" url="?curid=8822" title="Daniel Williamson">
<text>Daniel Williamson may refer to:
*Danny Williamson (footballer) (born 1973), former English footballer
*A DJ, stage name LTJ Bukem
*Daniel Alexander Williamson (1823–1903), British artist
*Dan Williamson, New Zealand rower</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5220943" start="33" end="62" title="Danny Williamson (footballer)" label="Danny Williamson (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q921236" start="120" end="129" title="LTJ Bukem" label="LTJ Bukem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216388" start="131" end="158" title="Daniel Alexander Williamson" label="Daniel Alexander Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258656" start="188" end="202" title="Dan Williamson" label="Dan Williamson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8824" wikidata="Q207449" url="?curid=8824" title="Division of labour">
<text>The division of labour is the separation of the tasks in any economic system or organisation so that participants may specialise (specialisation). Individuals, organisations, and nations are endowed with or acquire specialised capabilities, and either form combinations or trade to take advantage of the capabilities of others in addition to their own. Specialised capabilities may include equipment or natural resources as well as skills. Training and combinations of equipment and other assets acting together are often important. For example, an individual may specialise by acquiring tools and the skills to use them effectively just as an organisation may specialise by acquiring specialised equipment and hiring or training skilled operators. The division of labour is the motive for trade and the source of economic interdependence.
An increasing division of labour is associated with the growth of total output and trade, the rise of capitalism, and the increasing complexity of industrialised processes. The concept and implementation of division of labour has been observed in ancient Sumerian (Mesopotamian) culture, where assignment of jobs in some cities coincided with an increase in trade and economic interdependence. Division of labour generally also increases both producer and individual worker productivity.

After the Neolithic Revolution, pastoralism and agriculture led to more reliable and abundant food supplies, which increased the population and led to specialisation of labour, including new classes of artisans, warriors, and the development of elites. This specialisation was furthered by the process of industrialisation, and Industrial Revolution-era factories. Accordingly, many classical economists as well as some mechanical engineers, such as Charles Babbage, were proponents of division of labour. Also, having workers perform single or limited tasks eliminated the long training period required to train craftsmen, who were replaced with less-paid but more productive unskilled workers.

== Pre-modern theories ==

=== Plato ===
In Plato&#x27;s &quot;Republic&quot;, the origin of the state lies in the natural inequality of humanity, which is embodied in the division of labour:

Silvermintz (2010) noted that &quot;Historians of economic thought credit Plato, primarily on account of arguments advanced in his Republic, as an early proponent of the division of labour.&quot; Notwithstanding this, Silvermintz argues that &quot;While Plato recognises both the economic and political benefits of the division of labour, he ultimately critiques this form of economic arrangement insofar as it hinders the individual from ordering his own soul by cultivating acquisitive motives over prudence and reason.&quot;

=== Xenophon ===
Xenophon, in the 4th century BC, makes a passing reference to division of labour in his &quot;Cyropaedia&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;Education of Cyrus&quot;).

=== Augustine of Hippo ===
A simile used by Augustine of Hippo shows that the division of labour was practised and understood in late Imperial Rome. In a brief passage of his &quot;The City of God&quot;, Augustine seems to be aware of the role of different social layers in the production of goods, like household (&quot;familiae&quot;), corporations (&quot;collegia&quot;) and the state.

===Medieval Muslim scholars===

The division of labour was discussed by multiple medieval Persian scholars. They considered the division of labour between members of a household, between members of society and between nations. For Nasir al-Din al-Tusi and al-Ghazali the division of labour was necessary and useful. The similarity of the examples provided by these scholars with those provided by Adam Smith (such as al-Ghazali&#x27;s needle factory and Tusi&#x27;s claim that exchange, and by extension the division of labour, are the consequences of the human reasoning capability and that no animals have been observed to exchange one bone for another) led some scholars to conjecture that Smith was influenced by the medieval Persian scholarship.

== Modern theories ==

=== William Petty ===

Sir William Petty was the first modern writer to take note of the division of labour, showing its has worth in existence and usefulness in Dutch shipyards. Classically, the workers in a shipyard would build ships as units, finishing one before starting another. But the Dutch had it organised with several teams each doing the same tasks for successive ships. People with a particular task to do must have discovered new methods that were only later observed and justified by writers on political economy.

Petty also applied the principle to his survey of Ireland. His breakthrough was to divide up the work so that large parts of it could be done by people with no extensive training.

=== Bernard de Mandeville ===
Bernard de Mandeville discussed the matter in the second volume of &quot;The Fable of the Bees&quot; (1714). This elaborates many matters raised by the original poem about a &#x27;Grumbling Hive&#x27;. He says:
=== David Hume ===
 - David Hume, A Treatise on Human Nature

=== Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau ===

In his introduction to &quot;The Art of the Pin-Maker&quot; (&quot;Art de l&#x27;Épinglier&quot;, 1761), Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau writes about the &quot;division of this work&quot;:

By &quot;division of this work,&quot; du Monceau is referring to the subdivisions of 
the text describing the various trades involved in the pin making activity; this can also be described as a division of labour.

=== Adam Smith ===
In the first sentence of &quot;An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations&quot; (1776), Adam Smith foresaw the essence of industrialism by determining that division of labour represents a substantial increase in productivity. Like du Monceau, his example was the making of pins.

Unlike Plato, Smith famously argued that the difference between a street porter and a philosopher was as much a consequence of the division of labour as its cause. Therefore, while for Plato the level of specialisation determined by the division of labour was externally determined, for Smith it was the dynamic engine of economic progress. However, in a further chapter of the same book, Smith criticised the division of labour, saying that it makes man &quot;as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to become&quot; and that it can lead to &quot;the almost entire corruption and degeneracy of the great body of the people.…unless government takes some pains to prevent it.&quot; The contradiction has led to some debate over Smith&#x27;s opinion of the division of labour. Alexis de Tocqueville agreed with Smith: &quot;Nothing tends to materialize man, and to deprive his work of the faintest trace of mind, more than extreme division of labor.&quot; Adam Ferguson shared similar views to Smith, though was generally more negative.

The specialisation and concentration of the workers on their single subtasks often leads to greater skill and greater productivity on their particular subtasks than would be achieved by the same number of workers each carrying out the original broad task, in part due to increased quality of production, but more importantly because of increased efficiency of production, leading to a higher nominal output of units produced per time unit. Smith uses the example of a production capability of an individual pin maker compared to a manufacturing business that employed 10 men:One man draws out the wire; another straights it; a third cuts it; a fourth points it; a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head; to make the head requires two or three distinct operations; to put it on is a peculiar business; to whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself to put them into the paper; and the important business of making a pin is, in this manner, divided into about eighteen distinct operations, which, in some manufactories, are all performed by distinct hands, though in others the same man will sometimes perform two or three of them. I have seen a small manufactory of this kind, where ten men only were employed, and where some of them consequently performed two or three distinct operations. But though they were very poor, and therefore but indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery, they could, when they exerted themselves, make among them about twelve pounds of pins in a day. There are in a pound upwards of four thousand pins of a middling size. Those ten persons, therefore, could make among them upwards of forty-eight thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth part of forty-eight thousand pins, might be considered as making four thousand eight hundred pins in a day. But if they had all wrought separately and independently, and without any of them having been educated to this peculiar business, they certainly could not each of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day.Smith saw the importance of matching skills with equipment—usually in the context of an organisation. For example, pin makers were organised with one making the head, another the body, each using different equipment. Similarly, he emphasised a large number of skills, used in cooperation and with suitable equipment, were required to build a ship.

In modern economic discussion, the term &quot;human capital&quot; would be used. Smith&#x27;s insight suggests that the huge increases in productivity obtainable from technology or technological progress are possible because human and physical capital are matched, usually in an organisation. See also a short discussion of Adam Smith&#x27;s theory in the context of business processes. Babbage wrote a seminal work &quot;On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures&quot; analysing perhaps for the first time the division of labour in factories.

=== Immanuel Kant ===
In the &quot;Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals&quot; (1785), Immanuel Kant notes the value of the division of labour:All crafts, trades and arts have profited from the division of labour; for when each worker sticks to one particular kind of work that needs to be handled differently from all the others, he can do it better and more easily than when one person does everything. Where work is not thus differentiated and divided, where everyone is a jack-of-all-trades, the crafts remain at an utterly primitive level.

=== Karl Marx ===

Marx argued that increasing the specialisation may also lead to workers with poorer overall skills and a lack of enthusiasm for their work. He described the process as alienation: workers become more and more specialised and work becomes repetitive, eventually leading to complete alienation from the process of production. The worker then becomes &quot;depressed spiritually and physically to the condition of a machine.&quot;

Additionally, Marx argued that the division of labour creates less-skilled workers. As the work becomes more specialised, less training is needed for each specific job, and the workforce, overall, is less skilled than if one worker did one job entirely.

Among Marx&#x27;s theoretical contributions is his sharp distinction between the economic and the social division of labour. That is, some forms of labour co-operation are purely due to &quot;technical necessity&quot;, but others are a result of a &quot;social control&quot; function related to a class and status hierarchy. If these two divisions are conflated, it might appear as though the existing division of labour is technically inevitable and immutable, rather than (in good part) socially constructed and influenced by power relationships. He also argues that in a communist society, the division of labour is transcended, meaning that balanced human development occurs where people fully express their nature in the variety of creative work that they do.

=== Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson ===
Henry David Thoreau criticised the division of labour in &quot;Walden&quot; (1854), on the basis that it removes people from a sense of connectedness with society and with the world at large, including nature. He claimed that the average man in a civilised society is less wealthy, in practice, than one in a &quot;savage&quot; society. The answer he gave was that self-sufficiency was enough to cover one&#x27;s basic needs.

Thoreau&#x27;s friend and mentor, Ralph Waldo Emerson, criticised the division of labour in his &quot;The American Scholar&quot; speech: a widely informed, holistic citizenry is vital for the spiritual and physical health of the country.

=== Émile Durkheim ===
In his seminal work, &quot;The Division of Labor in Society&quot;, Émile Durkheim observes that the division of labour appears in all societies and positively correlates with societal advancement because it increases as a society progresses.

Durkheim arrived at the same conclusion regarding the positive effects of the division of labour as his theoretical predecessor, Adam Smith. In &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot;, Smith observes the division of labour results in &quot;a proportionable increase of the productive powers of labor.&quot; While they shared this belief, Durkheim believed the division of labour applied to all &quot;biological organisms generally,&quot; while Smith believed this law applied &quot;only to human societies.&quot; This difference may result from the influence of Charles Darwin&#x27;s &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot; on Durkheim&#x27;s writings. For example, Durkheim observed an apparent relationship between &quot;the functional specialisation of the parts of an organism&quot; and &quot;the extent of that organism&#x27;s evolutionary development,&quot; which he believed &quot;extended the scope of the division of labour so as to make its origins contemporaneous with the origins of life itself…implying that its conditions must be found in the essential properties of all organised matter.&quot;

Since Durkheim&#x27;s division of labour applied to all organisms, he considered it a &quot;natural law&quot; and worked to determine whether it should be embraced or resisted by first analysing its functions. Durkheim hypothesised that the division of labour fosters social solidarity, yielding &quot;a wholly moral phenomenon&quot; that ensures &quot;mutual relationships&quot; among individuals.

As social solidarity cannot be directly quantified, Durkheim indirectly studies solidarity by &quot;classify[ing] the different types of law to find...the different types of social solidarity which correspond to it.&quot; Durkheim categorises:

* criminal laws and their respective punishments as promoting mechanical solidarity, a sense of unity resulting from individuals engaging in similar work who hold shared backgrounds, traditions, and values; and
* civil laws as promoting organic solidarity, a society in which individuals engage in different kinds of work that benefit society and other individuals.

Durkheim believes that organic solidarity prevails in more advanced societies, while mechanical solidarity typifies less developed societies. He explains that in societies with more mechanical solidarity, the diversity and division of labour is much less, so individuals have a similar worldview. Similarly, Durkheim opines that in societies with more organic solidarity, the diversity of occupations is greater, and individuals depend on each other more, resulting in greater benefits to society as a whole. Durkheim&#x27;s work enabled social science to progress more efficiently &quot;in…the understanding of human social behavior.&quot;

=== Ludwig von Mises ===

Marx&#x27;s theories, including his negative claims regarding the division of labour, have been criticised by the Austrian economists, notably Ludwig von Mises. The primary argument is that the economic gains accruing from the division of labour far outweigh the costs, thus developing on the thesis that division of labour leads to cost efficiencies. It is argued that it is fully possible to achieve balanced human development within capitalism and alienation is downplayed as mere romantic fiction.

According to Mises, the idea has led to the concept of mechanisation in which a specific task is performed by a mechanical device, instead of an individual labourer. This method of production is significantly more effective in both yield and cost-effectiveness, and utilises the division of labour to the fullest extent possible. Mises saw the very idea of a task being performed by a specialised mechanical device as being the greatest achievement of division of labour.

=== Friedrich A. Hayek ===
In &quot;The Use of Knowledge in Society&quot;, Friedrich A. Hayek states:


== Globalisation and global division of labour ==
The issue reaches its broadest scope in the controversies about globalisation, which is often interpreted as a euphemism for the expansion of international trade based on comparative advantage. This would mean that countries specialise in the work they can do at the lowest relative cost measured in terms of the opportunity cost of not using resources for other work, compared to the opportunity costs experienced by countries. Critics, however, allege that international specialisation cannot be explained sufficiently in terms of &quot;the work nations do best&quot;, rather that this specialisation is guided more by commercial criteria, which favour some countries over others.

The OECD advised in June 2005 that:

Few studies have taken place regarding the global division of labour. Information can be drawn from ILO and national statistical offices. In one study, Deon Filmer estimated that 2.474 billion people participated in the global non-domestic labour force in the mid-1990s. Of these:

* around 15%, or 379 million people, worked in industry;
* a third, or 800 million worked in services and
* over 40%, or 1,074 million, in agriculture.

The majority of workers in industry and services were wage and salary earners—58 per cent of the industrial workforce and 65 per cent of the services workforce. But a large portion was self-employed or involved in family labour. Filmer suggests the total of employees worldwide in the 1990s was about 880 million, compared with around a billion working on their own account on the land (mainly peasants), and some 480 million working on their own account in industry and services. The 2007 ILO Global Employment Trends Report indicated that services have surpassed agriculture for the first time in human history:In 2006 the service sector&#x27;s share of global employment overtook agriculture for the first time, increasing from 39.5 to 40 per cent. Agriculture decreased from 39.7 per cent to 38.7 per cent. The industry sector accounted for 21.3 per cent of total employment.

== Contemporary theories ==

In the modern world, those specialists most preoccupied in their work with theorising about the division of labour are those involved in management and organisation.

In general, in capitalist economies, such things are not decided consciously. Different people try different things, and that which is most effective cost-wise (produces the most and best output with the least input) will generally be adopted. Often, techniques that work in one place or time do not work as well in another.

=== Styles of division of labour ===
Two styles of management that are seen in modern organisations are control and commitment:

# Control management, the style of the past, is based on the principles of job specialisation and the division of labour. This is the assembly-line style of job specialisation, where employees are given a very narrow set of tasks or one specific task.
# Commitment division of labour, the style of the future, is oriented on including the employee and building a level of internal commitment towards accomplishing tasks. Tasks include more responsibility and are coordinated based on expertise rather than a formal position.

Job specialisation is advantageous in developing employee expertise in a field and boosting organisational production. However, disadvantages of job specialisation included limited employee skill, dependence on entire department fluency, and employee discontent with repetitive tasks.

=== Labour hierarchy ===
It is widely accepted among economists and social theorists that the division of labour is, to a great extent, inevitable within capitalist societies, simply because no one can do all tasks at once. Labour hierarchy is a very common feature of the modern capitalist workplace structure, and the way these hierarchies are structured can be influenced by a variety of different factors, including:

* Size: as organisations increase in size, there is a correlation in the rise of the division of labour.
* Cost: cost limits small organisations from dividing their labour responsibilities.
* Development of new technology: technological developments have led to a decrease in the amount of job specialisation in organisations as new technology makes it easier for fewer employees to accomplish a variety of tasks and still enhance production. New technology has also been helpful in the flow of information between departments helping to reduce the feeling of department isolation.

It is often argued that the most equitable principle in allocating people within hierarchies is that of true (or proven) competency or ability. This concept of meritocracy could be read as an explanation or as a justification of why a division of labour is the way it is.

This claim, however, is often disputed by various sources, particularly: 
* Marxists claim hierarchy is created to support the power structures in capitalist societies which maintain the capitalist class as the owner of the labour of workers, in order to exploit it. Anarchists often add to this analysis by defending that the presence of coercive hierarchy in any form is contrary to the values of liberty and equality.
*Anti-imperialists see the globalised labour hierarchy between first world and third world countries necessitated by companies (through unequal exchange) that create a labour aristocracy by exploiting the poverty of workers in the developing world, where wages are much lower. These increased profits enable these companies to pay higher wages and taxes in the developed world (which fund welfare in first world countries), thus creating a working class satisfied with their standard of living and not inclined to revolution. This concept is further explored in dependency theory, notably by Samir Amin and Zak Cope.

==Limitations==

Adam Smith famously said in &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot; that the division of labour is limited by the extent of the market. This is because it is by the exchange that each person can be specialised in their work and yet still have access to a wide range of goods and services. Hence, reductions in barriers to exchange lead to increases in the division of labour and so help to drive economic growth. Limitations to the division of labour have also been related to coordination and transportation costs.

There can be motivational advantages to a reduced division of labour (which has been termed ‘job enlargement’ and &#x27;job enrichment&#x27;). Jobs that are too specialised in a narrow range of tasks are said to result in demotivation due to boredom and alienation. Hence, a Taylorist approach to work design contributed to worsened industrial relations.

There are also limitations to the division of labour (and the division of work) that result from workflow variations and uncertainties. These help to explain issues in modern work organisation, such as task consolidations in business process re-engineering and the use of multi-skilled work teams. For instance, one stage of a production process may temporarily work at a slower pace, forcing other stages to slow down. One answer to this is to make some portion of resources mobile between stages so that those resources must be capable of undertaking a wider range of tasks. Another is to consolidate tasks so that they are undertaken one after another by the same workers and other resources. Stocks between stages can also help to reduce the problem to some extent but are costly and can hamper quality control. Modern flexible manufacturing systems require both flexible machines and flexible workers.

In project-based work, the coordination of resources is a difficult issue for the project manager as project schedules and resulting resource bookings are based on estimates of task durations and so are subject to subsequent revisions. Again, consolidating tasks so that they are undertaken consecutively by the same resources and having resources available that can be called on at short-notice from other tasks can help to reduce such problems, though at the cost of reduced specialisation.

There are also advantages in a reduced division of labour where knowledge would otherwise have to be transferred between stages. For example, having a single person deal with a customer query means that only that one person has to be familiar with the customer&#x27;s details. It is also likely to result in the query being handled faster due to the elimination of delays in passing the query between different people.

== Gendered division of labour ==

The clearest exposition of the principles of sexual division of labour across the full range of human societies can be summarised by a large number of logically complementary implicational constraints of the following form: if women of childbearing ages in a given community tend to do X (e.g., preparing soil for planting) they will also do Y (e.g., the planting); while for men the logical reversal in this example would be that if men plant, they will prepare the soil.

White, Brudner, and Burton&#x27;s (1977) &quot;Entailment Theory and Method: A Cross-Cultural Analysis of the Sexual Division of Labor&quot;, using statistical entailment analysis, shows that tasks more frequently chosen by women in these order relations are those more convenient in relation to child rearing. This type of finding has been replicated in a variety of studies, including those on modern industrial economies. These entailments do not restrict how much work for any given task could be done by men (e.g., in cooking) or by women (e.g., in clearing forests), but are only least-effort or role-consistent tendencies. To the extent that women clear forests for agriculture, for example, they tend to do the entire agricultural sequence of tasks on those clearings. In theory, these types of constraints could be removed by provisions of child care, but ethnographic examples are lacking.

== Industrial organisational psychology ==
Job satisfaction has been shown to improve as an employee is given the task of a specific job. Students who have received PhDs in a chosen field later report increased satisfaction compared to their previous jobs. This can be attributed to their high levels of specialisation. The higher the training needed for the specialised job position, the higher is the level of job satisfaction as well, although many highly specialised jobs can be monotonous and produce high rates of burnout periodically.

== Division of work ==

In contrast to division of labour, division of work refers to the division of a large task, contract, or project into smaller tasks—each with a separate schedule within the overall project schedule.

Division of labour, instead, refers to the allocation of tasks to individuals or organisations according to the skills and/or equipment those people or organisations possess. Often division of labour and division of work are both part of the economic activity within an industrial nation or organisation.

== Disaggregated work ==
A job divided into elemental parts is sometimes called &quot;disaggregated work&quot;. Workers specialising in particular parts of the job are called professionals. The workers doing a portion of a non-recurring work may be called contractors, freelancers, or temporary workers. Modern communication technologies, particularly the Internet, gave rise to the sharing economy, which is orchestrated by online marketplaces for various kinds of disaggregated work.

== See also ==

* Asset poverty
* Complex society
* Economic sector
* Economies of scale
* Family economy
* Fordism
* Identity performance
* Industrialisation
* Kyriarchy
* Mechanisation
* New international division of labour
* Newly industrialised country
* Precariat
* Precarious work
* Productive and unproductive labour
* Price system
* Role suction
* Surplus product
* Temporary work
* Urbanisation
* Winner and loser culture

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Becker, Gary S. 1991. &quot;Division of Labor in Households and Families.&quot; Ch. 2 in &quot;A Treatise on the Family&quot;. Harvard University Press, .
* —— 1985. &quot;Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor.&quot; &quot;Journal of Labor Economics&quot; 3(1.2):S33–S58. 
*Braverman, Harry. 1974. &quot;Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century&quot;. Monthly Review Press.
* Coontz, Stephanie, and Peta Henderson. &quot;Women&#x27;s Work, Men&#x27;s Property: The Origins of Gender and Class&quot;.
* Durkheim, Émile. 1893. &quot;The Division of Labour in Society&quot;.
* Emerson, Ralph Waldo. &quot;The American Scholar.&quot;
* Filmer, Deon. &quot;Estimating the World at Work&quot; (a background report).
* Florida, Richard. 2002. &quot;The Rise of the Creative Class&quot;.
* —— &quot;The Flight of the Creative Class&quot;.
* Froebel, F., J. Heinrichs, and O. Krey. &quot;The New International Division of Labour&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
* Gintis, Herbert, Samuel Bowles, Robert T. Boyd, and Ernst Feghr. &quot;Moral Sentiments and Material Interests: The Foundations of Cooperation in Economic Life&quot;.
* Goodin, Robert E., James Mahmud Rice, Antti Parpo, and Lina Eriksson. 2008. &quot;Household Regimes Matter.&quot; Pp. 197–257 in &quot;Discretionary Time: A New Measure of Freedom&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. . Cambridge ID: 9780521709514.
* Gorz, André. &quot;The Division of Labour: The Labour Process and Class Struggle in Modern Capitalism&quot;.
* Groenewegen, Peter. 1987. &quot;division of labour.&quot; Pp. 901–07 in &quot;The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics&quot; 1.
* Heartfield, James. 2001. &quot;The Economy of Time.&quot; &quot;Cultural Trends&quot; 43/44:155–59
* Ollman, Bertell. &quot;Sexual and Social Revolution&quot;.
* Rattansi, Ali. &quot;Marx and the Division of Labour&quot;.
* Reisman, George. [1990] 1998. &quot;Capitalism: A Treatise on Economics&quot;. Laguna Hills, CA: TJS Books. .
* Solow, Robert M., and Jean-Philippe Touffut, eds. 2010. &quot;The Shape of the Division of Labour: Nations, Industries and Households&quot;. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar. 
** Contributors: Bina Agarwal, Martin Baily, Jean-Louis Beffa, Richard N. Cooper, Jan Fagerberg, Elhanan Helpman, Shelly Lundberg, Valentina Meliciani, and Peter Nunnenkamp.
* Rothbard, Murray. 19 March 2018. &quot;Freedom, Inequality, Primitivism and the Division of Labor.&quot; &quot;Mises Institute&quot;. Retrieved 2 July 2020.
* von Mises, Ludwig. &quot;Human Society: The Division of Labor .&quot; Pp. 157–58 in &quot;Human Action: A Treatise on Economics&quot;&quot;.&quot;
* —— &quot;Human Society: The Ricardian Law of Association.&quot; Pp. 158–60 in &quot;Human Action: A Treatise on Economics&quot;.
* Stigler, George J. 1951. &quot;The Division of Labor is Limited by the Extent of the Market.&quot; &quot;Journal of Political Economy&quot; 59(3):185–93. 
*&quot;World Development Report 1995&quot;. Washington, DC: World Bank. 1996.

== External links ==

* Summary of Smith&#x27;s example of pin-making 
* Conference: &quot;The New International Division of Labour&quot;. Speakers: Bina Agarwal, Martin Baily, Jean-Louis Beffa, Richard N. Cooper, Jan Fagerberg, Elhanan Helpman, Shelly Lundberg, Valentina Meliciani, Peter Nunnenkamp. Recorded in 2009.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="4" end="22" title="Division of labour" label="division of labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="61" end="76" title="economic system" label="economic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="80" end="92" title="organisation" label="organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233817" start="130" end="144" title="Departmentalization" label="specialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="403" end="419" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="790" end="795" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333516" start="814" end="838" title="economic interdependence" label="economic interdependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148708" start="912" end="918" title="Output (economics)" label="output"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="923" end="928" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="942" end="952" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="987" end="1001" title="Industrialisation" label="industrialised"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="1095" end="1100" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1105" end="1116" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="1339" end="1359" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="Neolithic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="1634" end="1651" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1657" end="1678" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="1712" end="1732" title="Classical economics" label="classical economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="1779" end="1794" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="2070" end="2075" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="2089" end="2097" title="Republic (Plato)" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="2109" end="2128" title="Origins of the State" label="origin of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431887" start="2149" end="2159" title="Social inequality" label="inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="2765" end="2773" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145374" start="2859" end="2869" title="Cyropaedia" label="Cyropaedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="2962" end="2980" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212318" start="3099" end="3114" title="The City of God" label="The City of God"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3233" end="3253" title="Pater familias#Roman familia" label="&amp;quot;familiae&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q302835" start="3539" end="3559" title="Nasir al-Din al-Tusi" label="Nasir al-Din al-Tusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="3564" end="3574" title="al-Ghazali" label="al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q278699" start="4110" end="4123" title="William Petty" label="William Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="4251" end="4259" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="4292" end="4300" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="4593" end="4610" title="political economy" label="political economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="4663" end="4670" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q379912" start="4824" end="4845" title="Bernard Mandeville" label="Bernard de Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171104" start="4897" end="4918" title="The Fable of the Bees" label="The Fable of the Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451675" start="5069" end="5095" title="A Treatise on Human Nature" label="A Treatise on Human Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q525949" start="5242" end="5272" title="Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau" label="Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="5591" end="5653" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="5668" end="5678" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="5867" end="5872" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q140694" start="6656" end="6677" title="Alexis de Tocqueville" label="Alexis de Tocqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q183094" start="6835" end="6848" title="Adam Ferguson" label="Adam Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q759676" start="6985" end="6993" title="subtasks" label="subtasks"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="9054" end="9066" title="organization" label="organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="9361" end="9374" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="9482" end="9492" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q851587" start="9682" end="9700" title="Pin Factory" label="business processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="9702" end="9709" title="Charles Babbage" label="Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550565" start="9898" end="9937" title="Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals" label="Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="9952" end="9965" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417770" start="10598" end="10608" title="Marx&amp;#x27;s theory of alienation" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551063" start="11212" end="11237" title="social division of labour" label="social division of labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="11642" end="11647" title="Power (sociology)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="11688" end="11697" title="communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="11932" end="11951" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Henry David Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q863534" start="11995" end="12001" title="Walden" label="Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="12297" end="12313" title="self-sufficiency" label="self-sufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="12393" end="12412" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788611" start="12461" end="12481" title="The American Scholar" label="The American Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="12515" end="12523" title="Holism" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020435" start="12648" end="12680" title="The Division of Labor in Society" label="The Division of Labor in Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="12688" end="12702" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Émile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="12993" end="13003" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="13420" end="13434" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="13448" end="13472" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="14057" end="14068" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q815726" start="14233" end="14250" title="social solidarity" label="social solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804508" start="14530" end="14556" title="Mechanical and organic solidarity" label="types of social solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="14612" end="14624" title="criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="14823" end="14833" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804508" start="15000" end="15018" title="organic solidarity" label="organic solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="15515" end="15529" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="15759" end="15778" title="Austrian economists" label="Austrian economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="15788" end="15804" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="Ludwig von Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="16081" end="16091" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417770" start="16096" end="16106" title="Marx&amp;#x27;s theory of alienation" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="16161" end="16166" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160362" start="16203" end="16216" title="mechanisation" label="mechanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754768" start="16390" end="16408" title="Cost-effectiveness analysis" label="cost-effectiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="16478" end="16483" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560872" start="16657" end="16688" title="The Use of Knowledge in Society" label="The Use of Knowledge in Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325" start="16696" end="16714" title="Friedrich A. Hayek" label="Friedrich A. Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="16839" end="16852" title="globalization" label="globalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="16917" end="16936" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q215551" start="16946" end="16967" title="comparative advantage" label="comparative advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q185715" start="17088" end="17104" title="opportunity cost" label="opportunity cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="17396" end="17406" title="commerce" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="17463" end="17467" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="17596" end="17599" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440398" start="17736" end="17748" title="Workforce" label="labour force"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="18421" end="18424" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="18978" end="18988" title="management" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="18993" end="19005" title="organization" label="organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="19023" end="19043" title="Capitalism" label="capitalist economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q942582" start="19148" end="19167" title="Cost–benefit analysis" label="effective cost-wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608371" start="19465" end="19483" title="Control (management)" label="Control management"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="19597" end="19610" title="assembly line" label="assembly-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q381160" start="20047" end="20053" title="expert" label="expert"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="20506" end="20515" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015382" start="21401" end="21411" title="Competence (human resources)" label="competency"/>
<link wikidata="Q178079" start="21440" end="21451" title="meritocracy" label="meritocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958" start="21472" end="21483" title="explanation" label="explanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="21629" end="21637" title="Marxism" label="Marxists"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="21740" end="21756" title="capitalist class" label="capitalist class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="21820" end="21830" title="Anarchism" label="Anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="21975" end="21992" title="Anti-imperialism" label="Anti-imperialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q876830" start="22037" end="22048" title="first world" label="first world"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="22053" end="22064" title="third world" label="third world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884230" start="22110" end="22126" title="unequal exchange" label="unequal exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q627118" start="22142" end="22160" title="labour aristocracy" label="labour aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="22363" end="22370" title="welfare spending" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q923955" start="22536" end="22553" title="dependency theory" label="dependency theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="22609" end="22619" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="22643" end="22664" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690953" start="23213" end="23228" title="job enlargement" label="job enlargement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690954" start="23240" end="23254" title="job enrichment" label="job enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q203549" start="23395" end="23404" title="Taylorism" label="Taylorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q627335" start="23573" end="23581" title="workflow" label="workflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q876690" start="23701" end="23732" title="business process reengineering" label="business process re-engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424398" start="24299" end="24328" title="flexible manufacturing system" label="flexible manufacturing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q816432" start="24466" end="24481" title="project manager" label="project manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751609" start="24493" end="24502" title="Schedule (project management)" label="schedules"/>
<link wikidata="Q965330" start="24548" end="24557" title="Estimation (project management)" label="estimates"/>
<link wikidata="Q777671" start="25647" end="25655" title="planting" label="planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q374182" start="25967" end="25977" title="entailment" label="entailment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217379" start="26103" end="26116" title="childrearing" label="child rearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="26330" end="26337" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="26672" end="26684" title="ethnographic" label="ethnographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="26873" end="26877" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="27717" end="27734" title="economic activity" label="economic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="27745" end="27762" title="industrial nation" label="industrial nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q289612" start="28037" end="28048" title="general contractor" label="contractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q215279" start="28050" end="28060" title="freelancer" label="freelancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q667944" start="28066" end="28080" title="temporary work" label="temporary work"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="28092" end="28118" title="information and communications technology" label="communication technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="28137" end="28145" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277143" start="28164" end="28179" title="sharing economy" label="sharing economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390477" start="28206" end="28224" title="online marketplace" label="online marketplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808804" start="28286" end="28299" title="Asset poverty" label="Asset poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156603" start="28302" end="28317" title="Complex society" label="Complex society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958441" start="28320" end="28335" title="Economic sector" label="Economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="28338" end="28356" title="Economies of scale" label="Economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433327" start="28359" end="28373" title="Family economy" label="Family economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466969" start="28376" end="28383" title="Fordism" label="Fordism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988317" start="28386" end="28406" title="Identity performance" label="Identity performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="28409" end="28426" title="Industrialisation" label="Industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q608344" start="28429" end="28438" title="Kyriarchy" label="Kyriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160362" start="28441" end="28454" title="Mechanisation" label="Mechanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046507" start="28457" end="28493" title="New international division of labour" label="New international division of labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="28496" end="28524" title="Newly industrialised country" label="Newly industrialised country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118871" start="28527" end="28536" title="Precariat" label="Precariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009677" start="28539" end="28554" title="Precarious work" label="Precarious work"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247853" start="28557" end="28591" title="Productive and unproductive labour" label="Productive and unproductive labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131126" start="28594" end="28606" title="Price system" label="Price system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360653" start="28609" end="28621" title="Role suction" label="Role suction"/>
<link wikidata="Q462052" start="28624" end="28639" title="Surplus product" label="Surplus product"/>
<link wikidata="Q667944" start="28642" end="28656" title="Temporary work" label="Temporary work"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="28659" end="28671" title="Urbanization" label="Urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q114244630" start="28674" end="28698" title="Winner and loser culture" label="Winner and loser culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q191020" start="28741" end="28756" title="Gary S. Becker" label="Becker, Gary S."/>
<link wikidata="Q4660282" start="28836" end="28860" title="A Treatise on the Family" label="A Treatise on the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="28868" end="28892" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041897" start="28982" end="29008" title="Journal of Labor Economics" label="Journal of Labor Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q721595" start="29033" end="29049" title="Harry Braverman" label="Braverman, Harry"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29063" end="29139" title="Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century" label="Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946330" start="29147" end="29167" title="Monthly Review Press" label="Monthly Review Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502844" start="29171" end="29188" title="Stephanie Coontz" label="Coontz, Stephanie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="29297" end="29312" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Durkheim, Émile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020435" start="29326" end="29359" title="The Division of Labour in Society" label="The Division of Labour in Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="29369" end="29389" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Emerson, Ralph Waldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q57788611" start="29397" end="29417" title="The American Scholar" label="The American Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q375612" start="29507" end="29523" title="Richard Florida" label="Florida, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760897" start="29537" end="29567" title="The Rise of the Creative Class" label="The Rise of the Creative Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="29737" end="29763" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501944" start="29767" end="29782" title="Herbert Gintis" label="Gintis, Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q125842" start="29784" end="29797" title="Samuel Bowles (economist)" label="Samuel Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q78655" start="29819" end="29830" title="Ernst Fehr" label="Ernst Feghr"/>
<link wikidata="Q18719437" start="29936" end="29953" title="Robert E. Goodin" label="Goodin, Robert E."/>
<link wikidata="Q6138814" start="29955" end="29972" title="James Mahmud Rice" label="James Mahmud Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q52474774" start="30071" end="30115" title="Discretionary Time" label="Discretionary Time: A New Measure of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q84352" start="30199" end="30210" title="André Gorz" label="Gorz, André"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753704" start="30388" end="30431" title="The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics" label="The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135809" start="30443" end="30460" title="James Heartfield" label="Heartfield, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q287567" start="30544" end="30559" title="Bertell Ollman" label="Ollman, Bertell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603085" start="30667" end="30682" title="George Reisman" label="Reisman, George"/>
<link wikidata="Q157268" start="30779" end="30795" title="Robert Solow" label="Solow, Robert M."/>
<link wikidata="Q5342750" start="30936" end="30948" title="Edward Elgar Publishing" label="Edward Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913801" start="30968" end="30980" title="Bina Agarwal" label="Bina Agarwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q521114" start="30982" end="30994" title="Martin Neil Baily" label="Martin Baily"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166627" start="30996" end="31012" title="Jean-Louis Beffa" label="Jean-Louis Beffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327984" start="31014" end="31031" title="Richard N. Cooper" label="Richard N. Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148890" start="31033" end="31046" title="Jan Fagerberg" label="Jan Fagerberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q726265" start="31048" end="31063" title="Elhanan Helpman" label="Elhanan Helpman"/>
<link wikidata="Q29349817" start="31065" end="31080" title="Shelly Lundberg" label="Shelly Lundberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="31127" end="31143" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Rothbard, Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457448" start="31238" end="31253" title="Mises Institute" label="Mises Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="31286" end="31303" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="von Mises, Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q662732" start="31370" end="31419" title="Human Action" label="&amp;quot;Human Action: A Treatise on Economics&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q243534" start="31566" end="31584" title="George Stigler" label="Stigler, George J."/>
<link wikidata="Q783630" start="31671" end="31699" title="Journal of Political Economy" label="Journal of Political Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558192" start="31728" end="31752" title="World Development Report" label="World Development Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="31781" end="31791" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8826" wikidata="Q902796" url="?curid=8826" title="Davy lamp">
<text>The Davy lamp is a safety lamp used in flammable atmospheres, invented in 1815 by Sir Humphry Davy. It consists of a wick lamp with the flame enclosed inside a mesh screen. It was created for use in coal mines, to reduce the danger of explosions due to the presence of methane and other flammable gases, called &quot;firedamp&quot; or &quot;minedamp.&quot;

== History ==

German polymath Alexander von Humboldt, working for the German Bureau of Mines, had concerns for the health and welfare of the miners and invented a kind of respirator and &quot;four lamps of different construction suitable for employment in various circumstances. The respirator was to prevent the inhaling of injurious gases, and to supply the miner with good air; the lamps were constructed to burn in the most inflammable kind of fire-damp without igniting the gas. They were the forerunners of Davy&#x27;s later invention, and were frequently made use of by the miners.&quot;

Davy&#x27;s invention was preceded by that of William Reid Clanny, an Irish doctor at Bishopwearmouth, who had read a paper to the Royal Society in May 1813. The more cumbersome Clanny safety lamp was successfully tested at Herrington Mill, and he won medals, from the Royal Society of Arts.

Despite his lack of scientific knowledge, engine-wright George Stephenson devised a lamp in which the air entered via tiny holes, through which the flames of the lamp could not pass. A month before Davy presented his design to the Royal Society, Stephenson demonstrated his own lamp to two witnesses by taking it down Killingworth Colliery and holding it in front of a fissure from which firedamp was issuing.

The first trial of a Davy lamp with a wire sieve was at Hebburn Colliery on 9 January 1816. A letter from Davy (which he intended to be kept private) describing his findings and various suggestions for a safety lamp was made public at a meeting in Newcastle on 3 November 1815, and a paper describing the lamp was formally presented at a Royal Society meeting in London on 9 November. For it, Davy was awarded the society&#x27;s Rumford Medal. Davy&#x27;s lamp differed from Stephenson&#x27;s in that the flame was surrounded by a screen of gauze, whereas Stephenson&#x27;s prototype lamp had a perforated plate contained in a glass cylinder (a design mentioned in Davy&#x27;s Royal Society paper as an alternative to his preferred solution). For his invention Davy was given £2,000 worth of silver (the money being raised by public subscription), whilst Stephenson was accused of stealing the idea from Davy, because the fully developed &#x27;Geordie lamp&#x27; had not been demonstrated by Stephenson until after Davy had presented his paper at the Royal Society, and (it was held) previous versions had not actually been safe.

A local committee of enquiry gathered in support of Stephenson exonerated him, showing that he had been working separately to create the Geordie lamp, and raised a subscription for him of £1,000. Davy and his supporters refused to accept their findings, and would not see how an uneducated man such as Stephenson could come up with the solution he had: Stephenson himself freely admitted that he had arrived at a practical solution on the basis of an erroneous theory. In 1833, a House of Commons committee found that Stephenson had equal claim to having invented the safety lamp. Davy went to his grave claiming that Stephenson had stolen his idea. The Stephenson lamp was used almost exclusively in North East England, whereas the Davy lamp was used everywhere else. The experience gave Stephenson a lifelong distrust of London-based, theoretical, scientific experts.

== Design and theory ==
The lamp consists of a wick lamp with the flame enclosed inside a mesh screen. The screen acts as a flame arrestor; air (and any firedamp present) can pass through the mesh freely enough to support combustion, but the holes are too fine to allow a flame to propagate through them and ignite any firedamp outside the mesh. The Davy lamp was fueled by oil or naphtha (lighter fluid). 

The lamp also provided a test for the presence of gases. If flammable gas mixtures were present, the flame of the Davy lamp burned higher with a blue tinge. Lamps were equipped with a metal gauge to measure the height of the flame. Miners could place the safety lamp close to the ground to detect gases, such as carbon dioxide, that are denser than air and so could collect in depressions in the mine; if the mine air was oxygen-poor (asphyxiant gas), the lamp flame would be extinguished (&quot;black damp&quot; or &quot;chokedamp&quot;). A methane-air flame is extinguished at about 17% oxygen content (which will still support life), so the lamp gave an early indication of an unhealthy atmosphere, allowing the miners to get out before they died of asphyxiation.

== Impact ==
In 1816, the Cumberland Pacquet reported a demonstration of the Davy lamp at William Pit, Whitehaven. Placed in a blower &quot;... the effect was grand beyond description. At first a blue flame was seen to cap the flame of the lamp, – then succeeded a lambent flame, playing in the cylinder; and shortly after, the flame of the firedamp expanded, so as to completely fill the wire gauze. For some time, the flame of the lamp was seen through that of the firedamp, which became ultimately extinguished without explosion. Results more satisfactory were not to be wished...&quot; Another correspondent to the paper commented &quot;The Lamp offers absolute security to the miner... With the excellent ventilation of the &quot;Whitehaven Collieries&quot; and the application of Sir HUMPHRY&#x27;s valuable instrument, the accidents from the explosion of&#x27; (carbureted) &#x27;hydrogene which have occurred (although comparatively few for such extensive works) will by this happy invention be avoided&quot;.

However, this prediction was not fulfilled: in the next thirty years, firedamp explosions in Whitehaven pits killed 137 people. More generally, the Select Committee on Accidents in Mines reported in 1835 that the introduction of the Davy lamp had led to an increase in mine accidents; the lamp encouraged the working of mines and parts of mines that had previously been closed for safety reasons. For example, in 1835, 102 men and boys were killed by a firedamp explosion in a Wallsend colliery working the Bensham seam, described at the subsequent inquest by John Buddle as &quot;a dangerous seam, which required the utmost care in keeping in a working state&quot;, which could only be worked with the Davy lamp. The coroner noted that a previous firedamp explosion in 1821 had killed 52, but directed his jury that any finding on the wisdom of continuing to work the seam was outside their province.

The lamps had to be provided by the miners themselves, not the owners, as traditionally the miners had bought their own candles from the company store. Miners still preferred the better illumination from a naked light, and mine regulations insisting that only safety lamps be used were draconian in principle, but in practice neither observed nor enforced. After two accidents in two years (1838–39) in Cumberland pits, both caused by safety checks being carried out by the light of a naked flame, the Royal Commission on Children&#x27;s Employment commented both on the failure to learn from the first accident, and on the &quot;further absurdity&quot; of &quot;carrying a Davy lamp in one hand for the sake of safety, and a naked lighted candle in the other, as if for the sake of danger. Beyond this there can be no conceivable thoughtlessness and folly; and when such management is allowed in the mine of two of the most opulent coal-proprietors in the kingdom, we cease to wonder at anything that may take place in mines worked by men equally without capital and science&quot;

Another reason for the increase in accidents was the unreliability of the lamps themselves. The bare gauze was easily damaged, and once just a single wire broke or rusted away, the lamp became unsafe.
Work carried out by a scientific witness and reported by the committee showed that the Davy lamp became unsafe in airflows so low that a Davy lamp carried at normal walking pace against normal airflows in walkways was only safe if provided with a draught shield (not normally fitted), and the committee noted that accidents had happened when the lamp was &quot;in general and careful use; no one survived to tell the tale of how these occurrences took place; conjecture supplied the want of positive knowledge most unsatisfactorily; but incidents are recorded which prove what must follow unreasonable testing of the lamp; and your Committee are constrained to believe that ignorance and a false reliance upon its merits, in cases attended with unwarrantable risks, have led to disastrous consequences&quot; The &quot;South Shields Committee&quot;, a body set up by a public meeting there (in response to an explosion at the St Hilda pit in 1839) to consider the prevention of accidents in mines had shown that mine ventilation in the North-East was generally deficient, with an insufficient supply of fresh air giving every opportunity for explosive mixtures of gas to accumulate. A subsequent select committee in 1852 concurred with this view; firedamp explosions could best be prevented by improving mine ventilation (by the use of steam ejectors: the committee specifically advised against fan ventilation), which had been neglected because of over-reliance on the safety of the Davy lamp.

The practice of using a Davy lamp and a candle together was not entirely absurd, however, if the Davy lamp is understood to be not only a safe light in an explosive atmosphere, but also a gauge of firedamp levels. In practice, however, the warning from the lamp was not always noticed in time, especially in the working conditions of the era.

The &quot;Regulation and Inspection of Mines Act&quot; of 1860 therefore required coal mines to have an adequate amount of ventilation, constantly produced, to dilute and render harmless noxious gases so that work areas were – under ordinary circumstances – in a fit state to be worked (areas where a normally safe atmosphere could not be ensured were to be fenced off &quot;as far as possible&quot;): it also required safety lamps to be examined and securely locked by a duly authorized person before use.

Even when new and clean, illumination from the safety lamps was very poor, and the problem was not fully resolved until electric lamps became widely available in the late 19th century.

== Successors ==

A modern-day equivalent of the Davy lamp has been used in the Olympic flame torch relays. It was used in the relays for the Sydney, Athens, Turin, Beijing, Vancouver and Singapore Youth Olympic Games. It was also used for the Special Olympics Shanghai, Pan American and Central African games and for the London 2012 Summer Olympics relay.

Lamps are still made in Eccles, Greater Manchester; in Aberdare, South Wales; and in Kolkata, India.

A replica of a Davy lamp is located in front of the ticket office at the Stadium of Light (Sunderland AFC) which is built on a former coal mine.

In 2015, the bicentenary of Davy&#x27;s invention, the former Bersham Colliery, in Wrexham, Wales, now a mining museum, hosted an event for members of the public to bring in their Davy lamps for identification. The National Mining Museum Scotland at Newtongrange, Scotland, also celebrated the 200th anniversary of the invention. In 2016, the Royal Institution of Great Britain, where the Davy lamp prototype is displayed, decided to have the invention 3D scanned, reverse engineered and presented to the museum visitors in a more accessible digital format via a virtual reality cabinet. At first sight it appears to be a traditional display cabinet but has a touch screen with various options for visitors to view and reference the virtual exhibits inside.

== Notes ==
== References ==

== Further reading ==

== External links ==

* Popular Science video showing an experiment that demonstrates the principle of the Davy lamp
* Edwards, Eric The Miners&#x27; Safety Lamp at Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford University
* Humphry Davy Brief bio at Spartacus Educational</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q902796" start="4" end="13" title="Davy lamp" label="Davy lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q371150" start="19" end="30" title="safety lamp" label="safety lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="82" end="98" title="Sir Humphry Davy" label="Sir Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q849004" start="117" end="121" title="Candle wick" label="wick"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="199" end="208" title="coal mine" label="coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="269" end="276" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q394497" start="317" end="325" title="firedamp" label="firedamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="341" end="349" title="Damp (mining)" label="minedamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="389" end="411" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q394497" start="807" end="816" title="fire-damp" label="fire-damp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017467" start="1001" end="1020" title="William Reid Clanny" label="William Reid Clanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918124" start="1041" end="1056" title="Bishopwearmouth" label="Bishopwearmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1086" end="1099" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="1224" end="1245" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q133614" start="1304" end="1321" title="George Stephenson" label="George Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1566" end="1587" title="Killingworth#Killingworth Colliery" label="Killingworth Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q394497" start="1636" end="1644" title="firedamp" label="firedamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q984308" start="1715" end="1722" title="Hebburn" label="Hebburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q285167" start="2088" end="2101" title="Rumford Medal" label="Rumford Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760369" start="2603" end="2615" title="Geordie lamp" label="Geordie lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="3270" end="3286" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="3491" end="3509" title="North East England" label="North East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q849004" start="3708" end="3712" title="Candle wick" label="wick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426994" start="3785" end="3799" title="flame arrestor" label="flame arrestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="4381" end="4395" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807985" start="4504" end="4518" title="asphyxiant gas" label="asphyxiant gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020081" start="4565" end="4575" title="black damp" label="black damp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4863" end="4881" title="Cumberland Pacquet" label="Cumberland Pacquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452805" start="6416" end="6427" title="John Buddle" label="John Buddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864530" start="7261" end="7307" title="Mines and Collieries Act 1842" label="Royal Commission on Children&amp;#x27;s Employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="10656" end="10669" title="Olympic flame" label="Olympic flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="10780" end="10793" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="10898" end="10925" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="London 2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342197" start="10958" end="10984" title="Eccles, Greater Manchester" label="Eccles, Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q319369" start="10989" end="10997" title="Aberdare" label="Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="10999" end="11010" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="11019" end="11026" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="11028" end="11033" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q31969" start="11109" end="11125" title="Stadium of Light" label="Stadium of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894926" start="11244" end="11260" title="Bersham Colliery" label="Bersham Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q496368" start="11265" end="11272" title="Wrexham" label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437860" start="11397" end="11428" title="National Mining Museum Scotland" label="National Mining Museum Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020516" start="11432" end="11444" title="Newtongrange" label="Newtongrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171086" start="11525" end="11559" title="Royal Institution" label="Royal Institution of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q269608" start="11647" end="11665" title="Reverse engineering" label="reverse engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456119" start="12159" end="12177" title="Pitt Rivers Museum" label="Pitt Rivers Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="12179" end="12196" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8827" wikidata="Q216360" url="?curid=8827" title="Docklands Light Railway">
<text>The Docklands Light Railway (DLR) is an automated light metro system primarily serving the redeveloped Docklands area of London and providing a direct connection between London&#x27;s two major financial districts, Canary Wharf and the City of London. First opened on 31 August 1987, the DLR has been extended multiple times, giving a total route length of . Lines now reach north to Stratford, south to Lewisham, west to and in the City of London financial district, and east to Beckton, London City Airport and Woolwich Arsenal. An extension to Thamesmead is currently being proposed.

Normal operations are automated, so there is minimal staffing on the 149 trains (which have no driving cabs) and at major interchange stations; the four below-ground stations are staffed, to comply with health and safety regulations for underground stations. The DLR was the first major railway infrastructure project in Britain where access for disabled people was considered, with level access into the train from platforms and lifts at all stations.

The DLR is operated and maintained by franchisee KeolisAmey Docklands (a joint venture of transport company Keolis and infrastructure support provider Amey) for Transport for London (TfL). Passenger numbers have increased as the network has expanded since its launch. In the financial year 2023/24, there were 98.9million passenger journeys.

==History==
===Background===
In the 18th and 19th century, new docks were built east of the City of London to cater for the rapidly growing city. The last of these docks opened in 1921 in the Royal Docks. From the early 1960s, the docks began to decline as cargo was containerised and mechanised. The older docks did not have space to expand, and could not handle larger vessels. The docks had been connected to the national railway network via the London and Blackwall Railway (L&amp;BR), which was closed in 1966 for lack of traffic. From the mid-1960s, the docks gradually closed down - leading to major job losses and economic deprivation. In the 1970s, the opening of new deep water Tilbury container docks located further east in Essex exacerbated the issue, with the Royal Docks closing in 1981. 

=== Origins and development ===
Throughout the 1970s, the government and the Greater London Council (GLC) put forward various plans to redevelop the Docklands area. The area was thought to have great potential for redevelopment, located close to the City of London with historic warehouses and large areas of water.

In 1972, the London Docklands Study team commissioned Travis Morgan &amp; Partners to propose redevelopment of the area. In 1973, they proposed, among other recommendations, that a &quot;minitram&quot; people-mover system capable of carrying up to 20 people in each unit should be constructed to connect the Docklands with the planned Fleet line tube railway terminus at Fenchurch Street railway station. The Greater London Council formed a Docklands Joint Committee with the Boroughs of Greenwich, Lewisham, Newham, Southwark and Tower Hamlets in 1974 to undertake the redevelopment of the area. A light railway system was envisaged, terminating either at Tower Hill tube station or at nearby Fenchurch Street, but both options were seen as too expensive.

Nonetheless, in 1976 another report proposed a conventional tube railway for the area and London Transport obtained Parliamentary powers to build a line from Charing Cross station to Fenchurch Street, Surrey Docks (now Surrey Quays railway station), the Isle of Dogs, North Greenwich and Custom House to Woolwich Arsenal. This was intended to be the second stage of the Fleet line – which had been renamed the Jubilee line, the first stage of which opened in 1979 from to . This would have cost around £325million. However, when the Thatcher Government came to power, the plans to extend the Jubilee line were halted and the new government insisted that a lower-cost option should be pursued.

In July 1981, the government established the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) to coordinate the redevelopment of the Docklands. The need to provide a cheap public transport solution led to it commissioning London Transport to evaluate a number of exclusively light rail options, using trams or tram like vehicles. The cost of extending the Jubilee line to the area was now estimated to be around £450million.

The core of the route ran alongside the Great Eastern line out of London and south along the former London &amp; Blackwall Railway line through the Isle of Dogs. Three terminus options were proposed at the west end, at Tower Hill, Minories and Aldgate East. The Tower Hill option would have required a low-level interchange to be constructed alongside the existing Underground station, but this would have been a very costly venture. The Minories option, a high-level station virtually on the site of the old Minories railway station, was selected and became the current Tower Gateway DLR terminus. Aldgate East would have been perhaps the most ambitious of all of the options, as it originally envisaged a low-level connection with the District line that would have allowed DLR trains to run on London Underground tracks to a variety of central London destinations. However, it quickly became apparent that there was no capacity on the existing network for integrating the DLR into the Underground.

Two southern terminus options were put forward, at Cubitt Town (today&#x27;s Island Gardens station) and Tiller Road, on the west side of Millwall Dock, with two possible routes to reach them. A &quot;western&quot; route would have run from the Westferry station alongside West Ferry Road via Cuba Street, then either terminating at Tiller Road or continuing over Millwall Docks Cut to a terminus at Cubitt Town. The &quot;central&quot; option required the West India Docks to be infilled or bridged and would run down the middle of the peninsula, through what was at the time an area of derelict warehouses. Ultimately this latter option was chosen, though the 1981 London Transport report warned that without extensive development around Canary Wharf the area would be &quot;very isolated with poor traffic prospects&quot; – as indeed it was, for a number of years.

The northern terminus was proposed at Mile End, with options including street running down Burdett Road towards Limehouse or along the Mile End Road to turn south before using an old railway alignment to reach Poplar.

A final report prepared by the GLC, LDDC, government departments and London Transport was published in June 1982, proposing a north–south route from Mile End to the Isle of Dogs, and an east–west route linking the Isle of Dogs to the City of London. Even during the development of the line, proposals for future extensions were being envisaged and investigated.

=== Parliamentary process and construction ===
Following the publishing of the report, the Departments of the Environment and Transport agreed to provide £77million towards construction of the extension, with a deadline of 1987. The funding agreement also included conditions to maximise the use of modern technology, and that no ongoing subsidy would be available from government.

Initially, the system was planned to be manually operated and having some stretches of street running. During the Parliamentary process, the northern terminus of the line was changed to Stratford, as part of efforts to segregate the line from road and other railway traffic, as the LDDC were pushing for the line to use a &quot;high tech automated system&quot;. In 1984, the contract for the initial system was awarded to a GEC / John Mowlem joint venture, which proposed fully automated operation using light rail vehicles.

The two Acts of Parliament that authorised the line to be built were passed in 1984 and 1985. Construction of the system began shortly after in 1985, with the joint venture careful to minimise costs in light of the £77million budget. Two thirds of the route was built on underused or disused railway infrastructure, and station architecture used a kit-of-parts approach to save money.

===Initial system (1987–1990)===

The railway was formally opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 30 July 1987, and passenger services began on 31 August. The initial system comprised two routes, from and Stratford to , with a total length of . It was mainly elevated on disused railway viaducts or new concrete viaducts, and adopted disused surface railway formations between Poplar and Stratford. The trains were fully automated, controlled by computer, and had no driver; a Passenger Service Agent (PSA) on each train, originally referred to as a &quot;Train Captain&quot;, was responsible for patrolling the train, checking tickets, making announcements and controlling the doors. PSAs could take control of the train in circumstances including equipment failure and emergencies. A total of eleven units supplied by Linke-Hofmann-Busch comprised the first generation of the Docklands Light Railway rolling stock.

The system was lightweight, with stations designed for trains of only a single articulated vehicle. The three branches totalled , had 15 stations, and were connected by a flat triangular junction near . Services ran from Tower Gateway to Island Gardens and from Stratford to Island Gardens; the north side of the junction was used only for access to the Poplar depot. The stations were mostly of a common design and constructed from standard components. A common feature was a short half-cylindrical glazed blue canopy. All stations were above ground and were generally unstaffed. All stations featured lifts and level access into the train from platforms, catering for disabled people, people with small children and elderly people.

===Extensions to the City and the Royal Docks (1991–1994)===

The initial system had a relatively low capacity, but the Docklands area very quickly developed into a major financial centre and employment zone, increasing traffic. In particular Tower Gateway, at the edge of the City of London, attracted criticism for its poor connections, as it did not connect directly with the nearby Tower Hill tube station or Fenchurch Street railway station. The criticism arose partly because the system usage was higher than expected. Plans were developed, before the system opened, to extend it to in the west and Beckton in the east. Stations and trains were extended to two-unit length, and the system was expanded into the heart of the City of London to through a tunnel, which opened in 1991 at a cost of £295million. This extension left on a stub.

The original trains were not suitable for underground usage due to not meeting the fire safety laws for underground trains. They were operated for a time on the above-ground sections only, and were later sold.

As the Canary Wharf office complex grew, Canary Wharf DLR station was redeveloped from a small wayside station to a large one with six platforms serving three tracks and a large overall roof, fully integrated into the malls below the office towers.

The east of Docklands needed better transport connections to encourage development, and a fourth branch, towards Beckton, was planned, with several route options available. A route from via and the north side of the Royal Docks complex was chosen, and opened in March 1994 at a cost of £280million. Initially it was thought the line was likely to be underutilised, due to the sparse development in the area and for this reason two additional stations at Thames Wharf (not to be confused with the later Thames Wharf proposal on the Woolwich branch) and Connaught were omitted. As part of this extension, one side of the original flat triangular junction was replaced by a grade-separated junction west of Poplar. Poplar was rebuilt to give cross-platform interchange between the Stratford and Beckton lines, with a new grade-separated junction built east of the station at the divergence of the Stratford and Beckton lines. As part of the extension, a new, larger, depot was built at Beckton.

===Extension to Greenwich &amp; Lewisham (1996–1999)===
Early on, Lewisham London Borough Council commissioned a feasibility study into extending the system under the River Thames. This led the council to advocate an extension via Greenwich and Deptford, terminating at Lewisham railway station. The ambitions of the operators were supported by politicians in Parliament, including the future Labour Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott, and Lord Whitty. The extension would be designed, built, financed and maintained by a private consortium as a Private finance initiative, with Government contributing around £50 million of the £200 million construction cost. 

Construction began in 1996, with the extension opening ahead of schedule on 20 November 1999. It left the Island Gardens route south of the Crossharbour turn-back sidings, and dropped gently to , where a street-level station replaced the high-level one on the former London &amp; Blackwall Railway viaduct. The line then entered a tunnel, following the route of the viaduct to a shallow subsurface station at , accessible by stairs or a lift. It crossed under the Thames to in the centre of Greenwich, and surfaced at Greenwich railway station, with cross-platform interchange between the northbound track and the London-bound main line. The line snaked on a concrete viaduct to , before descending to at street level, close to Lewisham town centre, terminating in two platforms between and below the main-line platforms at Lewisham railway station, with buses stopping outside the station. The extension quickly proved profitable. 

===Extensions to London City Airport &amp; Woolwich (2004–2009)===

An extension to London City Airport from the existing Beckton branch was explored in the mid-90s, at first via travelator from Royal Albert, and then in 1998 via a proposed lift-bridge over the dock with an intermediate station at West Silvertown. The government initially supported this proposal, and in 1999 was developed to the route known today with a further extension to King George V. At this time, the further route to Woolwich Arsenal was developed with an intermediate station at Woolwich Reach, but was viewed as a longer-term aspiration. The Woolwich Reach station (on the south bank of the Thames, at the site of the Marlborough Road ventilation and escape shaft), was descoped in 2000.

The extension was aided by a five-year programme of investment for public transport across London that was unveiled by Mayor of London Ken Livingstone on 12 October 2004. On 2 December 2005, an eastward branch along the approximate route of the former Eastern Counties and Thames Junction Railway on the southern side of the Royal Docks complex opened from Canning Town to via .

A further extension from to Woolwich Arsenal opened on 10 January 2009, providing interchange with National Rail services. The extension again used Private Finance Initiative funding, with construction beginning in June 2005, the same month that the contracts were finalised. The tunnels under the Thames were completed on 23 July 2007, and formally opened by Boris Johnson, Mayor of London on 12 January 2009. Following completion, the project was shortlisted for the 2009 Prime Minister&#x27;s Better Public Building Award.

The original station was closed in mid-2008 for complete reconstruction. The two terminal tracks either side of a narrow island platform were replaced by a single track between two platforms, one for arriving passengers and the other for departing (Spanish solution). It reopened on 2 March 2009.

As part of an upgrade to allow three-car trains, strengthening work was necessary at the Delta Junction north of . It was decided to include this in a plan for further grade separation to eliminate the conflict between services to Stratford and from Bank. A new timetable was introduced, with improved frequencies at peak hours. The new grade-separated route from Bank to Canary Wharf is used throughout the day, bypassing West India Quay station until mid-evening. Work on this project proceeded concurrently with the three-car upgrade work and the &#x27;diveunder&#x27; (sometimes referred to as a flyunder but DLR have coined the term in this instance &#x27;diveunder&#x27;), and the improved timetable came into use on 24 August 2009.

===Upgrade to three-car trains (2007–2011)===
With the development of the eastern Docklands as part of the Thames Gateway initiative and London&#x27;s staging of the 2012 Summer Olympics, several extensions and enhancements were undertaken.

Capacity was increased by upgrading for trains with three cars, each with four doors per side. The alternative of more frequent trains was rejected as the signalling changes needed would have cost no less than upgrading to longer trains and with fewer benefits. The railway had been built for single-car operation, and the upgrade required both strengthening viaducts to take heavier trains and lengthening many platforms. The extra capacity was useful for the 2012 Summer Olympics, which increased the use of London&#x27;s transport network. The main contractor for the expansion and alteration works was Taylor Woodrow.

Elverson Road, Royal Albert, Gallions Reach and Cutty Sark have not been extended for three-car trains; such extension may be impossible in some cases. Selective door operation is used, with emergency walkways in case a door fails to remain shut. station is underground, and both costs and the risk to nearby historic buildings prevent platform extension. The tunnel has an emergency walkway. Additional work beyond that needed to take the three-car trains was also carried out at some stations. This included replacing canopies with more substantial ones along the full platform length. A new station has been built east of the former location as nearby curves precluded lengthening. now has a third platform.

For this upgrade DLR purchased an additional 31 cars compatible with existing rolling stock. The works were originally planned as three phases: Bank-Lewisham, Poplar-Stratford, and the Beckton branch. The original £200million contract was awarded on 3 May 2007. Work started in 2007 and Bank-Lewisham was originally due to be completed in 2009. However, the work programme for the first two phases was merged and the infrastructure work was completed by the end of January 2010. The Lewisham-Bank route now runs three-car trains exclusively. They started running on the Beckton branch on 9 May 2011. Stratford to Lewisham and Bank to Woolwich Arsenal services sometimes operate as three-car trains; other routes run the longer trains when required.

===Extension to Stratford International (2011)===

In addition to the three-car station extensions, partly funded from the 2012 Olympics budget, a line was opened from Canning Town to Stratford and Stratford International railway station along the former North London Line of the national railway system, with additional stations. It parallels the London Underground Jubilee line for much of its length.

The extension to Stratford International, taking over the North London Line from Canning Town to Stratford, links the Docklands area with domestic high-speed services on High Speed 1. It was an important part of transport improvements for the 2012 Olympic Games, much of which were held on a site adjoining Stratford International.

The first contract for construction work was awarded on 10 January 2007 and construction started in mid-2007. Originally scheduled to open in mid-2010, the line opened on 31 August 2011. On 11 November 2015 the Mayor of London announced that all stations on this line would be rezoned from zone 3 to zone 2/3.

New stations were , , , , and Stratford International. Of these, Canning Town, West Ham and Stratford are former North London Line stations, and Stratford High Street was built on the site of railway station.

From Canning Town to Stratford the extension runs parallel to the Jubilee line of the London Underground. As well as providing interchange with the adjacent Jubilee line stations, there are additional DLR stations at Star Lane, Abbey Road and Stratford High Street.

At Stratford new platforms were built for the North London Line at the northern end of the station. The old platforms (formerly 1 and 2) adjacent to the Jubilee line were rebuilt for the DLR, renumbered 16 (towards Stratford International) and 17 (towards Beckton/Woolwich Arsenal). Interchange between the Stratford International branch and DLR trains via Poplar is possible although the platforms are widely separated and at different levels. There is no physical connection between the two branches.

===Relocation of Pudding Mill Lane station (2014)===
One of the tunnel portals for Elizabeth line is on the original site of Pudding Mill Lane station. As a consequence, work was carried out to divert the DLR between City Mill River and the River Lea onto a new viaduct further south. This included a replacement station, which opened on 28 April 2014. The former station stood on the only significant section of single track on the system, between Bow Church and Stratford. The opportunity was taken to double the track in three stages, to improve capacity. There was originally no provision for works beyond the realigned section in the Crossrail Act.

==Current system==
===Network===
The DLR has of tracks, with 45 stations. The three lines shown on the TfL DLR map have six branches: to Lewisham in the south, and Stratford International in the north, and Woolwich Arsenal in the east, and Central London in the west, splitting to and .
The northern, southern and south-eastern branches terminate at the National Rail stations at Stratford, Stratford International, Lewisham and Woolwich Arsenal. Other interchanges with National Rail are at Limehouse, Greenwich and West Ham, while out-of-station interchanges for Oyster card holders are available between Shadwell DLR station and the Windrush line station of the same name, and between Fenchurch Street and the DLR&#x27;s western termini of Tower Gateway and Bank.

Between Limehouse and Tower Gateway, the DLR runs parallel to the London, Tilbury and Southend line.

===Services===
The following services are operated in normal off-peak service from 26 September 2022:
At peak times, these same services run, but with the frequency increased by 25 per cent. Additionally, in the morning peak, alternate StratfordCanary Wharf services extend to Lewisham.

At terminal stations, trains reverse direction in the platforms, except at Bank where there is a reversing headshunt in the tunnel beyond the station. During service disruption or planned engineering work, trains can also turn back at and . There is also capability for an additional shuttle from Canning Town to Prince Regent when exhibitions are in progress at the ExCeL exhibition centre, although this is not supported by any additional turnback infrastructure. Trains serve every station on the route, but trains from Bank to Lewisham do not call at because they are routed along the diveunder track to avoid junction conflicts. When required, such as during engineering works or for special events, other routes may be operated, such as Beckton to Lewisham if the Bank and Tower Gateway branch is closed.

====Future services====
The new rolling stock to be introduced from 2024 onwards will support service improvements.

===Stations===
Most stations are elevated, with others at street level, in cutting or underground. Access to the platforms is mostly by staircase and lift, with escalators at some stations. From the outset the system has been fully accessible to wheelchairs; much attention was paid to quick and effective accessibility for all passengers. The station platforms match the floor height of the cars, giving level access for passengers with wheelchairs or pushchairs.

Most stations are of a modular design dating back to the initial system, extended and improved with two side platforms, each with separate access from the street, and platform canopies, although few examples remain of the original, distinctive rounded roof design. Stations are unstaffed, except the underground stations at , Stratford International and Woolwich Arsenal for safety reasons, a few of the busier interchange stations, Canning Town, West Ham, and City Airport, which has a ticket office for passengers unfamiliar with the system. Canning Town, Custom House and Prince Regent are normally staffed on the platform whenever there is a significant exhibition at the ExCeL exhibition centre.

On 3 July 2007, DLR officially launched an art programme called DLR Art, similar to that on the London Underground, Art on the Underground. Alan Williams was appointed to produce the first temporary commission, called &quot;Sidetrack&quot;, which portrays the ordinary and extraordinary sights, often unfamiliar to passengers, on the system and was displayed throughout the network.

===Fares and ticketing===

The system is part of the London fare zone system, and Travelcards that cover the appropriate zones are valid. Tickets can be purchased from ticket machines at the entrances to platforms, and are required before accessing the platform. Passengers using Oyster pay-as-you-go and contactless bank-cards need to touch both in and out of the system using card readers on automatic gates and platforms. There are no ticket barriers at DLR-only stations: correct ticketing is enforced by random on-train inspections by Passenger Service Agents (PSAs). There are barriers at Bank, , West Ham and , where the DLR platforms are within a London Underground or National Rail barrier line. There are also ticket barriers at Woolwich Arsenal, which are the only barriers staffed by DLR staff; at this station passengers can pass between the DLR and Southeastern platforms within the paid area. Users of payment cards who have failed to touch in at the start of the journey, and other passengers without a correct ticket, may be liable to a £100 penalty fare or prosecution for fare evasion.

===Rolling stock===
The DLR is equipped with 149 high-floor bi-directional single-articulated electric multiple units (EMUs). Each car has four double doors on each side, and two or three cars make up a train. There are no cabs because normal operations are automated; a small driver&#x27;s console is concealed behind a locked panel at each end, from which the PSA can drive the car. Consoles at each door opening allow a PSA to control door closure and make announcements whilst patrolling the train. With the absence of a driver&#x27;s position, the fully glazed car ends provide a forward and rear view for passengers. The operational top speed is .

Despite having high floors and being automated, the cars are derived from a German light-rail design intended for street running. All cars look similar but there have been several different types, some still in service, others sold to other operators. Units were purchased from Bombardier in 2005 and delivered between 2007 and 2010.

====Future rolling stock====

In 2017, TfL opened bidding for new full-length, walk-through trains, subsequently awarded to CAF in 2019 and expected in service between 2024 and 2026, following delivery and testing on the network of the initial units from January 2023. An order was placed for 54 five-car trains: 33 to replace the oldest existing trains and the rest to increase service capacity. The design of the trains increases internal capacity by 10% which, combined with service improvements, will bring about a 65% increase in capacity from Stratford to Lewisham, and a doubling of capacity between Canning Town and Beckton or Woolwich Arsenal. The trains have charging points and air-conditioning.

===Depots===
The network has two depots, at Poplar and Beckton. Poplar was opened with the initial line in 1987. Due to the constrained site, a new, larger, depot at Beckton was opened in 1994 and is now the main maintenance depot and primary control centre for the network. Track maintenance, off-peak train stabling, as well as the Operating and Maintenance Centre (OMC for TfL Staff) and the Hilton, Ritz and Dorchester Buildings houses the KeolisAmey Docklands franchise staff and the secondary back-up control centre are based at Poplar.

Buckingham Group was awarded a £35m contract in 2021 to upgrade the Beckton DLR depot to accommodate the new B23 rolling stock. Works include construction of a new carriage wash, extension and modification to existing track, and new sidings for the new trains. This was scheduled for completion in September 2023, but Buckingham went into administration the previous month (August 2023). TfL appointed Morgan Sindall to complete the work, alongside a £90m deal to build a new train shed and deliver further sidings.

=== Electrification ===

Traction power is provided at 750 V DC via an unusual bottom contact third rail system.

===Signalling technology===
Originally, the DLR used signalling based on a fixed-block technology developed by GEC-General Signal and General Railway Signal. This was replaced in 1994 with a moving-block TBTC (Transmission Based Train Control) system developed by Alcatel, called SelTrac. The SelTrac system was bought by Thales in 2007 and updates are provided by Thales Rail Signalling Solutions. The same technology is used by rapid transit systems including Vancouver&#x27;s SkyTrain, Toronto&#x27;s SRT, the San Francisco Municipal Railway and Hong Kong&#x27;s MTR. The SelTrac S40 system has also been adopted by the London Underground Jubilee line and Northern line. Transmissions occur via an inductive loop cable between each train&#x27;s Vehicle On-Board Controller (VOBC) and the control centre (VCC, SMC) at Beckton. If this link is broken and communication is lost between the VOBC and VCC, SMC, the train stops until it is authorised to move again. If the whole system fails the train can run in restricted manual at for safety until the system is restored and communication is re-established. Emergency brakes can be applied if the train breaks the speed limit during manual control or overshoots a fixed stopping point, or if it leaves the station when the route has not been set. A secondary control centre is based at Poplar, the location of the original control centre, which can operate immediately should there be any issues with the primary at Beckton.

== Corporate affairs ==

===Infrastructure and ownership===
Initially, DLR was a wholly owned subsidiary of London Regional Transport. In 1992, ownership was transferred to the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC). With the winding up of the LDDC in 1998, ownership passed to Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions – before passing to Transport for London (TfL) in 2000.

The infrastructure is owned by Docklands Light Railway Ltd, part of the London Rail division of TfL, which also manages London Overground, London Trams, the IFS Cloud Cable Car and the Elizabeth line. The infrastructure is maintained by the private company awarded the DLR franchise by TfL – currently KeolisAmey Docklands. The Lewisham, City Airport and Woolwich Arsenal extensions were designed, financed, built and maintained by private companies (concessionnaires): City Greenwich Lewisham (CGL) Rail, City Airport Rail Enterprises (CARE), and Woolwich Arsenal Rail Enterprises (WARE). In 2011, Transport Trading Limited (a subsidiary of TfL) bought out the companies responsible for the City Airport and Woolwich Arsenal extensions, leaving only the Lewisham extension under private ownership until 31 March 2021.

=== Operations ===
Initially operated by London Regional Transport, the DLR was transferred to the LDDC in 1992. The LDDC appointed Brown and Root to run the system in 1993. In 1994, it was announced that the DLR would be privatised, with operations and maintenance operated under franchise by the private sector.

In 1997, the first franchise was awarded to Serco Docklands Limited for seven years; operations began in April 1997. A management buyout backed by Serco management later sold its shares to Serco. A two-year extension was granted in 2002. In February 2005 TfL announced that Balfour Beatty/Keolis, First Carillion, RATP/Transdev and Serco had been shortlisted to operate the franchise, and in November 2005 TfL announced that Serco had retained the franchise for seven years from May 2006.

In July 2012, TfL called for expressions of interest in bidding for the next DLR franchise, and in January 2013 Serco&#x27;s contract was extended until September 2014. In April 2013, TfL announced that Go-Ahead/Colas Rail, Keolis/Amey, Serco and Stagecoach had been shortlisted to bid for the next franchise. However, on 30 August, just before the bid submission date of 9 September 2013, Go-Ahead/Colas Rail pulled out. The franchise was awarded to KeolisAmey Docklands Limited, with a handover date of 7 December 2014, expiring in April 2021 with an option for extension without going to tender.

In August 2023, TfL went out for tender for the next DLR franchise, with KeolisAmey Docklands contract being extended to 2025 while bidding took place. In February 2024, TfL announced that KeolisAmey, ComfortDelGro and Connecting Docklands (a joint venture of AtkinsRéalis and Go-Ahead Group) had been shortlisted to bid for the next franchise. In October 2024, TfL announced that KeolisAmey retained the franchise, being awarded an eight-year contract to operate and maintain the DLR from 1 April 2025.

===Performance===
Within a year of launch, annual passenger numbers reached 17 million, increasing to 64 million in 2009, and more than 80 million in 2011. The most recent figures show 116.8 million annual passengers in the financial year to 31 March 2020. The first five years had unreliability and operational problems, but the system has since become highly reliable. Research in 2008 showed 87% of the population of North Woolwich were in favour of the DLR.

The Parliamentary Transport Select Committee favourably reviewed light rail in 2005, and due to the success of the DLR, proposals for similar systems elsewhere emerged. The North and West London Light Railway was a plan for an orbital railway serving the other side of London. The DLR has been successful, as have other recent light rail systems, although it was earlier criticised for having been designed with insufficient capacity to meet the demand that quickly arose.

Until 1 July 2013, the only bicycles that were allowed were folding ones. DLR stated that this is because if evacuation is required, they would slow down the process. DLR cars, especially older rolling stock, were not designed with bicycles in mind – if they were allowed, they might obstruct doors and emergency exits. Since January 2014, full-size bicycles have been allowed on DLR trains at off-peak hours and weekends (except Bank Station, where bicycles are not permitted for safety reasons).

===Business trends===
The key available trends in recent years for the Docklands Light Railway are (years ending 31 March):
Activities in financial years 2020/21 and 2021/22 were severely reduced by the impact of the coronavirus pandemic.

==Future developments==
===Thamesmead extension===

Mooted throughout the 2010s, an extension across the River Thames to Thamesmead was first proposed in November 2019 as part of the Thamesmead and Abbey Wood OAPF (Opportunity Area Planning Framework). Technical and feasibility work began in late 2020. Stations would be located at Beckton Riverside and Thamesmead. Public consultation into the extension began in 2024. Estimated to cost around £1bn, the extension could open in the &quot;early 2030s&quot;.

===Thames Wharf station===
As part of the construction of the London City Airport extension, a gap in the viaduct due west of the western end of Royal Victoria Dock, between and stations, was passively safeguarded for a future station when development came forward on the brownfield and industrial sites. A station was also initially proposed at Oriental Road; however this was discounted at an early stage and the site is now flanked by several developments. The potential of development on the land at Thames Wharf was on hold for until the late 2010s, as the area was being safeguarded for the route of the Silvertown Tunnel, a new Thames river crossing currently under construction on the site.

As part of the 2018 budget, the Chancellor announced funding for the DLR to support development in the Royal Docks. Following completion of the Silvertown Tunnel in the mid-2020s, around 5,000 homes will be built on the site, and a new DLR station constructed.

===Tower Gateway station to Tower Hill interchange===

In July 2014, a Transport Supporting Paper from the London Infrastructure Plan 2050 by the Mayor of London considered the closure of Tower Gateway DLR station and the branch serving it, with a replacement interchange being provided via new platforms at Tower Hill Underground station. This would increase train frequencies to Bank by approximately 30 per cent, thereby unlocking more capacity on the Bank branch.

== Extensions cancelled or not progressed ==

=== Gallions Reach to Dagenham Dock ===
The extension to Dagenham Dock in East London, via the Barking Riverside development was first proposed in 2003, and was anticipated that the project could be completed and open for use by 2017, at a cost of around £750million. In November 2008, the Mayor of London Boris Johnson announced that due to financial constraints the extension, along with a number of other transport projects, had been cancelled. The Barking Riverside development is instead served by an extension of the London Overground to the new Barking Riverside station, which opened in July 2022.

===Bank to Charing Cross===
In February 2006 a proposal to extend the DLR to station from DLR branch was revealed. The idea originates from a DLR &quot;Horizon Study&quot;.

While not confirmed, it is probable that the Charing Cross scheme would use the overrun tunnels between Charing Cross Jubilee platforms and slightly west of . These tunnels were intended to be incorporated into the abandoned Phase 2 of the &quot;Fleet Line&quot; (Phase 1 became the original Jubilee line, prior to the Jubilee line Extension). However they would need enlargement because the DLR loading gauge is larger than tube gauge and current safety regulations require an emergency walkway in the tunnel.

Two reasons driving the proposal are capacity problems at Bank, having just one interchange between the DLR and the central portion of Underground, and the difficult journeys faced by passengers from Kent and South Coast between their rail termini and the DLR. Intermediate stations would be at City Thameslink/Ludgate Circus and Aldwych, which was intended for future connection with the proposed but now abandoned Cross River Tram.

===City Thameslink to Euston and St Pancras===
In 2011, strategy documents proposed a DLR extension to and . Transport for London have considered driving a line from via north to the rail termini. The main benefit of such an extension would be to broaden the available direct transport links to the Canary Wharf site. It would create a new artery in central London and help relieve the Northern and Circle lines and provide another metro line to serve the High Speed line into Euston.

===Lewisham to Catford and Beckenham Junction===
This possible extension was considered during the latest Horizon Study. The route would follow the Southeastern line and terminate between and stations. It has been seen as attractive to the district, as has the current terminus at Lewisham, built in an earlier extension. A map published in 2010 by Transport for London suggests that a further extension from Catford to has also been considered.

However, early plans showed problems due to station being only marginally lower than the busy A20 road, which impedes any extension. The plan is however being revised. When the Lewisham extension was first completed there were proposals to continue further to Beckenham to link it up with the Tramlink system. However, the way in which Lewisham station was built impedes this possible extension and it would prove costly to redevelop.

===Lewisham to Bromley North===
Another proposal is to by taking over the Bromley North Line, a short National Rail branch line which has no direct services into Central London. The scheme being considered by Transport for London and the London Borough of Bromley would convert the branch line to DLR operation. Although Lewisham Council planned to re-route the A20 road and redevelop the area south of Lewisham DLR station, the plans published in 2012 have no safeguarded route for an extension, making one unlikely.

== Accidents and incidents ==

* On 10 March 1987, before the system opened, a test train crashed through buffer stops at the original high-level terminus and was left hanging from the end of the elevated track. The accident has largely been attributed to unauthorised tests being run before the correct installation of the wayside safety system had been verified; an omission in the wayside system allowed the train to travel too fast on the approach to the terminus. The train was being driven manually at the time. However, inside sources have stated these tests were being done to test the ATP if the train was entering the station too quickly, and after six successful tests, a software issue involving asynchronous computer systems caused the train to not receive the instructions to activate the ATP, cut off power from the motors, and apply the brakes soon enough to prevent the train from slowing down, causing the train to go through the buffers. Following this, the software was reworked and the braking distance was changed to ensure such incidents wouldn&#x27;t happen in practice, and as a result may have possibly prevented a far more tragic incident from occurring.
* On 22 April 1991, two trains collided at a junction on the bridge during morning rush hour, requiring a shutdown of the system and evacuation of passengers by ladder. One train was travelling automatically; the other was under manual control.
* On 9 February 1996, the Provisional IRA blew up a lorry under a bridge near , killing two people and injuring many others. This caused £85 million of damage and marked an end to an IRA ceasefire in force at the time. Significant disruption was caused and a train was stranded at Island Gardens, unable to move until the track was rebuilt.

==See also==

* List of Docklands Light Railway stations
* List of tram and light rail transit systems
* Rail transport in Great Britain
* Transport in London (overview)
* Crossings of the River Thames
* Tunnels underneath the River Thames

==Notes==
==References==
===Further reading===
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="4" end="27" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="29" end="32" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="DLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q207842" start="50" end="61" title="medium-capacity rail system" label="light metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q124041" start="103" end="112" title="London Docklands" label="Docklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="121" end="127" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q124377" start="215" end="227" title="Canary Wharf" label="Canary Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="236" end="250" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q676136" start="384" end="393" title="Stratford, London" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537297" start="404" end="412" title="Lewisham" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417728" start="480" end="487" title="Beckton" label="Beckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8982" start="489" end="508" title="London City Airport" label="London City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q801639" start="513" end="529" title="Woolwich Arsenal station" label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329633" start="547" end="557" title="Docklands Light Railway extension to Thamesmead" label="Thamesmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="1115" end="1128" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q664399" start="1150" end="1156" title="Keolis" label="Keolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745963" start="1193" end="1197" title="Amey plc" label="Amey"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="1203" end="1223" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="1477" end="1491" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795188" start="1577" end="1588" title="Royal Docks" label="Royal Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q428072" start="1652" end="1665" title="Containerization" label="containerised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869110" start="1834" end="1862" title="London and Blackwall Railway" label="London and Blackwall Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419586" start="2073" end="2096" title="Port of Tilbury" label="Tilbury container docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="2121" end="2126" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476542" start="2267" end="2289" title="Greater London Council" label="Greater London Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q800753" start="2878" end="2910" title="Fenchurch Street railway station" label="Fenchurch Street railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q693450" start="2995" end="3004" title="Royal Borough of Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q215030" start="3006" end="3014" title="London Borough of Lewisham" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q208139" start="3016" end="3022" title="London Borough of Newham" label="Newham"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="3024" end="3033" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q208152" start="3038" end="3051" title="London Borough of Tower Hamlets" label="Tower Hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475207" start="3164" end="3187" title="Tower Hill tube station" label="Tower Hill tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801128" start="3423" end="3444" title="Charing Cross railway station" label="Charing Cross station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801499" start="3484" end="3512" title="Surrey Quays railway station" label="Surrey Quays railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q124295" start="3519" end="3531" title="Isle of Dogs" label="Isle of Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055506" start="3533" end="3548" title="North Greenwich, Isle of Dogs" label="North Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q801639" start="3569" end="3585" title="Woolwich Arsenal station" label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="3675" end="3687" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453886" start="3798" end="3817" title="First Thatcher ministry" label="Thatcher Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258953" start="4004" end="4044" title="London Docklands Development Corporation" label="London Docklands Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="4259" end="4263" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502917" start="4424" end="4442" title="Great Eastern Main Line" label="Great Eastern line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431064" start="4628" end="4640" title="Aldgate East tube station" label="Aldgate East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869222" start="4893" end="4917" title="Minories railway station" label="Minories railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q211265" start="5121" end="5134" title="District line" label="District line"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="5180" end="5198" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363912" start="5462" end="5484" title="Island Gardens DLR station" label="Island Gardens station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519503" start="5523" end="5536" title="Millwall Dock" label="Millwall Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q513260" start="5630" end="5647" title="Westferry DLR station" label="Westferry station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642944" start="5842" end="5858" title="West India Docks" label="West India Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q124377" start="6125" end="6137" title="Canary Wharf" label="Canary Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q784876" start="6292" end="6300" title="Mile End tube station" label="Mile End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623056" start="6325" end="6339" title="Street running train" label="street running"/>
<link wikidata="Q801480" start="7405" end="7414" title="Stratford station" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208203" start="7643" end="7646" title="General Electric Company" label="GEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13109143" start="7649" end="7660" title="Mowlem" label="John Mowlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="7723" end="7742" title="Light rail" label="light rail vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677783" start="7753" end="7771" title="Act of Parliament (UK)" label="Acts of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417386" start="8093" end="8105" title="kit-of-parts" label="kit-of-parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="8200" end="8218" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q801480" start="8329" end="8338" title="Stratford station" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076722" start="8482" end="8492" title="Track bed" label="formations"/>
<link wikidata="Q432790" start="8944" end="8963" title="Linke-Hofmann-Busch" label="Linke-Hofmann-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988848" start="9002" end="9039" title="Docklands Light Railway rolling stock" label="Docklands Light Railway rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229394" start="9396" end="9408" title="Poplar DLR depot" label="Poplar depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475207" start="10163" end="10186" title="Tower Hill tube station" label="Tower Hill tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q800753" start="10190" end="10222" title="Fenchurch Street railway station" label="Fenchurch Street railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417728" start="10382" end="10389" title="Beckton" label="Beckton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10815" end="10830" title="#Rolling stock" label="were later sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q124377" start="10840" end="10852" title="Canary Wharf" label="Canary Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032811" start="10874" end="10898" title="Canary Wharf DLR station" label="Canary Wharf DLR station"/>
<link wikidata="Q124041" start="11095" end="11104" title="London Docklands" label="Docklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417728" start="11196" end="11203" title="Beckton" label="Beckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643599" start="11754" end="11769" title="grade separation" label="grade-separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779831" start="11822" end="11848" title="cross-platform interchange" label="cross-platform interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878772" start="12066" end="12073" title="Beckton DLR depot" label="Beckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537320" start="12142" end="12173" title="Lewisham London Borough Council" label="Lewisham London Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="12243" end="12255" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="12307" end="12316" title="Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308650" start="12321" end="12329" title="Deptford" label="Deptford"/>
<link wikidata="Q801096" start="12346" end="12370" title="Lewisham station" label="Lewisham railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="12469" end="12475" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q332393" start="12498" end="12511" title="John Prescott" label="John Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q377139" start="12517" end="12528" title="Lord Whitty" label="Lord Whitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246203" start="12553" end="12593" title="DBFO" label="designed, built, financed and maintained"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246203" start="12623" end="12649" title="Private finance initiative" label="Private finance initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141277" start="12880" end="12892" title="Crossharbour DLR station" label="Crossharbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869110" start="13007" end="13037" title="London and Blackwall Railway" label="London &amp;amp; Blackwall Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q800840" start="13258" end="13283" title="Greenwich station" label="Greenwich railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544828" start="13367" end="13376" title="Greenwich Line" label="main line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8982" start="13758" end="13777" title="London City Airport" label="London City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777884" start="13869" end="13881" title="Royal Albert DLR station" label="Royal Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="14578" end="14593" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330096" start="14695" end="14739" title="Eastern Counties and Thames Junction Railway" label="Eastern Counties and Thames Junction Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795188" start="14768" end="14779" title="Royal Docks" label="Royal Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q801639" start="14851" end="14867" title="Woolwich Arsenal station" label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="15183" end="15196" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="15198" end="15213" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342434" start="15599" end="15615" title="Spanish solution" label="Spanish solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116189" start="16495" end="16509" title="Thames Gateway" label="Thames Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="16554" end="16574" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="17091" end="17111" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690185" start="17236" end="17250" title="Taylor Woodrow" label="Taylor Woodrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447765" start="17405" end="17429" title="Selective door operation" label="Selective door operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q801472" start="18913" end="18936" title="Stratford International" label="Stratford International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854601" start="18970" end="18987" title="North London Line" label="North London Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q801472" start="19137" end="19160" title="Stratford International station" label="Stratford International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854601" start="19178" end="19195" title="North London Line" label="North London Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q277604" start="19290" end="19302" title="High Speed 1" label="High Speed 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="19363" end="19381" title="2012 Olympic Games" label="2012 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q801472" start="19794" end="19817" title="Stratford International station" label="Stratford International"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="20040" end="20052" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee line"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="20060" end="20078" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="20828" end="20842" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q733229" start="20870" end="20895" title="Pudding Mill Lane DLR station" label="Pudding Mill Lane station"/>
<link wikidata="Q895380" start="21194" end="21204" title="Bow Church DLR station" label="Bow Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q801480" start="21209" end="21218" title="Stratford station" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188778" start="21384" end="21397" title="Crossrail Act 2008" label="Crossrail Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q801096" start="21537" end="21545" title="Lewisham station" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q801472" start="21564" end="21587" title="Stratford International" label="Stratford International"/>
<link wikidata="Q801639" start="21606" end="21622" title="Woolwich Arsenal station" label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q801102" start="21892" end="21901" title="Limehouse station" label="Limehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q800840" start="21903" end="21912" title="Greenwich station" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q801601" start="21917" end="21925" title="West Ham station" label="West Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q249400" start="21965" end="21976" title="Oyster card" label="Oyster card"/>
<link wikidata="Q131298543" start="22036" end="22049" title="Windrush line" label="Windrush line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115037" start="22065" end="22074" title="Shadwell railway station" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q106104076" start="22234" end="22267" title="London, Tilbury and Southend line" label="London, Tilbury and Southend line"/>
<link wikidata="Q784358" start="22665" end="22674" title="headshunt" label="headshunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q826480" start="22925" end="22948" title="ExCeL London" label="ExCeL exhibition centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601555" start="23520" end="23528" title="Elevated railway" label="elevated"/>
<link wikidata="Q801472" start="24279" end="24302" title="Stratford International railway station" label="Stratford International"/>
<link wikidata="Q801639" start="24307" end="24323" title="Woolwich Arsenal station" label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033431" start="24386" end="24398" title="Canning Town Station" label="Canning Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q801601" start="24400" end="24408" title="West Ham Station" label="West Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q826480" start="24629" end="24634" title="ExCeL" label="ExCeL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797273" start="24771" end="24793" title="Art on the Underground" label="Art on the Underground"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25092" end="25108" title="London Underground ticketing#Fare zones" label="London fare zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q769928" start="25121" end="25131" title="Travelcard" label="Travelcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q249400" start="25319" end="25325" title="Oyster card" label="Oyster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25344" end="25355" title="Transport for London#Contactless payments" label="contactless"/>
<link wikidata="Q806704" start="25634" end="25638" title="Bank–Monument station" label="Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="25694" end="25712" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="25716" end="25729" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q801639" start="25778" end="25794" title="Woolwich Arsenal station" label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q108888230" start="25902" end="25914" title="Southeastern (train operating company)" label="Southeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q233063" start="26205" end="26219" title="Bi-directional vehicle" label="bi-directional"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26227" end="26238" title="Articulated vehicle#Trains and rail" label="articulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="26239" end="26261" title="electric multiple unit" label="electric multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="26883" end="26893" title="light rail" label="light-rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q333498" start="27078" end="27088" title="Bombardier Inc." label="Bombardier"/>
<link wikidata="Q838212" start="27259" end="27262" title="Construcciones y Auxiliar de Ferrocarriles" label="CAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229394" start="27887" end="27893" title="Poplar DLR depot" label="Poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878772" start="27898" end="27905" title="Beckton DLR depot" label="Beckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983214" start="28387" end="28403" title="Buckingham Group" label="Buckingham Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911836" start="28789" end="28803" title="Morgan Sindall" label="Morgan Sindall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316667" start="29071" end="29081" title="Railway signalling" label="signalling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29093" end="29104" title="Railway signalling#Fixed block" label="fixed-block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208203" start="29129" end="29147" title="General Electric Company" label="GEC-General Signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532140" start="29152" end="29174" title="General Railway Signal" label="General Railway Signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936849" start="29209" end="29221" title="Moving block signalling" label="moving-block"/>
<link wikidata="Q885235" start="29282" end="29289" title="Alcatel" label="Alcatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447372" start="29298" end="29305" title="SelTrac" label="SelTrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161666" start="29340" end="29346" title="Thales Group" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="29448" end="29461" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q876780" start="29497" end="29505" title="SkyTrain (Vancouver)" label="SkyTrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="29522" end="29525" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="SRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140138" start="29531" end="29562" title="San Francisco Municipal Railway" label="San Francisco Municipal Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14751" start="29584" end="29587" title="MTR" label="MTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447372" start="29593" end="29600" title="SelTrac" label="SelTrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="29641" end="29659" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="29660" end="29672" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee line"/>
<link wikidata="Q214793" start="29677" end="29690" title="Northern line" label="Northern line"/>
<link wikidata="Q57573" start="29795" end="29799" title="VOBC" label="VOBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826459" start="30602" end="30627" title="London Regional Transport" label="London Regional Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258953" start="30671" end="30711" title="London Docklands Development Corporation" label="London Docklands Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974879" start="30781" end="30837" title="Secretary of State for the Environment, Transport and the Regions" label="Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="30858" end="30878" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570729" start="30967" end="30978" title="London Rail" label="London Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="31015" end="31032" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242590" start="31034" end="31046" title="London Trams" label="London Trams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337798" start="31052" end="31071" title="London cable car" label="IFS Cloud Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q111297173" start="31080" end="31094" title="Elizabeth line" label="Elizabeth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826459" start="31756" end="31781" title="London Regional Transport" label="London Regional Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q596499" start="31847" end="31861" title="Brown and Root" label="Brown and Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q499104" start="32074" end="32097" title="Serco" label="Serco Docklands Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q804920" start="32304" end="32318" title="Balfour Beatty" label="Balfour Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q664399" start="32319" end="32325" title="Keolis" label="Keolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039561" start="32327" end="32342" title="Carillion" label="First Carillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q643290" start="32344" end="32348" title="RATP Group" label="RATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q104185516" start="32349" end="32357" title="Transdev" label="Transdev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166056" start="32723" end="32731" title="Go-Ahead Group" label="Go-Ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982351" start="32732" end="32742" title="Colas Rail" label="Colas Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q664399" start="32744" end="32750" title="Keolis" label="Keolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745963" start="32751" end="32755" title="Amey plc" label="Amey"/>
<link wikidata="Q660261" start="32767" end="32777" title="Stagecoach Group" label="Stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140545" start="33321" end="33334" title="ComfortDelGro" label="ComfortDelGro"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="33363" end="33376" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q944608" start="33380" end="33392" title="AtkinsRéalis" label="AtkinsRéalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166056" start="33397" end="33411" title="Go-Ahead Group" label="Go-Ahead Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834897" start="34106" end="34132" title="Transport Select Committee" label="Transport Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="34153" end="34163" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015769" start="34261" end="34296" title="North and West London Light Railway" label="North and West London Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="34415" end="34425" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="35278" end="35298" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146774" start="35422" end="35432" title="Thamesmead" label="Thamesmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571368" start="35510" end="35552" title="London Plan" label="OAPF (Opportunity Area Planning Framework)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329633" start="35634" end="35651" title="Beckton Riverside" label="Beckton Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868954" start="35873" end="35902" title="London City Airport DLR station" label="London City Airport extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171143" start="35956" end="35975" title="Royal Victoria Dock" label="Royal Victoria Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q896586" start="36083" end="36093" title="Brownfield land" label="brownfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516864" start="36421" end="36438" title="Silvertown Tunnel" label="Silvertown Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745675" start="36526" end="36537" title="2018 United Kingdom budget" label="2018 budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795188" start="36614" end="36625" title="Royal Docks" label="Royal Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516864" start="36655" end="36672" title="Silvertown Tunnel" label="Silvertown Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="36919" end="36934" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702680" start="36961" end="36986" title="Tower Gateway DLR station" label="Tower Gateway DLR station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208482" start="37345" end="37358" title="Dagenham Dock" label="Dagenham Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245919" start="37383" end="37400" title="Barking Riverside" label="Barking Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="37578" end="37593" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="37594" end="37607" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="37630" end="37651" title="Great Recession" label="financial constraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245919" start="37740" end="37757" title="Barking Riverside" label="Barking Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="37811" end="37828" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329619" start="37840" end="37865" title="Barking Riverside railway station" label="Barking Riverside station"/>
<link wikidata="Q9392675" start="38465" end="38478" title="loading gauge" label="loading gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="38716" end="38727" title="London Underground" label="Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="38781" end="38785" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q800630" start="38876" end="38906" title="City Thameslink railway station" label="City Thameslink/Ludgate Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q990658" start="38911" end="38918" title="Aldwych station" label="Aldwych"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698658" start="38997" end="39013" title="Cross River Tram" label="Cross River Tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q108888230" start="39650" end="39662" title="Southeastern (train operating company)" label="Southeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q123372" start="40209" end="40218" title="Beckenham" label="Beckenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q786032" start="40242" end="40250" title="Tramlink" label="Tramlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973689" start="40459" end="40477" title="Bromley North Line" label="Bromley North Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="40594" end="40614" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q208201" start="40623" end="40648" title="London Borough of Bromley" label="London Borough of Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537320" start="40706" end="40722" title="Lewisham London Borough Council" label="Lewisham Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129820" start="40747" end="40755" title="A20 road (England)" label="A20 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q12162" start="41010" end="41021" title="buffer stop" label="buffer stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q868252" start="42169" end="42178" title="rush hour" label="rush hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="42357" end="42372" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591331" start="42373" end="42403" title="1996 Docklands bombing" label="blew up a lorry under a bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q851772" start="42689" end="42729" title="List of Docklands Light Railway stations" label="List of Docklands Light Railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q117581" start="42732" end="42775" title="List of tram and light rail transit systems" label="List of tram and light rail transit systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505124" start="42778" end="42809" title="Rail transport in Great Britain" label="Rail transport in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q119100" start="42812" end="42831" title="Transport in London" label="Transport in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q475941" start="42845" end="42874" title="Crossings of the River Thames" label="Crossings of the River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174326" start="42877" end="42912" title="Tunnels underneath the River Thames" label="Tunnels underneath the River Thames"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8828" wikidata="Q123709" url="?curid=8828" title="Dundee">
<text>Dundee (; ; or , ) is the fourth-largest city in Scotland. The mid-year population estimate for 2016 was , giving Dundee a population density of 2,478/km2 (6,420/mi2), the second-highest in Scotland. It lies within the eastern central Lowlands on the north bank of the Firth of Tay, which feeds into the North Sea. 

Under the name of Dundee City, it forms one of the 32 council areas used for local government in Scotland. Within the boundaries of the historic county of Angus, the city developed into a burgh in the late 12th century and established itself as an important east coast trading port. Rapid expansion was brought on by the Industrial Revolution, particularly in the 19th century when Dundee was the centre of the global jute industry. This, along with its other major industries, gave Dundee its epithet as the city of &quot;jute, jam and journalism&quot;.

With the decline of traditional industry, the city has adopted a plan to regenerate and reinvent itself as a cultural centre. In pursuit of this, a £1 billion master plan to regenerate and to reconnect the Waterfront to the city centre started in 2001 and is expected to be completed within a 30-year period. The V&amp;A Dundee – the first branch of the V&amp;A to operate outside of London – is the main centrepiece of the waterfront project. Today, Dundee is promoted as &quot;One City, Many Discoveries&quot; in honour of Dundee&#x27;s history of scientific activities and of the RRS &quot;Discovery&quot;, Robert Falcon Scott&#x27;s Antarctic exploration vessel, which was built in Dundee and is now berthed at Discovery Point. 

Dundee is an international research and development hub in technology, medicine and life sciences, with technological industries having arrived since the 1980s. Dundee was named as a &quot;City of the Future&quot; by Cognizant in 2021, the only UK city to be featured. Dundee has also been a leading city in electric vehicles, having one of the largest fleets of electric vehicles in the country. The city was named as the electric vehicle capital of Europe in 2018, and it has continuously been branded as the electric vehicle capital of Scotland and the United Kingdom. 

In 2014, Dundee was recognised by the United Nations as the UK&#x27;s first UNESCO City of Design for its diverse contributions to fields including medical research, comics and video games. Since 2015, Dundee&#x27;s international profile has risen. &quot;GQ&quot; magazine named Dundee the &quot;Coolest Little City in Britain&quot; in 2015 and &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; ranked Dundee at number 5 on its &quot;Worldwide Hot Destinations&quot; list for 2018.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Dundee&quot; is made up of two parts: the common Celtic place-name element &quot;dun&quot;, meaning fort; and a second part that may derive from a Celtic element, cognate with the Gaelic &quot;dè&quot;, meaning &#x27;fire&#x27;.

== History ==

===Early history===

While earlier evidence for human occupation is abundant, Dundee&#x27;s success and growth as a seaport town arguably came as a result of William the Lion&#x27;s charter, granting Dundee to his younger brother, David (later Earl of Huntingdon) in the late 12th century. The situation of the town and its promotion by Earl David as a trading centre led to a period of prosperity and growth. The earldom was passed down to David&#x27;s descendants, amongst whom was John Balliol. The town became a Royal Burgh on John&#x27;s coronation as king in 1292. The town and its castle were occupied by English forces for several years during the First War of Independence and recaptured by Robert the Bruce in early 1312. The original burghal charters were lost during the occupation and subsequently renewed by Bruce in 1327.

The burgh suffered considerably during the conflict known as the Rough Wooing of 1543 to 1550, and was occupied by the English forces of Andrew Dudley from 1547. In 1548, unable to defend the town against an advancing Scottish force, Dudley ordered that the town be burnt to the ground. In 1645, during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, Dundee was again besieged, this time by the Royalist Marquess of Montrose. The town was finally destroyed by Parliamentarian forces led by George Monck in 1651. The town played a pivotal role in the establishment of the Jacobite cause when John Graham of Claverhouse, 1st Viscount Dundee raised the Stuart standard on the Dundee Law in 1689. The town was held by the Jacobites in the 1715–16 rising, and on 6 January 1716 the Jacobite claimant to the throne, James VIII and III (the Old Pretender), made a public entry into the town. Many in Scotland, including many in Dundee, regarded him as the rightful king.

A notable resident of Dundee was Adam Duncan, 1st Viscount Duncan of Camperdown, Baron of Lundie (1 July 1731 to 4 August 1804). He was born in Dundee on 1 July 1731, the son of Alexander Duncan of Lundie, Provost of Dundee. Adam was educated in Dundee and later joined the Royal Navy on board the sloop Trial. He rose to be admiral and in October 1797 defeated the Dutch fleet off Camperdown (north of Haarlem). This was seen as one of the most significant actions in naval history.

===18th and 19th centuries===

The economy of medieval Dundee centred on the export of raw wool, with the production of finished textiles being a reaction to recession in the 15th century. Two government Acts in the mid 18th century had a profound effect on Dundee&#x27;s industrial success: the textile industry was revolutionised by the introduction of large four-storey mills, stimulated in part by the 1742 Bounty Act which provided a government-funded subsidy on Osnaburg linen produced for export. Expansion of the whaling industry was triggered by the second Bounty Act, introduced in 1750 to increase Britain&#x27;s maritime and naval skill base. Dundee, and Scotland more generally, saw rapid population increase at end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century, with the city&#x27;s population increasing from 12,400 in 1751 to 30,500 in 1821.

The phasing out of the linen export bounty between 1825 and 1832 stimulated demand for cheaper textiles, particularly for cheaper, tough fabrics. The discovery that the dry fibres of jute could be lubricated with whale oil (of which Dundee had a surfeit, following the opening of its gasworks) to allow it to be processed in mechanised mills resulted in the Dundee mills rapidly converting from linen to jute, which sold at a quarter of the price of flax. Interruption of Prussian flax imports during the Crimean War and of cotton during the American Civil War resulted in a period of inflated prosperity for Dundee and the jute industry dominated Dundee throughout the latter half of the 19th century. Unprecedented immigration, notably of Irish workers, led to accelerated urban expansion, and at the height of the industry&#x27;s success, Dundee supported 62 jute mills, employing some 50,000 workers. Cox Brothers, who owned the massive Camperdown Works in Lochee, were one of the largest jute manufacturers in Europe and employed more than 5,000 workers.

The rise of the textile industries brought with it an expansion of supporting industries, notably of the whaling, maritime and shipbuilding industries, and extensive development of the waterfront area started in 1815 to cope with increased demand for port capacity. At its height, 200 ships per year were built there, including Robert Falcon Scott&#x27;s Antarctic research vessel, the . This ship is now on display at Discovery Point in the city. A significant whaling industry was also based in Dundee, largely existing to supply the jute mills with whale oil. Whaling ceased in 1912 and shipbuilding ceased in 1981.
While the city&#x27;s economy was dominated by the jute industry, it also became known for smaller industries. Most notable among these were James Keiller&#x27;s and Sons, established in 1795, which pioneered commercial marmalade production, and the publishing firm DC Thomson, which was founded in the city in 1905. Dundee was said to be built on the &#x27;three Js&#x27;: Jute, Jam and Journalism.

The town was also the location of one of the worst rail disasters in British history, the Tay Bridge disaster. The first Tay Rail Bridge was opened in 1878. It collapsed some 18 months later during a storm, as a passenger train passed over it, resulting in the loss of 75 lives. The most destructive fire in the city&#x27;s history came in 1906, reportedly sending &quot;rivers of burning whisky&quot; through the street.

===20th and 21st centuries===

The jute industry fell into decline in the early 20th century, partly due to reduced demand for jute products and partly due to an inability to compete with the emerging industry in Calcutta. This gave rise to unemployment levels far in excess of the national average, peaking in the inter-war period, but major recovery was seen in the post-war period, thanks to the arrival first of American light engineering companies like Timex and NCR, and subsequent expansion into microelectronics.

Dundee was the first city in Scotland to gain official city status, after Queen Victoria signed a patent announcing the transition of Dundee from a royal burgh into a city. Dundee would officially gain city status on 26 January 1889. The patent still exists and is kept in storage in the city archives.

A £1 billion master plan to regenerate Dundee Waterfront is expected to last for a 30-year period between 2001 and 2031. The aims of the project are to reconnect the city centre to the waterfront; to improve facilities for walking, cyclists and buses; to replace the existing inner ring road with a pair of east/west tree-lined boulevards; and to provide a new civic square and a regenerated railway station and arrival space at the western edge. A new Victoria and Albert Museum opened on 15 September 2018. A new Eden Project attraction is also set to open in Dundee by the 2030s.

== Governance ==

=== Representation ===
Dundee City is one of 32 council areas of Scotland, administered by Dundee City Council. The council meets at Dundee City Chambers in City Square and has its mains offices at Dundee House on North Lindsay Street. The civic head and chair of the council is the Lord Provost. The council area is also divided into eighteen community council areas, three of which (Broughty Ferry, City Centre and Harbour, and West End) had community councils operating as at August 2024.

For elections to the House of Commons at Westminster, the city area and portions of the Angus council area are divided into two constituencies. The constituencies of Arbroath and Broughty Ferry and Dundee West are represented by Stephen Gethins (Scottish National Party) and Chris Law (Scottish National Party), respectively, both of whom were elected and re-elected respectively at the 2024 general election. For elections to the Scottish Parliament at Holyrood, the city area is divided across three constituencies. The Dundee City East constituency and the Dundee City West constituency are entirely within the city area. The Angus South (Holyrood) constituency includes north-eastern and north-western portions of the city area. All three constituencies are within the North East Scotland electoral region: Shona Robison (SNP) is the Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the Dundee East constituency; Joe Fitzpatrick (SNP) is the current MSP for the Dundee West constituency and Graeme Dey (SNP) is the current MSP for the Angus South constituency.

Winston Churchill served as one of two MPs for Dundee from 1908 to 1922.

===Administrative history===

Dundee appears to have been made a burgh sometime between 1181 and 1195. It was then raised to royal burgh status on the coronation of John Balliol as King of Scotland in 1292. The city has two mottos: (&#x27;Gift of God&#x27;) and (&#x27;With Thought and Purity&#x27;) although usually only the latter is used for civic purposes.

Dundee was declared a city in 1889, being the first Scottish place to have the title of city explicitly conferred on it rather than assuming it by customary usage. In 1894, Dundee was made a county of itself, removing it from Angus. The city&#x27;s boundaries were enlarged on numerous occasions, notably in 1913 when it absorbed the neighbouring burgh of Broughty Ferry.

From 1975 to 1996, Dundee was governed by the City of Dundee District Council, one of three district-level authorities within the Tayside region. The district was created under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 and covered a larger area than the pre-1975 city, taking in the burgh of Monifieth and most of the landward district of Monifieth (covering a number of villages north of Dundee) from Angus, and the parish of Longforgan (which included Invergowrie) from Perthshire. In 1996, the Dundee City council area was created under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994. Monifieth and the villages north of Dundee itself were transferred back to Angus, and the Longforgan area (including Invergowrie) was transferred to Perth and Kinross, largely reinstating the pre-1975 boundaries. Some controversy has ensued as a result of these boundary changes, with Dundee city councillors arguing for the return of Monifieth and Invergowrie.

===Independence referendum===
On 18 September 2014, Dundee was one of four council areas to vote &quot;Yes&quot; in the Scottish independence referendum, with 57.3% voting &quot;Yes&quot; on a 78.8% turnout. With the highest Yes vote for any local authority in Scotland, some in the Yes Scotland campaign nicknamed Dundee the &quot;Yes City&quot;, including former First Minister Alex Salmond.

== Geography ==

Dundee sits on the north bank of the Firth of Tay on the eastern, North Sea Coast of Scotland. The city lies NNE of Edinburgh and NNW of London. The built-up area occupies a roughly rectangular shape long by wide, aligned in an east to west direction and occupies an area of . The town is bisected by a line of hills stretching from Balgay Hill (elevation of 143 m) in the west end of the city, through the Dundee Law (174 m) which occupies the centre of the built up area, to Gallow Hill (83 m), between Baxter Park and the Eastern Cemetery. North of this ridge lies a valley through which cuts the Dighty Water burn, the elevation falling to around 45 m. North of the Dighty valley lie the Sidlaw Hills, the most prominent hill being Craigowl Hill (455 m).

The western and eastern boundaries of the city are marked by two burns that are tributaries of the River Tay. On the westernmost boundary of the city, the Lochee burn meets the Fowlis burn, forming the Invergowrie burn, which meets the Tay at Invergowrie basin. The Dighty Water enters Dundee from the village of Strathmartine and marks the boundaries of a number of northern districts of the city, joining the Tay between Barnhill and Monifieth. The Scouring burn in the west end of the city and Dens Burn in the east, both of which played important roles in the industrial development of the city, have now been culverted over.

=== Geology ===
The city lies within the Sidlaw-Ochil anticline, and the predominant bedrock type is Old Red Sandstone of the Arbuthnott-Garvock group. Differential weathering of a series of igneous intrusions has yielded a number of prominent hills in the landscape, most notably the Dundee Law (a late Silurian/early Devonian Mafic rock intrusion) and Balgay hill (a Felsic rock intrusion of similar age). In the east of the city, in Craigie and Broughty Ferry, the bedrock geology is of extrusive rocks, including mafic lava and tuff.

The land surrounding Dundee, particularly that in the lower lying areas to the west and east of the city, bears high quality soil that is particularly suitable for arable farming. It is predominantly of a brown forest soil type with some gleying, the lower parts being formed from raised beach sands and gravels derived from Old Red Sandstone and lavas.

=== Urban environment ===

Very little of pre-Reformation Dundee remains, the destruction suffered in the War of the Rough Wooing being almost total, with only scattered, roofless shells remaining. The area occupied by the medieval burgh of Dundee extends between East Port and West Port, which formerly held the gates to the walled city. The shoreline has been altered considerably since the early 19th century through development of the harbour area and land reclamation. Several areas on the periphery of the burgh saw industrial development with the building of textile mills from the end of the 18th century. Their placement was dictated by the need for a water supply for the modern steam powered machinery, and areas around the Lochee Burn (Lochee), Scouring Burn (Blackness) and Dens Burn (Dens Road area) saw particular concentrations of mills. The post war period saw expansion of industry to estates along the Kingsway.

Working-class housing spread rapidly and without control throughout the Victorian era, particularly in the Hawkhill, Blackness Road, Dens Road and Hilltown areas. Despite the comparative wealth of Victorian Dundee as a whole, living standards for the working classes were very poor. A general lack of town planning coupled with the influx of labour during the expansion of the jute industry resulted in insanitary, squalid and cramped housing for much of the population. While gradual improvements and slum clearance began in the late 19th century, the building of the groundbreaking Logie housing estate marked the beginning of Dundee&#x27;s expansion through the building of planned housing estates, under the vision of city architect James Thomson, whose legacy also includes the housing estate of Craigiebank and the beginnings of an improved transport infrastructure by planning the Kingsway bypass.

Modernisation of the city centre continued in the post-war period. The medieval Overgate was demolished in the early 1960s to make way for a shopping centre, followed by construction of the inner ring road and the Wellgate Shopping Centre. The Tay Road Bridge, completed in 1966, had as its northern landfall the docklands of central Dundee, and the new associated road system resulted in the city centre being cut off from the river. An acute shortage of housing in the late 1940s was addressed by a series of large housing estates built in the northern environs, including the Fintry, Craigie, Charleston and Douglas areas in the 1950s and early 1960s. These were followed by increasingly cost-effective and sometimes poorly planned housing throughout the 1960s. Much of this, in particular the high-rise blocks of flats at Lochee, Kirkton, Trottick, Whitfield, Ardler and Menzieshill, and the prefabricated Skarne housing blocks at Whitfield, has been demolished since the 1990s or is scheduled for future demolition.

Areas of Dundee:
=== Climate ===

The climate, like the rest of lowland Scotland, is Oceanic (Köppen-Geiger classification Cfb). Mean temperature and rainfall are typical for the east coast of Scotland, and with the city&#x27;s sheltered estuarine position, mean daily maxima are slightly higher than coastal areas to the North, particularly in spring and summer. The summers are still chilly when compared with similar latitudes in continental Europe, something compensated for by the mild winters, similar to the rest of the British Isles. The nearest official Met Office weather station is Mylnefield, Invergowrie which is about west of the City Centre.

A record high of was recorded in July 2013. The warmest month was July 2006, with an average temperature of (average high , average low ). In an &#x27;average&#x27; year the warmest day should reach , and in total just 1.86 days should equal or exceed a temperature of per year, illustrating the rarity of such warmth.

On average, 4.73 days should record a minimum temperature at or below -5 °C and there are 53.26 days of air frost on average. From 1991 to 2020, Mylnefield averaged 0.9 ice days, 50 days with precipitation of more than 5mm and 19.56 days with more than 10mm. The weather station is in plant hardiness zone 10a.

== Demography ==

===Population===

Dundee&#x27;s recorded population reached a peak of 182,204 at the 1971 census. According to the 2011 census, the City of Dundee had a population of 147,268. A more recent population estimate of the City of Dundee has been recorded at 149,680 in 2020. The demographic make-up of the population is much in line with the rest of Scotland. The age group from 30 to 44 forms the largest portion of the population (20%). The median age of males and females living in Dundee was 37 and 40 years, respectively, compared to 37 and 39 years for those in the whole of Scotland.

===Residents===

The place of birth of the town&#x27;s residents was 94.16% United Kingdom (including 87.85% from Scotland), 0.42% Ireland, 1.33% from other European Union (EU) countries, and 3.09% from elsewhere in the world. The economic activity of residents aged 16–74 was 35.92% in full-time employment, 10.42% in part-time employment, 4.25% self-employed, 5.18% unemployed, 7.82% students with jobs, 4.73% students without jobs, 15.15% retired, 4.54% looking after home or family, 7.92% permanently sick or disabled, and 4.00% economically inactive for other reasons. Compared with the average demography of Scotland, Dundee has both low proportions of people born outside the United Kingdom and for people over 75 years old.

Natives of Dundee are called Dundonians and are often recognisable by their distinctive dialect of Scots as well as their accent, which most noticeably substitutes the monophthong /ɛ/ (pronounced &quot;eh&quot;) in place of the diphthong /aj/ (pronounced &quot;ai&quot;). Dundee, and Scotland more generally, saw rapid population increase at end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century, with the city&#x27;s population increasing from 12,400 in 1751 to 30,500 in 1821. Of particular significance was an influx of Irish workers in the early to mid-19th century, attracted by the prospect of employment in the textiles industries. In 1851, 18.9% of people living in Dundee were of Irish birth.

The city has also attracted immigrants from Italy, fleeing poverty and famine, in the 19th century Jews, fleeing from the Russia controlled portions of partitioned Poland and from German occupation in the 20th. Today, Dundee has a sizeable ethnic minority population, and has around 4,000 Asian residents which is the fourth-largest Asian community in Scotland. The city also has 1.0% of residents from a Black/African/Caribbean background.

===Students===

Dundee has a higher proportion of university students – one in seven of the population – than any other town in Europe, except Heidelberg. The 14.2% come from all around the world to attend the local universities and colleges. Dundee is a major attraction for Northern Irish students who make up 5% of the total student population. The city&#x27;s universities are believed to hold the highest percentage of Northern Irish students outside of Northern Ireland and have a big impact on the local economy and culture. However, this has declined in recent years due to the increase of tuition fees for students elsewhere in the UK. Dundee also has a lot of students from abroad, mostly from the Republic of Ireland and other EU countries but with an increasing number from countries from the Far East and Nigeria.

=== Ethnicity ===
The proportion of people residing in Dundee born outside the UK was 12.9% in 2022, compared with 9.0% in 2011 and 4.9% in 2001. Below are the fifteen largest overseas-born groups in Dundee according to the 2022 census, alongside the two previous censuses.

===Religion===

The Church of Scotland Presbytery of Dundee is responsible for overseeing the worship of 37 congregations in and around the Dundee area, although changing population patterns have led to some of the churches becoming linked charges. Due to their city centre location, the City Churches, Dundee Parish Church (St Mary&#x27;s) and the Steeple Church, are the most prominent Church of Scotland buildings in Dundee. They are on the site of the medieval parish kirk of St Mary, of which only the 15th-century west tower survives. The attached church was once the largest parish church in medieval Scotland.

Dundee was unusual among Scottish medieval burghs in having two parish kirks; the second, dedicated to St Clement, has disappeared, but its site was approximately that of the present City Square. Other presbyterian groups include the Free Church which meet at St. Peters (the historic church of Robert Murray M&#x27;Cheyne).

In the Middle Ages Dundee was also the site of houses of the Dominicans (Blackfriars), and Franciscans (Greyfriars), and had a number of hospitals and chapels. These establishments were sacked during the Scottish Reformation, in the mid-16th century, and were reduced to burial grounds, now Barrack Street (also referred to as the Dek-tarn street) and The Howff burial ground, respectively.

St. Paul&#x27;s Cathedral is the seat of the Scottish Episcopal Diocese of Brechin. It is charged with overseeing the worship of 9 congregations in the city, as well as a further 17 in Angus, the Carse of Gowrie and parts of Aberdeenshire. Since 2018 the diocese has been led by Bishop Andrew Swift. St. Andrew&#x27;s Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Dunkeld, led by Bishop Stephen Robson. The diocese is responsible for overseeing 15 congregations in Dundee and 37 in the surrounding area, including St Mary, Our Lady of Victories Church in the city.

There are Methodist, Baptist, Congregationalist, Pentecostal and Salvation Army churches in the city, and non-mainstream Christian groups are also well represented, including the Unitarians, the Society of Friends, the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, Seventh-day Adventists, Christadelphians, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Muslims are served by the Dundee Central Mosque, built in 2000 to replace their former premises on the Hilltown. There are three other mosques in the city including Jamia Masjid Tajdare Madina on Victoria Road, Jame Masjid Bilal on Dura Street and Al Maktoum Mosque on Wilkie&#x27;s Lane. Alongside these there is an Islamic Society on the University of Dundee campus.

The Sikh community is served by the Guru Nanak Gurdwara on Victoria Road, which serves its community in Dundee.

A recorded Jewish community has existed in the city since the early 19th century. There is a small Orthodox synagogue at Dudhope Park which was built in the 1960s, with the Hebrew Burial Grounds located to the east. Dundee Buddhist Group is a Buddhist Temple based in Reform Street. There is also a Hindu mandir in Taylor&#x27;s Lane, situated in the West End of the city.

== Economy ==

In 1911 40% of the city&#x27;s population was employed in the jute industry. By 1951 this had dropped to 20%, and now is effectively zero. The period following World War II was notable for the transformation of the city&#x27;s economy. While jute still employed one-fifth of the working population, new industries were attracted and encouraged. NCR Corporation selected Dundee as the base of operations for the UK in late 1945, primarily because of the lack of damage the city had sustained in the war, good transport links and high productivity from long hours of sunshine. Production started in the year before the official opening of the plant on 11 June 1947. A fortnight after the tenth anniversary of the plant the 250,000th cash register was produced. By the 1960s, NCR had become the principal employer of the city producing cash registers, and later ATMs, at several of its Dundee plants. The firm developed magnetic-strip readers for cash registers and produced early computers. Astral, a Dundee-based firm that manufactured and sold refrigerators and spin dryers was merged into Morphy Richards and rapidly expanded to employ over 1,000 people. The development in Dundee of a Michelin tyre-production facility helped to absorb the unemployment caused by the decline of the jute industry, particularly with the abolition of the jute control by the Board of Trade on 30 April 1969.

Employment in Dundee changed dramatically during the 1980s with the loss of nearly 10,000 manufacturing jobs due to closure of the shipyards, cessation of carpet manufacturing and the disappearance of the jute trade. To combat growing unemployment and declining economic conditions, Dundee was declared an Enterprise Zone in January 1984. In 1983, the first ZX Spectrum home computers were produced in Dundee by Timex. In the same year the company broke production records, despite a sit-in by workers protesting against job cuts and plans to demolish one of the factory buildings to make way for a supermarket. Timex closed its Dundee plant in 1993 following an acrimonious six-month industrial dispute. The Michelin Tyre factory closed in June 2020, with the loss of 850 jobs.

Dundee is a regional employment and education centre, with around 325,000 people within 30 minutes&#x27; drive of the city centre and 860,000 people within one hour. Many people from North East Fife, Angus and Perth and Kinross commute to the city. As of 2015, there were 395 employers who employed 250 or more staff; over a five-year period (2011–2015) the number of registered enterprises in Dundee increased by 20.9% from 2,655 to 3,210. The largest employers in the city are NHS Tayside, Dundee City Council, University of Dundee, Tayside Contracts, Tesco, D. C. Thomson &amp; Co and BT. Several government agencies and public sector organisations are based in Dundee, such as the Care Inspectorate (Scotland), the Scottish Social Services Council and Social Security Scotland.

Other employers include limited and private companies such as NCR, Michelin, Alliance Trust, Aviva, Royal Bank of Scotland, Asda, Stagecoach Strathtay, Tokheim, Scottish Citylink, Rochen Limited, C J Lang &amp; Son (SPAR Scotland), Joinery and Timber Creations, Xplore Dundee, and W. L. Gore and Associates. Between 2009 and 2014 the hardest-hit sectors, in terms of jobs, were Information and Communication, Construction and Manufacturing which each lost around 500 full-time jobs. By contrast, the Professional, Scientific and Technical sector saw an upsurge in jobs in addition to the Business Administration and Support Service sector which increased by approximately 1,000 full-time and 300 part-time jobs in the same six-year period. Gross median weekly earnings of full-time employees in Dundee in 2015 was £523.50; men received £563.40 and women £451.80. Gross weekly pay for all employees in Dundee has increased from £325.00 in 2000 to £380.00 in 2015.

The biomedical and biotechnology sectors, including start-up biomedical companies arising from university research, employ just under 1,000 people directly and nearly 2,000 indirectly. Information technology and video game development have been important industries in the city for more than 20 years. Rockstar North, developer of &quot;Lemmings&quot; and the &quot;Grand Theft Auto&quot; series was founded in Dundee as DMA Design by David Jones; an undergraduate of the Abertay University. Rockstar Games returned to Dundee in 2020 when they acquired Ruffian Games to form Rockstar Dundee. Other game development studios in Dundee include Denki, Dynamo Games, 4J Studios and Outplay Entertainment, among others.

Dundee is also a key retail destination for North East Scotland and has been ranked fourth in Retail Rankings in Scotland. The city centre offers a wide variety of retailers, department stores and independent/specialist stores. The Murraygate and High Street forms the main pedestrian area and is home to a number of main anchors such as Marks and Spencer, Accessorise. The main pedestrian area also connects the two large shopping centres; the Overgate Centre which is anchored by Primark, H&amp;M, Next, Argos, and The Perfume Shop and the Wellgate Centre by Home Bargains, T. J. Hughes, B&amp;M, Superdrug, Iceland, Holland &amp; Barrett, Poundland, Savers, The Works, Hydro Electric, Other retail areas in the city include Gallagher Retail Park, Kingsway East Retail Park and Kingsway West Retail Park. The new Myrekirk Retail Park opened in 2022.

== Transport ==

===Road===

Dundee is served by the A90 road, which connects the city to the M90 and Perth in the west with Forfar and Aberdeen in the north. The part of the road that is in the city is a dual carriageway and forms the city&#x27;s main bypass on its north side, known as the Kingsway. East of the A90&#x27;s Forfar Road junction, the Kingsway East continues as the A972 and meets the A92 at the Scott Fyffe roundabout. Travelling east, the A92 connects the city to Arbroath and Montrose and to the south with Fife, via the Tay Road Bridge.

The A930 links the city with coastal settlements to the east, including Monifieth and Carnoustie. Progressing westward from where the A92 meets the Tay Road Bridge at the Riverside Roundabout, the A85 follows the southern boundary of the city along Riverside Drive and towards the A90 at the Swallow Roundabout. The A85 multiplexes with the A90 and diverges again at Perth.

Also meeting the A92 and A85 at the Riverside Roundabout is the A991 Inner Ring Road, which surrounds the perimeter of the city centre, returning to the A92 on the east side of the Tay Road Bridge. The A923 Dundee to Dunkeld road meets the A991 at the Dudhope Roundabout, and the A929 links the A991 to the A90 via Forfar Road.

===Bus===

Dundee has an extensive network of bus routes. The Seagate bus station is the city&#x27;s main terminus for journeys out of town. Xplore Dundee operates most of the intra-city services, with other more rural services operated by Stagecoach Strathtay and Moffat &amp; Williamson. The city&#x27;s two railway stations are the main Dundee station, near the waterfront, which has now finished re-construction as part of the waterfront re-development programme and the much smaller Broughty Ferry station at the eastern end of the city.

There are also many inter-city bus services offered by Megabus, Citylink and National Express.

===Rail, air and sea===

Passenger services at Dundee are provided by ScotRail, CrossCountry, Caledonian Sleeper and London North Eastern Railway. There are other nearby stations at Invergowrie, Balmossie and Monifieth. No freight trains have served the city since the Freightliner terminal in Dundee was closed in the 1980s.

Dundee Airport offers commercial flights to Heathrow Airport, Kirkwall Airport, and Sumburgh (Shetland) by Loganair. The airport is capable of serving small aircraft and is located west of the city centre, adjacent to the River Tay. The nearest major international airport is Edinburgh Airport, to the south.

The cargo port of Dundee is one of the largest economic generators in the city and is operated by Forth Ports. Seafarers arriving at the port are offered welfare and pastoral assistance by seafarers charity Apostleship of the Sea. The seaport in recent years has saw a significant increase in cruises arriving at port. In 2023, Ambassador Cruise Line made Dundee a port call following the launch of their second ship &quot;Ambition&quot;. Cruises from Dundee depart to Norway, Denmark, France, Spain, Sweden, Belgium and the Netherlands.

== Education ==

Dundee is home to two universities and a student population of approximately 20,000. The University of Dundee became an independent entity in 1967, after 70 years of being incorporated into the University of St Andrews. It was founded in 1881 by Mary Ann Baxter and her distant cousin John Boyd Baxter as University College, Dundee, and teaching began in 1883. It fully merged with the University of St Andrews in 1897 and was reorganised as Queen&#x27;s College, Dundee in 1954. Significant research in biomedical fields is carried out in the School of Life Sciences. The university is also home to Dundee Law School, situated in the Scrymgeour Building on the main campus and the School of Medicine, based at the city&#x27;s Ninewells Hospital. The university also incorporates the Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design and the teacher training college.

Abertay University was founded as Dundee Institute of Technology in 1888. Previously, the buildings formed Bell Street Technical College, a further education college. It was granted university status in 1994 under the Further and Higher Education Act, 1992. The university is noted for its computing and creative technology courses, particularly in the fields of computer games technology and cyber-security. Notable alumni include David Jones, founder of DMA Design (now known as Rockstar North), Sir Brian Souter, founder of Stagecoach, and Lord Iain McNicol, former General Secretary of the Labour Party.

Dundee College is the city&#x27;s umbrella further education college, which was established in 1985 as an institution of higher education and vocational training. As of 2013, it merged with Angus College in Arbroath, to become Dundee and Angus College (D&amp;A college). The Al-Maktoum College of Higher Education was established in Dundee in Blackness Road in 2002. It is a research-led institution of higher education which are currently offering programmes accredited by SQA in the study of Islam and Muslims, Arabic language and Islamic Economics and Finance. It is an independent institution. It is named after its patron, Hamdan bin Rashid Al Maktoum.
Schools in Dundee have a pupil enrolment of over 20,300. There are 37 primary state schools and 8 secondary state schools in the city. There are 11 primary and 2 secondary Roman Catholic denominational schools which, as in the rest of Scotland, are open to children of all denominations. The remainder are non-denominational. There is also one specialist school that caters for pupils with learning difficulties aged between five and 18 from Dundee and the surrounding area.

Dundee has one independent school, the High School of Dundee, which was founded in the 13th century by the Abbot and monks of Lindores Abbey. The current building was designed by George Angus in a Greek Revival style and built in 1832–34. Notable students in the early modern period included Thomas Thomson, Hector Boece, and the brothers James, John and Robert Wedderburn who were the authors of &quot;The Gude and Godlie Ballatis&quot;, used early in the Scottish Reformation as a vehicle to spread Protestant theology. According to Blind Harry&#x27;s largely apocryphal work &quot;The Actes and Deidis of the Illustre and Vallyeant Campioun Schir William Wallace&quot;, William Wallace was also educated in Dundee.

== Culture ==
Dundee made a bid to be named the 2017 UK City of Culture, and on 19 June 2013 was named as one of the four short-listed cities alongside Hull, Leicester and Swansea Bay. Ultimately, Dundee&#x27;s bid was unsuccessful, with Hull winning the contest. Dundee came in fifth place in a newspaper survey regarding numbers of cultural venues in the United Kingdom, ahead of other Scottish cities.

In August 2021, Dundee made a joint bid with Perth and Kinross, Angus and Fife for the UK City of Culture again in 2025 under the title of &#x27;Tay Cities&#x27;.

Dundee also went to bid to become the European Capital of Culture in 2023 but due to the United Kingdom voting to leave the European Union in June 2016, Dundee&#x27;s bid, along with those of other British cities submitting bids, was discontinued by the European Commission.

===Museums and galleries===
The city&#x27;s main museum and art gallery, McManus Galleries, is in Albert Square. The exhibits include work by James McIntosh Patrick, Alberto Morrocco and David McClure amongst the collection of fine and decorative art, items from Dundee&#x27;s history and natural history artefacts. Dundee Contemporary Arts (abbreviated DCA) opened in 1999 is an international art centre in the Nethergate close to Dundee Rep, which houses two contemporary art galleries, a two-screen arthouse cinema, a print studio, a visual research centre and a café bar. Britain&#x27;s only full-time public observatory, Mills Observatory at the summit of the city&#x27;s Balgay Hill, was given to the city by linen manufacturer and keen amateur scientist John Mills in 1935. Dundee Science Centre in the Greenmarket is a science centre based on the five senses with a series of interactive shows and exhibits. Verdant Works is a museum dedicated to the once dominant jute industry in Dundee and is based in a former jute mill.

The University of Dundee also runs several public museums and galleries, including the D&#x27;Arcy Thompson Zoology Museum and the Tayside Medical History Museum. The university, through Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design also offers the Cooper Gallery for contemporary art, and its archives including: the abcD (artists&#x27; books collection Dundee); the REWIND Archive (video art collection); and the Richard Demarco Digital Archive.

The V&amp;A Dundee Museum of Design opened in September 2018 and is built south of Craig Harbour onto the River Tay in a building designed by Kengo Kuma. It was officially opened by the Earl and Countess of Strathearn in 2019. It is the centrepiece of the city&#x27;s waterfront redevelopment. The new museum may bring another 500,000 extra visitors to the city and create up to 900 jobs.

The city&#x27;s archival records are mostly kept by two archives: Dundee City Archives, operated by Dundee City Council and the University of Dundee&#x27;s Archive Services.
Dundee City Archives holds the official records of the city and of the former Tayside Regional Council. The archive also holds the records of various people, groups and organisations connected to the city. The university&#x27;s Archive Services hold a wide range of material relating to the university and its predecessor institutions and to individuals associated with the university, such as D&#x27;Arcy Wentworth Thompson. Archive Services also holds the archives of several individuals, businesses and organisations based in Dundee and the surrounding area. The records held include a substantial number of business archives relating to the jute and linen industry in Dundee; records of other businesses including the archives of the Alliance Trust and the department store G. L. Wilson; the records of the Brechin Diocese of the Scottish Episcopal Church; and the NHS Tayside Archive. The same archive also holds the Michael Peto collection which includes thousands of the photojournalist&#x27;s photographs, negatives, slides, publications and papers.

===Literature===
Dundee has a strong literary heritage, with several authors having been born, lived or studied in the city. These include A. L. Kennedy, Rosamunde Pilcher, Kate Atkinson, Thomas Dick, Mary Shelley, Mick McCluskey, John Burnside and Neil Forsyth. The Dundee International Book Prize is a biennial competition open to new authors, offering a prize of £10,000 and publication by Polygon Books. Past winners have included: Andrew Murray Scott, Claire-Marie Watson and Malcolm Archibald. William McGonagall, regularly cited as the &quot;world&#x27;s worst poet&quot;, worked and wrote in the city, often giving performances of his work in pubs and bars. Many of his poems are about the city and events therein, such as his work &quot;The Tay Bridge Disaster&quot;.

Dundee&#x27;s poetic heritage is represented by the 2013 poetry anthology &quot;Whaleback City&quot; edited by W. N. Herbert and Andy Jackson (Dundee University Press) containing poems by McGonagall, Don Paterson, Douglas Dunn, John Burnside and many others. City of Recovery Press was founded in Dundee, and has become a controversial figure in documenting the darker side of the city.

=== Cinema ===
The Dundee Mountain Film Festival (DMFF), held in the last weekend of November, presents the best presenters and films of the year in mountaineering, mountain culture and adventure sport, along with an art and trade exhibition. DMFF is also one of the members of International Alliance for Mountain Film (IAMF) among other important international mountain film festivals.

Dundee Contemporary Arts hosts an annual horror film festival called &quot;Dundead&quot;, which started in 2011. It also hosts the Discovery Film Festival, an international film festival targeted for young audiences.

The city also has two Multiplex cinemas, Odeon and Cineworld.

=== Theatre, drama, dance ===
Dundee is home to a full-time repertory ensemble, which originated in 1939. One of its alumni, Hollywood actor Brian Cox, is a native of the city. The Dundee Repertory Theatre, built in 1982, is also the base for the Scottish Dance Theatre company.

The Whitehall Theatre opened in 1969.

The Little Theatre at the foot of the Hilltown is home to and maintained by Dundee Dramatic Society.

=== Music ===
Dundee&#x27;s principal concert auditorium, the Caird Hall (named after its benefactor, the jute baron James Key Caird) in the City Square regularly hosts the Royal Scottish National Orchestra. Various smaller venues host local and international musicians during Dundee&#x27;s annual Jazz, Guitar and Blues Festivals.

Dundee has hosted the National Mod a number of times – 1902, 1913, 1937, 1959 and 1974.

Dundee also hosted BBC Radio 1&#x27;s Big Weekend back in 2006 and was due to host for a second time in 2020 but it was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Dundee hosted the event again on 26th-28 May 2023 at Camperdown Park in the north-west of the city.

Popular music groups such as the 1970s soul-funk outfit Average White Band, the Associates, the band Spare Snare, Danny Wilson, the Hazey Janes, and the Indie rock bands the View and the Law are from Dundee. Musician, songwriter and performer Michael Marra was born and raised in Dundee. Ricky Ross of Deacon Blue and singer-songwriter KT Tunstall are former pupils of the High School of Dundee, although Tunstall is not a native of the city. The Northern Irish indie rock band Snow Patrol was formed by students at the University of Dundee. Brian Molko, lead singer of Placebo, grew up in the city as did Ian Cussick, singer of Lake. At the end of June, Dundee hosts an annual blues festival known as the &quot;Dundee Blues Bonanza&quot;.

=== Media ===
Dundee is home to DC Thomson &amp; Co. Ltd, established in 1905, which produces over 200 million magazines, newspapers and comics every year; these include &quot;The Beano&quot;, &quot;The Dandy&quot; and &quot;The Press and Journal&quot;.

Dundee is home to one of eleven BBC Scotland broadcasting centres, located within the Nethergate Centre. STV North&#x27;s Tayside news and advertising operations are based in the Seabraes area of the city, from where an &quot;STV News Tayside&quot; opt-out bulletin is broadcast, (though not on Digital Satellite), within the nightly regional news programme, &quot;STV News at Six&quot;. The city also had a community internet TV station called The Dundee Channel which was launched on 1 September 2009.

Dundee formerly had three local radio stations that were based in the city. Radio Tay was launched on 17 October 1980. The station split frequencies in January 1995, launching Tay FM for a younger audience and Tay AM playing classic hits (now called Greatest Hits Radio Tayside &amp; Fife). Neither Tay FM or Greatest Hits Radio are based within the city of Dundee, with their only locally targeted show (Tay FM breakfast) being broadcast from a Bauer studio in Edinburgh. In 1999, Discovery 102 was launched, later to be renamed Wave 102 following a claim by The Discovery Channel that the station could mistakenly be linked to its brand. The station was further rebranded to Wave FM and Pure Radio. The 102FM frequency now carries a relay of Aberdeen-based radio station Original 106 (Scotland) which features news, content and commercials tailored for Tayside.

=== Landmarks ===
The city and its landscape are dominated by The Law and the Firth of Tay. The Law, a large hill to the north of the City Centre was the site of an Iron Age Hill Fort, upon which the Law War Memorial, designed by Thomas Braddock, was erected in 1921 to commemorate the fallen of World War I. The waterfront, much altered by reclamation in the 19th century, retains several of the docks that once were the hub of the jute and whaling industries, including the Camperdown and Victoria Docks. The Victoria Dock is the home of the frigate HMS &quot;Unicorn&quot; and the North Carr Lightship, while Captain Scott&#x27;s RRS &quot;Discovery&quot; occupies Craig Pier, from where the ferries to Fife once sailed.

The oldest building in the city is St Mary&#x27;s Tower, which dates from the late 15th century. This forms part of the City Churches, which consist of St Clement&#x27;s Church, dating to 1787–8 and built by Samuel Bell, Old St Paul&#x27;s and St David&#x27;s Church, built in 1841–42 by William Burn, and St Mary&#x27;s Church, rebuilt in 1843–44, also by Burn, following a fire. Other significant churches in the city include the Gothic Revival St Paul&#x27;s Episcopal Cathedral, built by Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1853 on the former site of Dundee Castle in the High Street, and the Catholic St. Andrew&#x27;s Cathedral, built in 1835 by George Mathewson in Nethergate.

As a result of the destruction suffered during the Rough Wooing, little of the mediaeval city (aside from St Mary&#x27;s Tower) remains and the earliest surviving domestic structures date from the Early Modern Era. A notable example is the Wishart Arch (or East Port) in Cowgate. It is the last surviving portion of the city walls. Dating from prior to 1548, it owes its continued existence to its association with the Protestant martyr George Wishart, who is said to have preached to plague victims from the East Port in 1544. Another is the building complex on the High Street known as Gardyne&#x27;s Land, parts of which date from around 1560. The Howff burial ground in the northern part of the City Centre also dates from this time; it was given to the city by Mary Queen of Scots in 1564, having previously served as the grounds of a Franciscan abbey.

Several castles can be found in Dundee, mostly from the Early Modern Era. The earliest parts of Mains Castle in Caird Park were built by David Graham in 1562 on the site of a hunting lodge of 1460. Dudhope Castle, originally the seat of the Scrymgeour family, dates to the late 16th century and was built on the site of a keep of 1460. Claypotts Castle, a striking Z plan castle in West Ferry, was built by John Strachan and dates from 1569 to 1588. In 1495 Broughty Castle was built and remained in use as a major defensive structure until 1932, playing a role in the Anglo-Scottish Wars and the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. The castle stands on a shallow tip projecting into the Firth, alongside two beaches, one of sand, the other of pebbles. The ruins of Powrie Castle, north of Fintry, date from the 16th-century castle north.

North of the City Churches, at the end of Reform Street, lies the High School of Dundee, built in 1829–34 by George Angus in a Greek Revival style. Another school building of note is Morgan Academy on Forfar Road, built in 1863, designed by John Dick Peddie in a Dutch Gothic style.

Dundee&#x27;s industrial history as a centre for textile production is apparent throughout the city. Numerous former jute mills remain standing and while some lay derelict, many have been converted for other uses. Of particular note are the Tay Works, built by the Gilroy Brothers –1865, Camperdown Works in Lochee, which built and owned by Cox Brothers, one of Europe&#x27;s largest jute manufacturing companies, and begun in 1849, and Upper Dens Mill and Lower Dens Works, built by the Baxter Brothers in the mid-19th century.

A more recent landmark is the Tower Building of the University of Dundee built between 1959 and 1961. At the time of its construction only the Old Steeple was taller in the city. The Tower was built to replace the original college buildings which stood on the site. The building houses the university&#x27;s main administration and includes galleries and the university&#x27;s Archive, Records Management and Museum Services.

Many 1960s landmark multi-storey housing buildings were demolished in the late 2000s. The former Tayside House block, nicknamed &#x27;Faulty Towers&#x27; by many local people, was demolished in 2013 as part of the waterfront redevelopment program. According to the architectural historian Charles McKean and his co-authors of Lost Dundee, the best views in the city were from Tayside House, because these were the only views from which the building itself could not be seen.

== Sport and recreation ==
=== Football ===

Dundee has two professional football clubs: Dundee, founded in 1893, and Dundee United, founded in 1909 as Dundee Hibernian. Dundee FC and Dundee United currently play in the Scottish Premiership. Their grounds the ScotFoam Stadium and Tannadice Park are just 100 metres apart, closer together than any other football stadiums in the UK. The Dundee derby is one of the most highly anticipated fixtures in Scottish football.

Dundee is one of four British cities to have produced two European Cup semi-finalists. Dundee lost to A.C. Milan in 1963 and Dundee United lost to A.S. Roma in 1984. Dundee also reached the semi-finals of the forerunner to the UEFA Cup in 1968 and Dundee United were runners-up in the UEFA Cup in 1987. There are also seven junior football teams in the area: Dundee North End, East Craigie, Lochee Harp, Lochee United, Dundee Violet, Broughty Athletic and Downfield.

=== Ice hockey ===
Dundee Stars, the main ice hockey team, play at the Dundee Ice Arena. The team joined the Elite League in the 2010/2011 season. They are one of three professional ice hockey teams in Scotland, and play against teams from England, Wales and Northern Ireland in the Elite League. In the 2013/2014 season, Dundee Stars won the Gardiner Conference trophy, their only one to date. The majority of the players are from Canada and the United States. Marc LeFebvre is the current head coach and general manager of the Dundee Stars.

There also is an amateur ice hockey team, Dundee Rockets, who play in the Scottish National League.

=== Rugby ===
The city is also home to six rugby union teams. Dundee High School Former Pupils play in Scottish National League Division One, the second tier of Scottish club rugby. The remainder of the teams compete in the Caledonia Regional League – Harris Academy FP play in Caledonia Division One, Morgan Academy FP and Panmure in Caledonia Division Two Midlands, Dundee University Medics and Stobswell in Caledonia Division Three Midlands.

=== Athletics ===
Liz McColgan and Eilish McColgan both hail from Dundee and have been members of the Dundee Hawkhill Harriers athletics club.

=== Other sports ===
Local sports clubs include Dundee Handball Club, Grove Menzieshill Hockey Club; Dundee Wanderers Hockey Club, Dundee Volleyball Club, Dundee Northern Lights Floorball Club, Dundee Hawkhill Harriers, Dundee City Aquatics, Dundee Hurricanes, Dundee Roller Derby and Dundee &amp; Angus Radio Controlled Car Klub (DARCCK).

The Olympia Leisure Centre, opened in 2013, has a swimming pool.

There is a velodrome, Caird Park Velodrome.

== Public services ==
Dundee and the surrounding area is supplied with water by Scottish Water. Dundee, along with parts of Perthshire and Angus is supplied from Lintrathen and Backwater reservoirs in Glen Isla. Electricity distribution is by Scottish Hydro Electric plc, part of the Scottish and Southern Energy group.

Waste management is handled by Dundee City Council. There is a kerbside recycling scheme that currently only serves 15,500 households in Dundee. Cans, glass and plastic bottles are collected on a weekly basis. Compostable material and non-recyclable material are collected on alternate weeks. Paper is collected for recycling on a four-weekly basis.

Recycling centres and points are at a number of locations in Dundee. Items accepted include steel and aluminium cans, cardboard, paper, electrical equipment, engine oil, fridges and freezers, garden waste, gas bottles, glass, liquid food and drinks cartons, plastic bottles, plastic carrier bags, rubble, scrap metal, shoes and handbags, spectacles, textiles, tin foil, wood and yellow pages. Recent figures taken in 2008, suggest the city council has a recycling rate of 36.1%.

Law enforcement is provided by Police Scotland. The headquarters of the Dundee Branch of Police Scotland is situated in West Bell Street. There are also four police stations which serve the city: Maryfield, Lochee, Downfield and Longhaugh.

Healthcare is supplied in the area by NHS Tayside. Ninewells Hospital, is the only hospital with an accident and emergency department in the area. Dundee is also served by the East Central Region of the Scottish Ambulance Service which covers the city, Tayside and Kingdom of Fife. There is one ambulance station for the city; on West School Road.

The Scottish Fire and Rescue Service operate three fire stations, covering the city and surrounding villages. The main station is at Blackness Road and there is a control room at Macalpine Road fire station.

== Sister cities ==
Chronologically:
* Orléans, France (1946)
* Zadar, Croatia (1959)
* Alexandria, United States (1962)
* Würzburg, Germany (1962)
* Nablus, Palestine (1980)
* Dubai, United Arab Emirates (2004)
* West Dundee, United States (2013)

==Freedom of the City==
The following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Dundee.
===Individuals===
* William Arrol: 1889.
* Henry Morton Stanley: 1890.
* William Harcourt: 1898.
* Sir John Leng: 1902.
* Whitelaw Reid: 1906.
* H. H. Asquith: October 1912.
* Emma Grace Marryat: 1918.
* David Middleton Greig: 1920.
* Agnes Husband: 1926.
* Thomas Johnston: 1947.
* Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother: 1954.
* Maurice McManus: 1981.
* Nelson Mandela: 9 October 1993.
* Aung San Suu Kyi: 2008.
* Ramsay MacDonald
* Stanley Baldwin
* Rev. William Macmillan
* James McLean

===Military units===
* The Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment): 1954.

== See also ==
* Brittle Bone Society, a UK charity established in 1968 in Dundee
* Dundee Museum of Transport
* History of Dundee#Notable Dundonians and people associated with Dundee
* Alexander C. Lamb and references to the Lamb Collection, which is held in the City Museum and the Local History Centre of Dundee Central Library

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== News ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
=== Websites ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
=== Maps ===
* 
* 
* 

=== Listed building reports ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* National Library of Scotland: SCOTTISH SCREEN ARCHIVE (selection of archive films about Dundee)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="0" end="6" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815294" start="26" end="40" title="List of towns and cities in Scotland by population" label="fourth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="49" end="57" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="172" end="186" title="List of Scottish council areas by population density" label="second-highest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327668" start="227" end="243" title="central Lowlands" label="central Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765455" start="269" end="281" title="Firth of Tay" label="Firth of Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="304" end="313" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="335" end="346" title="Dundee" label="Dundee City"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="371" end="384" title="Council areas of Scotland" label="council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="394" end="422" title="local government in Scotland" label="local government in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="453" end="468" title="Shires of Scotland" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="472" end="477" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="505" end="510" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="638" end="659" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211" start="735" end="739" title="jute" label="jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q43674688" start="1186" end="1200" title="V&amp;amp;A Dundee" label="V&amp;amp;A Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="1227" end="1234" title="Victoria &amp;amp; Albert Museum" label="V&amp;amp;A"/>
<link wikidata="Q82257" start="1456" end="1481" title="RRS Discovery" label="RRS &amp;quot;Discovery&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="1483" end="1502" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Robert Falcon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107035" start="1824" end="1833" title="Cognizant" label="Cognizant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="1915" end="1931" title="electric vehicle" label="electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2257" end="2263" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="2436" end="2438" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="2532" end="2555" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="2728" end="2734" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312594" start="3082" end="3098" title="William the Lion" label="William the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177456" start="3155" end="3160" title="David, Earl of Huntingdon" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170228" start="3168" end="3186" title="Earl of Huntingdon" label="Earl of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="3408" end="3420" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928458" start="3440" end="3451" title="Royal Burgh" label="Royal Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242848" start="3580" end="3605" title="First War of Scottish Independence" label="First War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="3624" end="3640" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443265" start="3827" end="3839" title="Rough Wooing" label="Rough Wooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756843" start="3899" end="3912" title="Andrew Dudley" label="Andrew Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508780" start="4069" end="4095" title="Scotland in the Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q979180" start="4150" end="4170" title="James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose" label="Marquess of Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q335106" start="4236" end="4248" title="George Monck, 1st Duke of Albemarle" label="George Monck"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="4317" end="4325" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q892818" start="4337" end="4384" title="John Graham of Claverhouse, 1st Viscount Dundee" label="John Graham of Claverhouse, 1st Viscount Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="4396" end="4402" title="House of Stuart" label="Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q458148" start="4419" end="4429" title="Law, Dundee" label="Dundee Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="4556" end="4574" title="James Francis Edward Stuart" label="James VIII and III"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053650" start="4792" end="4807" title="Barony of Lundie" label="Baron of Lundie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107274" start="5664" end="5672" title="Osnaburg" label="Osnaburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="5717" end="5724" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211" start="6238" end="6242" title="jute" label="jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053334" start="6268" end="6277" title="whale oil" label="whale oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="6527" end="6534" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="6560" end="6571" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="6597" end="6615" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028320" start="6996" end="7012" title="Camperdown Works" label="Camperdown Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665087" start="7016" end="7022" title="Lochee" label="Lochee"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="7444" end="7463" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Robert Falcon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053334" start="7668" end="7677" title="whale oil" label="whale oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383736" start="7876" end="7905" title="Keiller&amp;#x27;s marmalade" label="James Keiller&amp;#x27;s and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5834964" start="7955" end="7964" title="marmalade" label="marmalade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="8001" end="8011" title="DC Thomson" label="DC Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287158" start="8226" end="8245" title="Tay Bridge disaster" label="Tay Bridge disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480690" start="8257" end="8272" title="Tay Rail Bridge" label="Tay Rail Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558509" start="8419" end="8467" title="1906 Dundee fire" label="most destructive fire in the city&amp;#x27;s history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="8772" end="8780" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10959578" start="9017" end="9022" title="Timex Group" label="Timex"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="9027" end="9030" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="9136" end="9147" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="9155" end="9169" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43674688" start="9838" end="9864" title="V&amp;amp;A Dundee" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q596642" start="9900" end="9912" title="Eden Project" label="Eden Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="10035" end="10060" title="council areas of Scotland" label="council areas of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28528294" start="10078" end="10097" title="Dundee City Council" label="Dundee City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17807407" start="10120" end="10140" title="Dundee City Chambers" label="Dundee City Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514904" start="10185" end="10197" title="Dundee House" label="Dundee House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577032" start="10270" end="10282" title="Lord Provost of Dundee" label="Lord Provost"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10331" end="10354" title="List of community council areas in Scotland#Dundee City" label="community council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q459773" start="10372" end="10386" title="Broughty Ferry" label="Broughty Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123071" start="10388" end="10411" title="City Centre, Dundee" label="City Centre and Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985027" start="10417" end="10425" title="West End, Dundee" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="10501" end="10517" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="10521" end="10532" title="Westminster Palace" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="10568" end="10573" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="10608" end="10622" title="United Kingdom constituencies" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q121407346" start="10646" end="10673" title="Arbroath and Broughty Ferry (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Arbroath and Broughty Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032281" start="10678" end="10689" title="Dundee West (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Dundee West"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882482" start="10709" end="10724" title="Stephen Gethins" label="Stephen Gethins"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="10726" end="10749" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875413" start="10755" end="10764" title="Chris Law" label="Chris Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="10867" end="10888" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="10911" end="10930" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746031" start="10934" end="10942" title="Scottish Parliament Building" label="Holyrood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265528" start="11002" end="11031" title="Dundee City East (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Dundee City East constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265524" start="11040" end="11069" title="Dundee City West (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Dundee City West constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q544610" start="11109" end="11144" title="Angus South (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Angus South (Holyrood) constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647853" start="11253" end="11289" title="North East Scotland (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="North East Scotland electoral region"/>
<link wikidata="Q444675" start="11291" end="11304" title="Shona Robison" label="Shona Robison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="11318" end="11351" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612012" start="11392" end="11407" title="Joe Fitzpatrick" label="Joe Fitzpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349075" start="11470" end="11480" title="Graeme Dey" label="Graeme Dey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11541" end="11583" title="Sir Winston Churchill#Political career to the Second World War" label="Winston Churchill served as one of two MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314860" start="11600" end="11604" title="1908 Dundee by-election" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q112242278" start="11608" end="11612" title="Dundee in the 1922 general election" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="11680" end="11685" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928458" start="11740" end="11751" title="royal burgh" label="royal burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="11780" end="11792" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q104828357" start="12168" end="12184" title="county of city" label="county of itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="12203" end="12208" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q459773" start="12333" end="12347" title="Broughty Ferry" label="Broughty Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q633294" start="12480" end="12487" title="Tayside" label="Tayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="12531" end="12567" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179174" start="12641" end="12650" title="Monifieth" label="Monifieth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12667" end="12684" title="List of local government areas in Scotland (1930–1975)#Sub-county authorities" label="landward district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009662" start="12776" end="12786" title="Longforgan" label="Longforgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q653438" start="12803" end="12814" title="Invergowrie" label="Invergowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="12821" end="12831" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="12893" end="12934" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="13085" end="13102" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="13419" end="13451" title="Scottish independence referendum" label="Scottish independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052763" start="13582" end="13594" title="Yes Scotland" label="Yes Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="13679" end="13691" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765455" start="13748" end="13760" title="Firth of Tay" label="Firth of Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="13777" end="13786" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114344" start="13820" end="13823" title="Boxing the compass" label="NNE"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="13827" end="13836" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114344" start="13841" end="13844" title="Boxing the compass" label="NNW"/>
<link wikidata="Q458148" start="14118" end="14128" title="Dundee Law" label="Dundee Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089176" start="14216" end="14227" title="Baxter Park" label="Baxter Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016714" start="14324" end="14328" title="burn (topography)" label="burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483311" start="14403" end="14415" title="Sidlaw Hills" label="Sidlaw Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181748" start="14447" end="14460" title="Craigowl Hill" label="Craigowl Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016714" start="14536" end="14541" title="burn (topography)" label="burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q19719" start="14570" end="14579" title="River Tay" label="River Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q653438" start="14673" end="14684" title="Invergowrie" label="Invergowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622121" start="14784" end="14797" title="Strathmartine" label="Strathmartine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861836" start="14894" end="14902" title="Barnhill, Dundee" label="Barnhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179174" start="14907" end="14916" title="Monifieth" label="Monifieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="15085" end="15092" title="culvert" label="culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q190147" start="15156" end="15165" title="anticline" label="anticline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517523" start="15203" end="15220" title="Old Red Sandstone" label="Old Red Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="15254" end="15277" title="Differential weathering" label="Differential weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q61041319" start="15293" end="15310" title="igneous intrusion" label="igneous intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q458148" start="15387" end="15397" title="Law, Dundee" label="Dundee Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="15406" end="15414" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="15421" end="15429" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="15430" end="15435" title="Mafic" label="Mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q847257" start="15471" end="15477" title="Felsic" label="Felsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181694" start="15538" end="15545" title="Craigiebank, Dundee" label="Craigie"/>
<link wikidata="Q459773" start="15550" end="15564" title="Broughty Ferry" label="Broughty Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352521" start="15592" end="15606" title="extrusive rock" label="extrusive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="15625" end="15629" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q484924" start="15634" end="15638" title="tuff" label="tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333706" start="15846" end="15863" title="brown forest soil" label="brown forest soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485878" start="15879" end="15886" title="Gley soil" label="gleying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="16042" end="16053" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443265" start="16102" end="16125" title="War of the Rough Wooing" label="War of the Rough Wooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665087" start="16744" end="16750" title="Lochee" label="Lochee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923187" start="16768" end="16777" title="Blackness, Dundee" label="Blackness"/>
<link wikidata="Q93623660" start="17430" end="17444" title="Slum clearance in the United Kingdom" label="slum clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242621" start="17512" end="17517" title="Logie, Dundee" label="Logie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681182" start="17665" end="17678" title="James Thomson (architect)" label="James Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181694" start="17729" end="17740" title="Craigiebank, Dundee" label="Craigiebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441301" start="18078" end="18093" title="Tay Road Bridge" label="Tay Road Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="18941" end="18948" title="Oceanic climate" label="Oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="18950" end="18963" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen-Geiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851405" start="19419" end="19429" title="Met Office" label="Met Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q653438" start="19461" end="19472" title="Invergowrie" label="Invergowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="20908" end="20922" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="21583" end="21588" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001535" start="21606" end="21612" title="Accent (dialect)" label="accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q932126" start="21652" end="21663" title="monophthong" label="monophthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="21712" end="21721" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="22423" end="22438" title="ethnic minority" label="ethnic minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="22768" end="22778" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="23363" end="23375" title="EU countries" label="EU countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="23443" end="23450" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="23748" end="23766" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="23767" end="23777" title="Presbyterian polity" label="Presbytery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314830" start="24031" end="24068" title="Dundee Parish Church (St Mary&amp;#x27;s)" label="Dundee Parish Church (St Mary&amp;#x27;s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605920" start="24077" end="24091" title="Steeple Church" label="Steeple Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="24116" end="24134" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="24208" end="24215" title="St Mary" label="St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887" start="24450" end="24460" title="Pope Clement I" label="St Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q389941" start="24642" end="24669" title="Robert Murray McCheyne" label="Robert Murray M&amp;#x27;Cheyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="24680" end="24691" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="24734" end="24744" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="24764" end="24775" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="24877" end="24897" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Scottish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740747" start="25025" end="25034" title="The Howff" label="The Howff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942416" start="25065" end="25090" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Dundee" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="25110" end="25128" title="Scottish Episcopal" label="Scottish Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q778172" start="25129" end="25147" title="Diocese of Brechin (Episcopalian)" label="Diocese of Brechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54862539" start="25344" end="25363" title="Andrew Swift (bishop)" label="Bishop Andrew Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942304" start="25365" end="25392" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Dundee" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="25412" end="25426" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278867" start="25427" end="25445" title="Diocese of Dunkeld" label="Diocese of Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612696" start="25461" end="25475" title="Stephen Robson" label="Stephen Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17807316" start="25588" end="25625" title="St Mary, Our Lady of Victories Church, Dundee" label="St Mary, Our Lady of Victories Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="25650" end="25659" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="25661" end="25668" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="25670" end="25687" title="Congregationalist" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="25689" end="25700" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="25705" end="25719" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="25819" end="25829" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="25835" end="25853" title="Society of Friends" label="Society of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="25859" end="25883" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="25885" end="25906" title="Seventh-day Adventist" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q27827" start="25909" end="25925" title="Christadelphians" label="Christadelphians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="25931" end="25978" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="25981" end="25987" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902226" start="26007" end="26028" title="Dundee Central Mosque" label="Dundee Central Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="26321" end="26341" title="University of Dundee" label="University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="26355" end="26359" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="26398" end="26406" title="Gurdwara" label="Gurdwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="26563" end="26571" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834031" start="26572" end="26581" title="Dundee Synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="26707" end="26715" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="26763" end="26768" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q842402" start="26769" end="26775" title="mandir" label="mandir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985027" start="26815" end="26823" title="West End, Dundee" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="27198" end="27213" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q235041" start="27686" end="27699" title="cash register" label="cash register"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="27712" end="27716" title="Automatic Teller Machine" label="ATMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="27897" end="27910" title="refrigerators" label="refrigerators"/>
<link wikidata="Q496334" start="27915" end="27926" title="Clothes dryer" label="spin dryers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913476" start="27943" end="27958" title="Morphy Richards" label="Morphy Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q151107" start="28040" end="28048" title="Michelin" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="28049" end="28053" title="tire" label="tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="28211" end="28225" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344719" start="28551" end="28566" title="Enterprise Zone" label="Enterprise Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="28603" end="28614" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="28615" end="28629" title="home computers" label="home computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644618" start="28657" end="28662" title="Timex Group USA" label="Timex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="28729" end="28735" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="28930" end="28948" title="industrial dispute" label="industrial dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="29208" end="29223" title="Fife" label="North East Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="29235" end="29252" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954176" start="29504" end="29515" title="NHS Tayside" label="NHS Tayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="29538" end="29558" title="University of Dundee" label="University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="29579" end="29584" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="29586" end="29608" title="D. C. Thomson &amp;amp; Co. Ltd" label="D. C. Thomson &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="29613" end="29615" title="BT Group plc" label="BT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038855" start="29710" end="29738" title="Care Inspectorate (Scotland)" label="Care Inspectorate (Scotland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437981" start="29744" end="29776" title="Scottish Social Services Council" label="Scottish Social Services Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q54493776" start="29781" end="29805" title="Social Security Scotland" label="Social Security Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="29870" end="29873" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q151107" start="29875" end="29883" title="Michelin" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732335" start="29885" end="29899" title="Alliance Trust" label="Alliance Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q791179" start="29901" end="29906" title="Aviva" label="Aviva"/>
<link wikidata="Q160126" start="29908" end="29930" title="Royal Bank of Scotland" label="Royal Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q297410" start="29932" end="29936" title="Asda" label="Asda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596845" start="29938" end="29958" title="Stagecoach Strathtay" label="Stagecoach Strathtay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813561" start="29960" end="29967" title="Tokheim" label="Tokheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476350" start="29969" end="29986" title="Scottish Citylink" label="Scottish Citylink"/>
<link wikidata="Q610492" start="30024" end="30037" title="Spar (retailer)" label="SPAR Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972535" start="30070" end="30083" title="Xplore Dundee" label="Xplore Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q471316" start="30089" end="30114" title="W. L. Gore and Associates" label="W. L. Gore and Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q864601" start="30776" end="30786" title="biomedical" label="biomedical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="30791" end="30804" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061635" start="30984" end="31006" title="video game development" label="video game development"/>
<link wikidata="Q94893" start="31074" end="31088" title="Rockstar North" label="Rockstar North"/>
<link wikidata="Q864177" start="31109" end="31117" title="Lemmings (video game)" label="Lemmings"/>
<link wikidata="Q132730" start="31138" end="31154" title="Grand Theft Auto" label="Grand Theft Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747788" start="31207" end="31218" title="David Jones (video game developer)" label="David Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505925" start="31244" end="31262" title="Abertay University" label="Abertay University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377918" start="31347" end="31362" title="Rockstar Dundee" label="Rockstar Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023123" start="31413" end="31418" title="Denki" label="Denki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319115" start="31420" end="31432" title="Dynamo Games" label="Dynamo Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q238132" start="31434" end="31444" title="4J Studios" label="4J Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="31825" end="31842" title="M&amp;amp;S" label="Marks and Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069980" start="31844" end="31855" title="Monsoon Accessorize" label="Accessorise"/>
<link wikidata="Q137023" start="31969" end="31976" title="Primark" label="Primark"/>
<link wikidata="Q188326" start="31978" end="31985" title="H&amp;amp;M" label="H&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q246655" start="31987" end="31991" title="Next (clothing)" label="Next"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756719" start="32004" end="32020" title="The Perfume Shop" label="The Perfume Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888229" start="32048" end="32061" title="Home Bargains" label="Home Bargains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672651" start="32063" end="32075" title="T. J. Hughes" label="T. J. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q280467" start="32393" end="32401" title="A90 road" label="A90 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q491312" start="32434" end="32437" title="M90 motorway" label="M90"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="32442" end="32447" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q996509" start="32465" end="32471" title="Forfar" label="Forfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="32476" end="32484" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="32545" end="32561" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649688" start="32722" end="32726" title="A972 road" label="A972"/>
<link wikidata="Q280487" start="32741" end="32744" title="A92 road" label="A92"/>
<link wikidata="Q630668" start="32822" end="32830" title="Arbroath" label="Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q420303" start="32835" end="32843" title="Montrose, Angus" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="32866" end="32870" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441301" start="32880" end="32895" title="Tay Road Bridge" label="Tay Road Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649675" start="32902" end="32906" title="A930 road" label="A930"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179174" start="32970" end="32979" title="Monifieth" label="Monifieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012395" start="32984" end="32994" title="Carnoustie" label="Carnoustie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649651" start="33095" end="33098" title="A85 road" label="A85"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649695" start="33337" end="33341" title="A991 road" label="A991"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649674" start="33475" end="33479" title="A923 road" label="A923"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265921" start="33490" end="33497" title="Dunkeld" label="Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660978" start="33553" end="33557" title="A929 road" label="A929"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440428" start="33664" end="33683" title="Seagate bus station" label="Seagate bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972535" start="33743" end="33756" title="Xplore Dundee" label="Xplore Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596845" start="33842" end="33862" title="Stagecoach Strathtay" label="Stagecoach Strathtay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096420" start="33942" end="33956" title="Dundee railway station" label="Dundee station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765820" start="34090" end="34112" title="Broughty Ferry railway station" label="Broughty Ferry station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853911" start="34201" end="34208" title="Megabus (Europe)" label="Megabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476350" start="34210" end="34218" title="Scottish Citylink" label="Citylink"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479582" start="34223" end="34239" title="National Express Coaches" label="National Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980329" start="34312" end="34320" title="ScotRail" label="ScotRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141120" start="34322" end="34334" title="CrossCountry" label="CrossCountry"/>
<link wikidata="Q428145" start="34336" end="34354" title="Caledonian Sleeper" label="Caledonian Sleeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q53649859" start="34359" end="34387" title="London North Eastern Railway" label="London North Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442906" start="34424" end="34435" title="Invergowrie railway station" label="Invergowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944519" start="34437" end="34446" title="Balmossie railway station" label="Balmossie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425536" start="34451" end="34460" title="Monifieth railway station" label="Monifieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q472109" start="34511" end="34523" title="Freightliner Group" label="Freightliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655504" start="34569" end="34583" title="Dundee Airport" label="Dundee Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="34613" end="34629" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431732" start="34631" end="34647" title="Kirkwall Airport" label="Kirkwall Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432932" start="34653" end="34672" title="Sumburgh Airport" label="Sumburgh (Shetland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q934983" start="34676" end="34684" title="Loganair" label="Loganair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8716" start="34845" end="34862" title="Edinburgh Airport" label="Edinburgh Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472593" start="34977" end="34988" title="Forth Ports" label="Forth Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498143" start="35086" end="35108" title="Apostleship of the Sea" label="Apostleship of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255784" start="35207" end="35229" title="Ambassador Cruise Line" label="Ambassador Cruise Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006977" start="35302" end="35310" title="MS Ambition" label="Ambition"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="35348" end="35354" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="35356" end="35363" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="35388" end="35395" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="35400" end="35415" title="Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="35524" end="35544" title="University of Dundee" label="University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="35629" end="35653" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062984" start="35681" end="35696" title="Mary Ann Baxter" label="Mary Ann Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q864601" start="35939" end="35949" title="biomedical" label="biomedical"/>
<link wikidata="Q60756006" start="35979" end="36002" title="School of Life Sciences (University of Dundee)" label="School of Life Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895349" start="36035" end="36052" title="Dundee Law School" label="Dundee Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q27957875" start="36117" end="36135" title="University of Dundee School of Medicine" label="School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038594" start="36162" end="36180" title="Ninewells Hospital" label="Ninewells Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314669" start="36219" end="36266" title="Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design" label="Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505925" start="36302" end="36320" title="Abertay University" label="Abertay University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091069" start="36520" end="36558" title="Further and Higher Education Act, 1992" label="Further and Higher Education Act, 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="36665" end="36679" title="computer games" label="computer games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="36695" end="36709" title="Computer security" label="cyber-security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747788" start="36734" end="36745" title="David Jones (video game developer)" label="David Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q94893" start="36783" end="36797" title="Rockstar North" label="Rockstar North"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965350" start="36804" end="36816" title="Brian Souter" label="Brian Souter"/>
<link wikidata="Q660261" start="36829" end="36839" title="Stagecoach Group" label="Stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980556" start="36850" end="36862" title="Iain McNicol" label="Iain McNicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532175" start="36871" end="36908" title="General Secretary of the Labour Party" label="General Secretary of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877049" start="36911" end="36925" title="Dundee College" label="Dundee College"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="36954" end="36971" title="further education" label="further education"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877049" start="37101" end="37114" title="Angus College" label="Angus College"/>
<link wikidata="Q630668" start="37118" end="37126" title="Arbroath" label="Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877049" start="37138" end="37162" title="Dundee and Angus College" label="Dundee and Angus College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919096" start="37385" end="37388" title="Scottish Qualifications Authority" label="SQA"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="37405" end="37410" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="37415" end="37421" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q712839" start="37539" end="37567" title="Hamdan bin Rashid Al Maktoum" label="Hamdan bin Rashid Al Maktoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756622" start="38084" end="38105" title="High School of Dundee" label="High School of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="38152" end="38157" title="Abbot" label="Abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="38162" end="38166" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614230" start="38171" end="38185" title="Lindores Abbey" label="Lindores Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q902546" start="38337" end="38351" title="Thomas Thomson (chemist)" label="Thomas Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q652097" start="38353" end="38365" title="Hector Boece" label="Hector Boece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379123" start="38384" end="38417" title="James, John and Robert Wedderburn" label="James, John and Robert Wedderburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379123" start="38448" end="38476" title="The Gude and Godlie Ballatis" label="The Gude and Godlie Ballatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="38502" end="38522" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Scottish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984048" start="38580" end="38591" title="Blind Harry" label="Blind Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712294" start="38629" end="38710" title="The Actes and Deidis of the Illustre and Vallyeant Campioun Schir William Wallace" label="The Actes and Deidis of the Illustre and Vallyeant Campioun Schir William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="38718" end="38733" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864835" start="38817" end="38835" title="UK City of Culture" label="UK City of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="38916" end="38920" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="38922" end="38931" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235968" start="38936" end="38947" title="Swansea Bay" label="Swansea Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="39215" end="39232" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="39234" end="39239" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="39244" end="39248" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q129372" start="39372" end="39399" title="European Capital of Culture" label="European Capital of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="39419" end="39472" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="the United Kingdom voting to leave the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="39588" end="39607" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303706" start="39683" end="39700" title="McManus Galleries" label="McManus Galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139400" start="39752" end="39774" title="James McIntosh Patrick" label="James McIntosh Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608471" start="39776" end="39792" title="Alberto Morrocco" label="Alberto Morrocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16750373" start="39797" end="39810" title="David McClure (artist)" label="David McClure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265526" start="39926" end="39950" title="Dundee Contemporary Arts" label="Dundee Contemporary Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="40223" end="40234" title="observatory" label="observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859986" start="40236" end="40253" title="Mills Observatory" label="Mills Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850782" start="40287" end="40293" title="Balgay" label="Balgay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450954" start="40391" end="40412" title="Dundee Science Centre" label="Dundee Science Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921032" start="40526" end="40539" title="Verdant Works" label="Verdant Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="40648" end="40668" title="University of Dundee" label="University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314669" start="40831" end="40878" title="Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design" label="Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q8273285" start="41061" end="41076" title="Richard Demarco" label="Richard Demarco"/>
<link wikidata="Q43674688" start="41099" end="41113" title="V&amp;amp;A Dundee" label="V&amp;amp;A Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19719" start="41201" end="41210" title="River Tay" label="River Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q725462" start="41237" end="41247" title="Kengo Kuma" label="Kengo Kuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q36812" start="41281" end="41312" title="Prince William, Duke of Cambridge" label="Earl and Countess of Strathearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28528294" start="41585" end="41604" title="Dundee City Council" label="Dundee City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="41613" end="41633" title="University of Dundee" label="University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q633294" start="41737" end="41761" title="Tayside Regional Council" label="Tayside Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q739438" start="42053" end="42083" title="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Wentworth Thompson" label="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Wentworth Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732335" start="42397" end="42411" title="Alliance Trust" label="Alliance Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="42493" end="42518" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Scottish Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954176" start="42528" end="42539" title="NHS Tayside" label="NHS Tayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455941" start="42581" end="42593" title="Michael Peto" label="Michael Peto"/>
<link wikidata="Q506858" start="42637" end="42652" title="photojournalist" label="photojournalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q278872" start="42857" end="42870" title="A. L. Kennedy" label="A. L. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q254240" start="42872" end="42889" title="Rosamunde Pilcher" label="Rosamunde Pilcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q272622" start="42891" end="42904" title="Kate Atkinson (writer)" label="Kate Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525055" start="42906" end="42917" title="Thomas Dick (scientist)" label="Thomas Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="42919" end="42931" title="Mary Shelley" label="Mary Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q977057" start="42949" end="42962" title="John Burnside (writer)" label="John Burnside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988561" start="42967" end="42979" title="Neil Forsyth" label="Neil Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404824" start="42985" end="43016" title="Dundee International Book Prize" label="Dundee International Book Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q981978" start="43218" end="43236" title="William McGonagall" label="William McGonagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q819652" start="44246" end="44259" title="mountain film" label="mountain film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265526" start="44272" end="44296" title="Dundee Contemporary Arts" label="Dundee Contemporary Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153108" start="44512" end="44521" title="Multiplex (movie theater)" label="Multiplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127470" start="44531" end="44536" title="Odeon Cinemas" label="Odeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120901" start="44541" end="44550" title="Cineworld" label="Cineworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="44613" end="44622" title="repertory" label="repertory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34975" start="44694" end="44703" title="Brian Cox (actor)" label="Brian Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041283" start="44734" end="44758" title="Dundee Repertory Theatre" label="Dundee Repertory Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476349" start="44800" end="44822" title="Scottish Dance Theatre" label="Scottish Dance Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q230752" start="45020" end="45030" title="auditorium" label="auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933232" start="45036" end="45046" title="Caird Hall" label="Caird Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715400" start="45091" end="45106" title="James Key Caird" label="James Key Caird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002502" start="45147" end="45180" title="Royal Scottish National Orchestra" label="Royal Scottish National Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="45272" end="45276" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="45289" end="45294" title="Blues" label="Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358839" start="45329" end="45341" title="Royal National Mòd" label="National Mod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047954" start="45415" end="45445" title="BBC Radio 1&amp;#x27;s Big Weekend" label="BBC Radio 1&amp;#x27;s Big Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="45537" end="45554" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="45696" end="45705" title="soul-funk" label="soul-funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q583556" start="45713" end="45731" title="Average White Band" label="Average White Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q743137" start="45737" end="45747" title="Associates (band)" label="Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492690" start="45758" end="45769" title="Spare Snare" label="Spare Snare"/>
<link wikidata="Q365099" start="45771" end="45783" title="Danny Wilson (band)" label="Danny Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739097" start="45785" end="45800" title="the Hazey Janes" label="the Hazey Janes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="45810" end="45820" title="Indie rock" label="Indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q578954" start="45827" end="45835" title="The View (band)" label="the View"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746381" start="45840" end="45847" title="The Law (Scotland band)" label="the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406284" start="45900" end="45913" title="Michael Marra" label="Michael Marra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431654" start="45945" end="45955" title="Ricky Ross (musician)" label="Ricky Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180767" start="45959" end="45970" title="Deacon Blue" label="Deacon Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q230601" start="45993" end="46004" title="KT Tunstall" label="KT Tunstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756622" start="46030" end="46051" title="High School of Dundee" label="High School of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q188407" start="46135" end="46146" title="Snow Patrol" label="Snow Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="46177" end="46197" title="University of Dundee" label="University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q223741" start="46199" end="46210" title="Brian Molko" label="Brian Molko"/>
<link wikidata="Q484839" start="46227" end="46234" title="Placebo (band)" label="Placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655492" start="46263" end="46274" title="Ian Cussick" label="Ian Cussick"/>
<link wikidata="Q249363" start="46286" end="46290" title="Lake (German band)" label="Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="46335" end="46340" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="46574" end="46583" title="The Beano" label="The Beano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728848" start="46597" end="46606" title="The Dandy" label="The Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758095" start="46623" end="46644" title="The Press and Journal" label="The Press and Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q681822" start="46685" end="46697" title="BBC Scotland" label="BBC Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113389" start="46758" end="46767" title="STV North" label="STV North"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394869" start="47018" end="47033" title="STV News at Six" label="STV News at Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516431" start="47334" end="47340" title="Tay FM" label="Tay FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516429" start="47408" end="47446" title="Greatest Hits Radio Tayside &amp;amp; Fife" label="Greatest Hits Radio Tayside &amp;amp; Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566761" start="47688" end="47696" title="Wave 102" label="Wave 102"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="47718" end="47739" title="The Discovery Channel" label="The Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102508" start="47931" end="47954" title="Original 106 (Scotland)" label="Original 106 (Scotland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q458148" start="48085" end="48092" title="Law, Dundee" label="The Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765455" start="48101" end="48113" title="Firth of Tay" label="Firth of Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123071" start="48157" end="48168" title="City Centre, Dundee" label="City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="48188" end="48196" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="48197" end="48206" title="Hill Fort" label="Hill Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="48319" end="48330" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="48364" end="48375" title="Land reclamation" label="reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q489413" start="48575" end="48598" title="HMS Unicorn (1824)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Unicorn&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054700" start="48607" end="48627" title="North Carr Lightship" label="North Carr Lightship"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="48635" end="48648" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Captain Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q82257" start="48656" end="48681" title="RRS Discovery" label="RRS &amp;quot;Discovery&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="48729" end="48733" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006170" start="49036" end="49048" title="William Burn" label="William Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942416" start="49195" end="49229" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Dundee" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="49240" end="49264" title="George Gilbert Scott" label="Sir George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942304" start="49346" end="49373" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Dundee" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443265" start="49476" end="49488" title="Rough Wooing" label="Rough Wooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435675" start="49622" end="49638" title="Scotland in the Early Modern Era" label="Early Modern Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="49855" end="49861" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367426" start="49862" end="49876" title="George Wishart" label="George Wishart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522655" start="50013" end="50032" title="Gardyne&amp;#x27;s Land, Dundee" label="Gardyne&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740747" start="50072" end="50081" title="The Howff" label="The Howff"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="50265" end="50275" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838974" start="50380" end="50392" title="Mains Castle" label="Mains Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311750" start="50482" end="50496" title="Dudhope Castle" label="Dudhope Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812387" start="50620" end="50636" title="Claypotts Castle" label="Claypotts Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278449" start="50742" end="50757" title="Broughty Castle" label="Broughty Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640586" start="50853" end="50872" title="Anglo-Scottish Wars" label="Anglo-Scottish Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508780" start="50881" end="50907" title="Scotland in the Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236933" start="51042" end="51055" title="Powrie Castle" label="Powrie Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756622" start="51182" end="51203" title="High School of Dundee" label="High School of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911570" start="51299" end="51313" title="Morgan Academy" label="Morgan Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229358" start="51357" end="51373" title="John Dick Peddie" label="John Dick Peddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028320" start="51688" end="51704" title="Camperdown Works" label="Camperdown Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249005" start="51982" end="52002" title="University of Dundee" label="University of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080843" start="52646" end="52660" title="Charles McKean" label="Charles McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="52906" end="52914" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q335483" start="52922" end="52928" title="Dundee F.C." label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192873" start="52951" end="52964" title="Dundee United F.C." label="Dundee United"/>
<link wikidata="Q14377162" start="53053" end="53073" title="Scottish Premiership" label="Scottish Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q615561" start="53089" end="53109" title="the ScotFoam Stadium" label="the ScotFoam Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q777672" start="53114" end="53128" title="Tannadice Park" label="Tannadice Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023621" start="53220" end="53232" title="Dundee derby" label="Dundee derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q728383" start="53361" end="53373" title="European Champion Clubs&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="53405" end="53415" title="A.C. Milan" label="A.C. Milan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53419" end="53423" title="European Cup 1962-63#Semi finals" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="53450" end="53459" title="A.S. Roma" label="A.S. Roma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53463" end="53467" title="European Cup 1983-84#Semi-finals" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53542" end="53546" title="Inter-Cities Fairs Cup 1967-68#Semifinals" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53600" end="53604" title="UEFA Cup 1986-87#Final" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314828" start="53662" end="53678" title="Dundee North End F.C." label="Dundee North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328190" start="53680" end="53692" title="East Craigie F.C." label="East Craigie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665084" start="53694" end="53705" title="Lochee Harp F.C." label="Lochee Harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665085" start="53707" end="53720" title="Lochee United F.C." label="Lochee United"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834035" start="53722" end="53735" title="Dundee Violet F.C." label="Dundee Violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975857" start="53737" end="53754" title="Broughty Athletic F.C." label="Broughty Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303147" start="53759" end="53768" title="Downfield F.C." label="Downfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q164126" start="53790" end="53802" title="Dundee Stars" label="Dundee Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="53813" end="53823" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265539" start="53842" end="53858" title="Dundee Ice Arena" label="Dundee Ice Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q642975" start="53880" end="53892" title="Elite Ice Hockey League" label="Elite League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330783" start="53900" end="53916" title="2010–11 EIHL season" label="2010/2011 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q951062" start="54357" end="54371" title="Dundee Rockets" label="Dundee Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125188" start="54389" end="54413" title="Scottish National League (ice hockey)" label="Scottish National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="54459" end="54470" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128070" start="54478" end="54510" title="Dundee HSFP" label="Dundee High School Former Pupils"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437871" start="54519" end="54556" title="Scottish National League Division One" label="Scottish National League Division One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019396" start="54640" end="54665" title="Caledonia Regional League" label="Caledonia Regional League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993693" start="54668" end="54685" title="Harris Academy RFC" label="Harris Academy FP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911569" start="54718" end="54735" title="Morgan Academy FP RFC" label="Morgan Academy FP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966518" start="54740" end="54747" title="Panmure RFC" label="Panmure"/>
<link wikidata="Q261792" start="54880" end="54892" title="Liz McColgan" label="Liz McColgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349528" start="54897" end="54912" title="Eilish McColgan" label="Eilish McColgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314820" start="55054" end="55074" title="Dundee Handball Club" label="Dundee Handball Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q206763" start="55184" end="55193" title="Floorball" label="Floorball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314822" start="55248" end="55265" title="Dundee Hurricanes" label="Dundee Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q115812820" start="55267" end="55286" title="Dundee Roller Derby" label="Dundee Roller Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q111853581" start="55351" end="55373" title="Olympia Leisure Centre (2013)" label="Olympia Leisure Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017652" start="55435" end="55455" title="Caird Park Velodrome" label="Caird Park Velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438022" start="55538" end="55552" title="Scottish Water" label="Scottish Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839836" start="55635" end="55644" title="Backwater Reservoir" label="Backwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331094" start="55659" end="55668" title="River Isla, Perthshire" label="Glen Isla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437783" start="55701" end="55724" title="Scottish Hydro Electric" label="Scottish Hydro Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q493854" start="55742" end="55770" title="Scottish and Southern Energy" label="Scottish and Southern Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28528294" start="55810" end="55829" title="Dundee City Council" label="Dundee City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="55989" end="56000" title="Compostable" label="Compostable"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="56851" end="56861" title="Health care" label="Healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954176" start="56889" end="56900" title="NHS Tayside" label="NHS Tayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038594" start="56902" end="56920" title="Ninewells Hospital" label="Ninewells Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411102" start="57054" end="57080" title="Scottish Ambulance Service" label="Scottish Ambulance Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437729" start="57204" end="57236" title="Scottish Fire and Rescue Service" label="Scottish Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="57448" end="57455" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="57473" end="57478" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="57497" end="57507" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999" start="57532" end="57540" title="Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q214178" start="57559" end="57565" title="Nablus" label="Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="57586" end="57591" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260662" start="57623" end="57634" title="West Dundee, Illinois" label="West Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="57740" end="57759" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q337783" start="57791" end="57804" title="William Arrol" label="William Arrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q171421" start="57814" end="57834" title="Henry Morton Stanley" label="Henry Morton Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q775821" start="57844" end="57860" title="William Harcourt (politician)" label="William Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244539" start="57870" end="57883" title="John Leng (politician)" label="Sir John Leng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386012" start="57893" end="57906" title="Whitelaw Reid" label="Whitelaw Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="57916" end="57929" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180941" start="57975" end="57996" title="David Middleton Greig" label="David Middleton Greig"/>
<link wikidata="Q50059163" start="58006" end="58019" title="Agnes Husband" label="Agnes Husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q255340" start="58029" end="58044" title="Tom Johnston (British politician)" label="Thomas Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="58054" end="58086" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577032" start="58096" end="58111" title="List of provosts of Dundee" label="Maurice McManus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="58121" end="58135" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q36740" start="58155" end="58171" title="Aung San Suu Kyi" label="Aung San Suu Kyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="58181" end="58197" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="58200" end="58215" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310998" start="58243" end="58255" title="Jim McLean" label="James McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568897" start="58284" end="58321" title="Black Watch" label="Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971662" start="58347" end="58367" title="Brittle Bone Society" label="Brittle Bone Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834024" start="58414" end="58440" title="Dundee Museum of Transport" label="Dundee Museum of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58443" end="58513" title="History of Dundee#Notable Dundonians and people associated with Dundee" label="History of Dundee#Notable Dundonians and people associated with Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718649" start="58516" end="58533" title="Alexander Crawford Lamb" label="Alexander C. Lamb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8829" wikidata="Q613171" url="?curid=8829" title="Do Not Adjust Your Set">
<text>Do Not Adjust Your Set is a British television series produced originally by Rediffusion, London, and then by the fledgling Thames Television for British commercial television channel ITV from 26 December 1967 to 14 May 1969. The show took its name from the message (frequently seen on the TV screen in those days) that was displayed when there was a problem with transmission or technical difficulties.

It helped launch the careers of Denise Coffey, David Jason, Eric Idle, Terry Jones and Michael Palin; the last three became members of the Monty Python comedy troupe soon afterward. Although originally conceived as a children&#x27;s programme, it quickly acquired a fandom amongst adults, including future Python members John Cleese and Graham Chapman.

The Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band, a satirical comedy/art/pop group, also performed songs in each programme and frequently appeared as extras in sketches. The programme itself comprised a series of satirical sketches, often presented in a surreal, absurd and discontinuous style – anticipating &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot;, which began five months after the last episode of &quot;Do Not Adjust Your Set&quot;. Several surreal animations between sketches were crafted for the second series by Terry Gilliam, who soon graduated to &quot;Python&quot; along with Palin, Jones and Idle.

One recurring feature of the show was &quot;Captain Fantastic&quot;, a superhero parody featuring David Jason in farcical and morbid adventures against villainess Mrs. Black (Coffey). These segments were shot entirely on location in London. The feature was so popular with the young audience that after &quot;Do Not Adjust Your Set&quot; itself ended, &quot;Captain Fantastic&quot; briefly continued in its own capacity in the children&#x27;s magazine show &quot;Magpie&quot;.

Only 14 of the original 29 episodes currently exist.

== Awards ==
In June 1968, an episode of &quot;Do Not Adjust Your Set&quot; was submitted to the 1968 Prix Jeunesse International Television Festival in Munich. It won first prize in the 12–15 years category.

==Home media==
Nine of the 14 episodes from the first (Rediffusion) series were released on DVD in the UK and the US on 25 August 2005. Both releases use the same NTSC Region 0 discs made from telerecordings of the original videotapes. In this DVD release, the episodes are numbered 1 to 9, although, in fact, they are episodes 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14 from series 1 (a similar fault was made on the release of &quot;At Last the 1948 Show&quot;). The sole surviving episode from series 2 and &quot;Do Not Adjust Your Stocking&quot; were not included. Contrary to claims on the packaging, Terry Gilliam&#x27;s animations also do not appear on this release, although Gilliam does appear as one of the additional writers in the credits for episodes 3 and 4. The Bonzo Dog Doo Dah Band was seen playing their song &quot;Death Cab for Cutie&quot; (also performed in the Beatles&#x27; film &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;) on the DVD in episode 7.

On 16 September 2019, the British Film Institute released a comprehensive DVD set of the surviving videos and animations from both series. It includes the previously missing fourth episode of the first series, which was rediscovered (but only after the earlier DVD release) when it was noticed that a copy had been sent to the jury of the Prix de Jeunesse award. This edition survives as a domestic recording on a Phillips 1500 cassette made by Thames Television in 1976, which was discovered by Kaleidoscope in 2015, when a copy was returned from Munich. It is thus the only series 1 episode with magnetic rather than optical sound quality. The BFI release features episodes with their original numbering. They include the Christmas special and some Terry Gilliam animations (restored from his own masters) that appeared in otherwise lost episodes.

==Episodes==

===Christmas Special (1967)===
The very first episode, an introductory special meant for Boxing Day 1967, was accidentally switched with the first regular episode in all regions except for London.

===Series 1 (1968)===
The first series was produced by Rediffusion, thirteen episodes were broadcast from 26 December 1967 to 28 March 1968, on Thursdays at 17:25. Three episodes from this series are currently missing from the archives, nine episodes survive as telerecordings and a further edition &quot;(Episode 4)&quot; survives on a domestic tape recording. Several cast changes occurred over the course of this series, Tim Brooke-Taylor filled in for Michael Palin for the studio recording for Episode 9, as the latter was having his appendix removed. The following edition, Neil Innes was absent from the taping since he had the flu, so Eric Idle filled in for him when performing the vocals/ piano parts for the Bonzo&#x27;s musical number &quot;&#x27;Love is a Cylindrical Piano&#x27;&quot;. 

===Specials (1968)===
A summer special was broadcast on 29 July 1968. It was the last episode to be produced by Rediffusion, since it was transmitted on their final day of broadcasting before Thames Television took over as the franchise holder for the London region (weekdays only) the following day. The Christmas special was the first episode to be produced by Thames. For a 1986 repeat, David Jason demanded to be removed from the show, thus creating an abridged version of 25 minutes. This edition was also notable for featuring the first animated sketch by Terry Gilliam, who would go on to contribute further material for the subsequent series. 

===Series 2 (1969)===
The second and final series, thirteen episodes were broadcast from 19 February 1969 to 14 May 1969, on Wednesdays at 17:20. Most of the episodes from this series are currently missing from the archives, although audio recordings survive from several missing episodes Only Episode 2 survives intact, it&#x27;s also the only episode from the entire series run to exist on its original 2&quot; master videotape. Animated sequences by Terry Gilliam including &quot;&#x27;Beware of the Elephants&#x27;&quot; and &quot;&#x27;Learning to Live with an Elephant&#x27;&quot; also exist on b&amp;w 35mm film. 

== References ==
== Sources ==
*

==External links==
*BFI Screenonline Article
*A Review of Do Not Adjust Your Set!
* &quot;Do Not Adjust Your Set&quot; at British Comedy Guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4809145" start="77" end="96" title="Associated-Rediffusion" label="Rediffusion, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q541667" start="124" end="141" title="Thames Television" label="Thames Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="184" end="187" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257639" start="437" end="450" title="Denise Coffey" label="Denise Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q964329" start="452" end="463" title="David Jason" label="David Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q210741" start="465" end="474" title="Eric Idle" label="Eric Idle"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="476" end="487" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q223985" start="492" end="505" title="Michael Palin" label="Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="544" end="556" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="726" end="737" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962" start="742" end="756" title="Graham Chapman" label="Graham Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q205356" start="763" end="785" title="Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band" label="Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225114" start="789" end="798" title="Political satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="1052" end="1085" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25078" start="1261" end="1274" title="Terry Gilliam" label="Terry Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036634" start="1396" end="1413" title="Captain Fantastic (TV series)" label="Captain Fantastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="1423" end="1432" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="1465" end="1473" title="farcical" label="farcical"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="1504" end="1514" title="villainess" label="villainess"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732400" start="1809" end="1827" title="Magpie (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Magpie&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="2037" end="2043" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="2257" end="2261" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630352" start="2287" end="2300" title="telerecording" label="telerecording"/>
<link wikidata="Q752945" start="2521" end="2542" title="At Last the 1948 Show" label="At Last the 1948 Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704300" start="2920" end="2939" title="Death Cab for Cutie (song)" label="Death Cab for Cutie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="2965" end="2976" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q901203" start="2994" end="3014" title="Magical Mystery Tour (film)" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="3074" end="3096" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q541667" start="3493" end="3510" title="Thames Television" label="Thames Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="4002" end="4012" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q914201" start="4535" end="4552" title="Tim Brooke-Taylor" label="Tim Brooke-Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9656" start="4650" end="4658" title="Appendix (anatomy)" label="appendix"/>
<link wikidata="Q918538" start="4691" end="4701" title="Neil Innes" label="Neil Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969829" start="6344" end="6364" title="British Comedy Guide" label="British Comedy Guide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8832" wikidata="Q775538" url="?curid=8832" title="West Memphis Three">
<text>The West Memphis Three are three freed men convicted as teenagers in 1994 of the 1993 murders of three boys in West Memphis, Arkansas, United States. Damien Echols was sentenced to death, Jessie Misskelley Jr. to life imprisonment plus two 20-year sentences, and Jason Baldwin to life imprisonment. During the trial, the prosecution asserted that the juveniles killed the children as part of a Satanic ritual.

Due to the dubious nature of the evidence, the lack of physical evidence connecting the men to the crime, and the suspected presence of emotional bias in court, the case generated widespread controversy and was the subject of several documentaries. Celebrities and musicians held fundraisers to support efforts to free the men.

In July 2007, new forensic evidence was presented. A report jointly issued by the state and the defense team stated, &quot;Although most of the genetic material recovered from the scene was attributable to the victims of the offenses, some of it cannot be attributed to either the victims or the defendants.&quot;

Following a 2010 decision by the Arkansas Supreme Court regarding newly produced DNA evidence and potential juror misconduct, the West Memphis Three negotiated a plea bargain with prosecutors. On August 19, 2011, they entered Alford pleas, which allowed them to assert their innocence while acknowledging that prosecutors have enough evidence to convict them. Judge David Laser accepted the pleas and sentenced the three to time served. They were released with 10-year suspended sentences, having served 18 years.

==The crime==
On May 5, 1993, three eight-year-old boys (Steve Branch, Michael Moore, and Christopher Byers) were reported missing in West Memphis, Arkansas. The first report to the police was made by Byers&#x27;s adoptive father, John Mark Byers, around 7:00 pm. The boys were allegedly last seen together by three neighbors, who in affidavits told of seeing them playing together around 6:30 pm the evening they disappeared and seeing Terry Hobbs, Steve Branch&#x27;s stepfather, calling them to come home. Initial police searches made that night were limited. Friends and neighbors also conducted a search that night, which included a cursory visit to the location where the bodies were later found.

A more thorough police search for the children began around 8:00 am on May 6, led by the Crittenden County Search and Rescue personnel. Searchers canvassed all of West Memphis but focused primarily on Robin Hood Hills, where the boys were reported last seen. Despite a shoulder-to-shoulder search of Robin Hood Hills by a human chain, searchers found no sign of the missing boys.

Around 1:45 pm, juvenile Parole Officer Steve Jones spotted a boy&#x27;s black shoe floating in a muddy creek that led to a major drainage canal in Robin Hood Hills. A subsequent search of the ditch revealed the bodies of three boys. They had been stripped naked and were hogtied with their own shoelaces, their right ankles tied to their right wrists behind their backs, the same with their left arms and legs. Their clothing was found in the creek, some of it twisted around sticks that had been thrust into the muddy ditch bed. The clothing was mostly turned inside-out; two pairs of the boys&#x27; underwear were never recovered. Christopher Byers had lacerations to various parts of his body and mutilation of his scrotum and penis.

The autopsies by forensic pathologist Frank J. Peretti indicated that Byers died of &quot;multiple injuries&quot;, while Moore and Branch died of &quot;multiple injuries with drowning&quot;.

Police initially suspected the boys had been raped; however, later expert testimony disputed this finding. Trace amounts of sperm DNA were found on a pair of pants recovered from the scene. Prosecution experts claim Byers&#x27;s wounds were the results of a knife attack and that he had been purposely castrated by the murderer; defense experts claim the injuries were most likely the result of post-mortem animal predation. Police believed the boys were assaulted and killed at the location where they were found; critics argued that the assault, at least, was unlikely to have occurred at the creek.

Byers was the only victim with drugs in his system; he was prescribed Ritalin (methylphenidate) in January 1993 as part of treatment of an attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. The initial autopsy report describes the drug as Carbamazepine and the dosage at a sub-therapeutic level. His father said Byers may not have taken his prescription on May 5, 1993.

==Victims==


Steve Edward Branch, Christopher Byers and Michael Moore were all second graders at Weaver Elementary School. Each had achieved the rank of &quot;Wolf&quot; in the local Cub Scout pack and were best friends.

===Steve Edward Branch===
Steve Branch was the son of Steven and Pamela Branch, who divorced when he was an infant. His mother was awarded custody and later married Terry Hobbs. Branch was eight years old, 4 ft. 2 tall, weighed 65 lbs, and had blond hair. He was last seen wearing blue jeans and a white T-shirt, and riding a black and red bicycle. He was an honor student. He lived with his mother, Pamela Hobbs, his stepfather, Terry Hobbs, and a four-year-old half-sister, Amanda. Steve Edward Branch is buried in Mount Zion Cemetery in Steele, Missouri.

===Christopher Mark Byers===
Christopher Byers was born to Melissa DeFir and Ricky Murray. His parents divorced when he was four years old and shortly afterward his mother married John Mark Byers, who adopted the boy. Byers was eight years old, 4 ft. tall, weighed 52 lbs, and had light brown hair. He was last seen wearing blue jeans, dark shoes, and a white long-sleeved shirt. He lived with his mother, Sharon Melissa Byers, his adoptive father, John Mark Byers, and his stepbrother, Shawn Ryan Clark, aged 13. According to his mother, Christopher was a typical eight-year-old. &quot;He still believed in the Easter Bunny and Santa Claus&quot;. Christopher Mark Byers is buried in Forest Hill Cemetery East in Memphis, Tennessee.

===James Michael Moore===
Michael Moore was the son of Todd and Dana Moore. He was eight years old, 4 ft. 2 tall, weighed 55 lbs, and had brown hair. He was last seen wearing blue pants, a blue Boy Scouts of America shirt, and an orange and blue Boy Scout hat, and riding a light green bicycle. Moore enjoyed wearing his scout uniform even when he was not at meetings. He was considered the leader of the three. He lived with his parents and his nine-year-old sister, Dawn. James Michael Moore is buried in Crittenden Memorial Park Cemetery in Marion, Arkansas.

===Victims memorial===
In 1994, a memorial was erected for the three murder victims. The memorial is located in the playground of Weaver Elementary School in West Memphis, where all three victims were second graders at the time of the crime. In May 2013, for the 20th anniversary of the slayings, Weaver Elementary School principal Sheila Grissom raised funds to refurbish the memorial.

==Suspects==

===Baldwin, Echols, and Misskelley===

At the time of their arrests, Jessie Misskelley Jr. was 17 years old, Jason Baldwin was 16 years old, and Damien Echols was 18 years old.

Baldwin and Echols had been previously arrested for vandalism and shoplifting respectively, and Misskelley had a reputation for his temper and for engaging in fistfights with other teenagers at school. Misskelley and Echols had dropped out of high school; however, Baldwin earned high grades and demonstrated a talent for drawing and sketching, and was encouraged by one of his teachers to study graphic design in college. Echols and Baldwin were close friends, and bonded over their similar tastes in music and fiction, and over their shared distaste for the prevailing cultural climate of West Memphis, situated in the Bible Belt. Echols and Baldwin were acquainted with Misskelley from school, but were not close friends with him.

Echols&#x27; family was poor, received frequent visits from social workers and he rarely attended school. He and a girlfriend had run off and later broken into a trailer during a rain storm; they were arrested, though only Echols was charged with burglary.

Echols spent several months in a mental institution in Arkansas and afterward received &quot;full disability&quot; status from the Social Security Administration. During Echols&#x27; trial, Dr. George W. Woods testified (for the defense) that Echols suffered from:

serious mental illness characterized by grandiose and persecutory delusions, auditory and visual hallucinations, disordered thought processes, substantial lack of insight, and chronic, incapacitating mood swings.

At his death penalty sentencing hearing, Echols&#x27; psychologist reported that months before the murders, Echols had claimed that he obtained super powers by drinking human blood. At the time of his arrest, Echols was working part-time with a roofing company and expecting a child with his girlfriend, Domini Teer.

===Chris Morgan and Brian Holland===
Early in the investigation, the WMPD briefly regarded two West Memphis teenagers as suspects. Chris Morgan and Brian Holland, both with drug offense histories, had abruptly departed for Oceanside, California, four days after the bodies were discovered. Morgan was presumed to be at least casually familiar with all three murdered boys, having previously driven an ice cream truck route in their neighborhood.

Arrested in Oceanside on May 17, 1993, Morgan and Holland both took polygraph exams administered by California police. Examiners reported that both men&#x27;s charts indicated deception when they denied involvement in the murders. During subsequent questioning, Morgan claimed a long history of drug and alcohol use, along with blackouts and memory lapses. He claimed that he &quot;might have&quot; killed the victims but quickly recanted this part of his statement.

California police sent blood and urine samples from Morgan and Holland to the WMPD, but there is no indication WMPD investigated Morgan or Holland as suspects following their arrest in California. The relevance of Morgan&#x27;s recanted statement would later be debated in trial, but it was eventually barred from admission as evidence.

===&quot;Mr. Bojangles&quot;===

The sighting of a black male as a possible alternate suspect was implied during the beginning of the Misskelley trial. According to local West Memphis police officers, on the evening of May 5, 1993, at 8:42 pm, workers in the Bojangles&#x27; restaurant located about a mile from the crime scene in Robin Hood Hills reported seeing a black male who seemed &quot;mentally disoriented&quot; inside the restaurant&#x27;s ladies&#x27; room. The man was bleeding and had brushed against the restroom walls. Officer Regina Meeks responded to the call, taking the restaurant manager&#x27;s report through the eatery&#x27;s drive-through window. By then, the man had left, and police did not enter the restroom on that date.

The day after the victims&#x27; bodies were found, Bojangles&#x27; manager Marty King, thinking there was a possible connection to the bleeding man found in the bathroom, reported the incident to police officers who then inspected the ladies&#x27; room. The man reportedly wore a &quot;blue cast type brace on his arm that had white Velcro on it&quot;, which would have made it difficult to tie up and murder three young boys. King gave the officers a pair of sunglasses he thought the man had left behind, and the detectives took some blood samples from the walls and tiles of the restroom. Police detective Bryn Ridge testified that he later lost those blood scrapings. A hair identified as belonging to a black male was later recovered from a sheet wrapped around one of the victims.

==Investigation==
===Evidence and interviews===
Police officers James Sudbury and Steve Jones felt that the crime had &quot;cult&quot; overtones, and that Damien Echols might be a suspect because he had an interest in occultism, and Jones felt Echols was capable of murdering children. The police interviewed Echols on May 7, two days after the bodies were discovered. During a polygraph examination, he denied any involvement. The polygraph examiner claimed that Echols&#x27; chart indicated deception. On May 9, during a formal interview by Detective Bryn Ridge, Echols mentioned that one of the victims had wounds to the genitals; law enforcement viewed this knowledge as incriminating.

No physical evidence connected Echols, Baldwin or Misskelley to the crime.

After a month had passed with little progress in the case, police continued to focus their investigation upon Echols, interrogating him more frequently than any other person. Nonetheless, they claimed he was not regarded as a direct suspect but a source of information.

On June 3, the police interrogated Jessie Misskelley Jr. Despite his reported IQ of 72 (categorizing him as borderline intellectual functioning) and his status as a minor, Misskelley was questioned alone; his parents were not present during the interrogation. Misskelley&#x27;s father gave permission for Misskelley to go with police but did not explicitly give permission for his son to be questioned or interrogated. Misskelley was questioned for roughly 12 hours. Only two segments, totaling 46 minutes, were recorded. Misskelley quickly recanted his confession, citing intimidation, coercion, fatigue, and veiled threats from police. Misskelley specifically said he was &quot;scared of the police&quot; during this confession.

Though he was informed of his Miranda rights, Misskelley later claimed he did not fully understand them. In 1996, the Arkansas Supreme Court ruled that Misskelley&#x27;s confession was voluntary and that he did, in fact, understand the Miranda warning and its consequences. Portions of Misskelley&#x27;s statements to the police were leaked to the press and reported on the front page of the Memphis &quot;Commercial Appeal&quot; before any of the trials began.

Shortly after Misskelley&#x27;s first confession, police arrested Echols and his close friend Baldwin. Eight months after his original confession, on February 17, 1994, Misskelley made another statement to police. His lawyer, Dan Stidham, remained in the room and continually advised Misskelley not to say anything. Misskelley ignored this advice and went on to detail how the boys were abused and murdered. Stidham, who was later elected to a municipal judgeship, has written a detailed critique of what he asserts are major police errors and misconceptions during their investigation. Stidham made similar comments during a radio show interview in May 2010.

The physical evidence presented at the trial of Echols and Baldwin consisted of two green threads found at the crime scene that a state witness claimed are microscopically similar to a green child&#x27;s T-shirt found in Echols&#x27;s sister&#x27;s closet, and one red rayon fiber that state witnesses said is similar to a women&#x27;s robe found in Baldwin&#x27;s home. Under further questioning, the state witness conceded that many fibers are microscopically similar to each other and that the discovery proved nothing.

===Vicki Hutcheson===
Vicki Hutcheson, a new resident of West Memphis, would play an important role in the investigation, though she would later recant her testimony, claiming her statements were fabricated due in part to coercion from police.

On May 6, 1993 (before the victims were found later the same day), Hutcheson took a polygraph exam by Detective Don Bray at the Marion Police Department, to determine whether or not she had stolen money from her West Memphis employer. Hutcheson&#x27;s young son, Aaron, was also present, and proved such a distraction that Bray was unable to administer the polygraph. Aaron, a playmate of the murdered boys&#x27;, mentioned to Bray that the boys had been killed at &quot;the playhouse.&quot; When the bodies proved to have been discovered near where Aaron indicated, Bray asked Aaron for further details, and Aaron claimed that he had witnessed the murders committed by Satanists who spoke Spanish. Aaron&#x27;s further statements were wildly inconsistent, and he was unable to identify Baldwin, Echols, or Misskelley from photo line-ups, and there was no &quot;playhouse&quot; at the location Aaron indicated. A police officer leaked portions of Aaron&#x27;s statements to the press contributing to the growing belief that the murders were part of a Satanic rite.

On or about June 1, 1993, Hutcheson agreed to police suggestions to place hidden microphones in her home during an encounter with Echols. Misskelley agreed to introduce Hutcheson to Echols. During their conversation, Hutcheson reported that Echols made no incriminating statements. Police said the recording was &quot;inaudible&quot;, but Hutcheson claimed the recording was audible. On June 2, 1993, Hutcheson told police that about two weeks after the murders were committed, she, Echols, and Misskelley attended a Wiccan meeting in Turrell, Arkansas. Hutcheson claimed that, at the Wiccan meeting, a drunken Echols openly bragged about killing the three boys. Misskelley was first questioned on June 3, 1993, a day after Hutcheson&#x27;s purported confession. Hutcheson was unable to recall the Wiccan meeting location and did not name any other participants in the purported meeting. Hutcheson was never charged with theft. She claimed she had implicated Echols and Misskelley to avoid facing criminal charges, and to obtain a reward for the discovery of the murderers.

==Trials==
Misskelley was tried separately, and Echols and Baldwin were tried together in 1994. Under the &quot;&quot;Bruton&quot; rule&quot;, Misskelley&#x27;s confession could not be admitted against his co-defendants; thus he was tried separately. All three defendants pleaded not guilty.

===Misskelley&#x27;s trial===
During Misskelley&#x27;s trial, Richard Ofshe, an expert on false confessions and police coercion, and Professor of Sociology at UC Berkeley, testified that the brief recording of Misskelley&#x27;s interrogation was a &quot;classic example&quot; of police coercion. Critics have also stated that Misskelley&#x27;s various &quot;confessions&quot; were in many respects inconsistent with each other, as well as with the particulars of the crime scene and murder victims, including (for example) an &quot;admission&quot; that Misskelley watched Damien rape one of the boys. Police had initially suspected that the victims had been raped because their anuses were dilated. However, there was no forensic evidence indicating that the murdered boys had been raped. Dilation of the anus is a normal post-mortem condition.

On February 5, 1994, Misskelley was convicted by a jury of one count of first-degree murder and two counts of second-degree murder. The court sentenced him to life plus 40 years in prison. His conviction was appealed, but the Arkansas Supreme Court affirmed the conviction.

===Echols&#x27; and Baldwin&#x27;s trial===
Three weeks later, Echols and Baldwin went on trial. The prosecution accused the three young men of committing a Satanic murder. The prosecution called Dale W. Griffis, a graduate of the unaccredited Columbia Pacific University, as an expert in the occult to testify the murders were a Satanic ritual. On March 19, 1994, Echols and Baldwin were found guilty on three counts of murder. The court sentenced Echols to death and Baldwin to life in prison.

At trial, the defense team argued that news articles from the time could have been the source for Echols&#x27; knowledge about the genital mutilation, and Echols said his knowledge was limited to what was &quot;on TV&quot;.

The prosecution claimed that Echols&#x27; knowledge was nonetheless too close to the facts, since there was no public reporting of drowning or that one victim had been mutilated more than the others. Echols testified that Detective Ridge&#x27;s description of their earlier conversation (which was not recorded) regarding those particular details was inaccurate (and indeed that some other claims by Ridge were &quot;lies&quot;). Mara Leveritt, an investigative journalist and the author of &quot;Devil&#x27;s Knot&quot;, argues that Echols&#x27; information may have come from police leaks, such as Detective Gitchell&#x27;s comments to Mark Byers, that circulated amongst the local public. The defense team objected when the prosecution attempted to question Echols about his past violent behaviors, but the defense objections were overruled.

==Aftermath==

===Criticism of the investigation===
There has been widespread criticism of the handling of the crime scene by the police. Misskelley&#x27;s former attorney Dan Stidham cites multiple substantial police errors at the crime scene, characterizing it as &quot;literally trampled, especially the creek bed.&quot; The bodies, he said, had been removed from the water before the coroner arrived to examine the scene and determine the state of rigor mortis, allowing the bodies to decay on the creek bank and to be exposed to sunlight and insects. The police did not telephone the coroner until almost two hours after the discovery of the floating shoe, resulting in a late appearance by the coroner. Officials failed to drain the creek in a timely manner and secure possible evidence in the water (the creek was sandbagged after the bodies were pulled from the water).

Stidham has called the coroner&#x27;s investigation &quot;extremely substandard.&quot; There was a small amount of blood found at the scene that was never tested. According to HBO&#x27;s documentaries &quot;Paradise Lost: The Child Murders at Robin Hood Hills&quot; (1996) and &quot;Paradise Lost 2: Revelations&quot; (2000), no blood was found at the crime scene, indicating that the location where the bodies were found was not necessarily the location where the murders actually happened. After the initial investigation, the police failed to control disclosure of information and speculation about the crime scene.

According to Leveritt, &quot;Police records were a mess. To call them disorderly would be putting it mildly.&quot; Leveritt speculated that the small local police force was overwhelmed by the crime, which was unlike any they had ever investigated. Police refused an unsolicited offer of aid and consultation from the violent crimes experts of the Arkansas State Police, and critics suggested this was due to the WMPD&#x27;s being under investigation by the Arkansas State Police for suspected theft from the Crittenden County drug task force. Leveritt further noted that some of the physical evidence was stored in paper sacks obtained from a supermarket (with the supermarket&#x27;s name printed on the bags) rather than in containers of known and controlled origin.

When police speculated about the assailant, the juvenile probation officer assisting at the scene of the murders speculated that Echols was &quot;capable&quot; of committing the murders,&quot; stating: &quot;it looks like Damien Echols finally killed someone.&quot;

Brent Turvey, a forensic scientist and criminal profiler, stated in the film &quot;Paradise Lost 2&quot; that human bite marks could have been left on at least one of the victims. However, these potential bite marks were first noticed in photographs years after the trials and were not inspected by a board-certified medical examiner until four years after the murders. The defense&#x27;s expert testified that the mark in question was not an adult bite mark, while experts put on by the State concluded that there was no bite mark at all. The State&#x27;s experts had examined the actual bodies for any marks, and others conducted expert photo analysis of injuries. Upon further examination, it was concluded that if these marks were bite marks, they did not match the teeth of any of the three convicted.

==Appeals and new evidence==
In May 1994, the three defendants appealed their convictions; the convictions were upheld on direct appeal. In June 1996, Misskelley&#x27;s lawyer, Dan Stidham, was preparing an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.

In 2007, Echols petitioned for a retrial, based on a statute permitting post-conviction testing of DNA evidence due to technological advances made since 1994 which might provide exoneration for the wrongfully convicted. The petition failed when the original trial judge, Judge David Burnett, disallowed presentation of this information in his court. This ruling was in turn thrown out by the Arkansas Supreme Court as to all three defendants on November 4, 2010.

===John Mark Byers&#x27; knife (1993)===
John Mark Byers, the adoptive father of victim Christopher Byers, gave a knife to cameraman Doug Cooper, who was working with documentary makers Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky while filming the first &quot;Paradise Lost&quot; feature. The knife was a folding hunting knife manufactured by Kershaw. According to the statements given by Berlinger and Sinofsky, Cooper informed them of his receipt of the knife on December 19, 1993. After the documentary crew returned to New York, Berlinger and Sinofsky were reported to have discovered what appeared to be blood on the knife. HBO executives ordered them to return the knife to the West Memphis Police Department. The knife was not received at the West Memphis Police Department until January 8, 1994.

Byers initially claimed the knife had never been used. However, after blood was found on the knife, Byers stated that he had used it only once, to cut deer meat. When told the blood matched both his and Chris&#x27; blood type, Byers said he had no idea how that blood might have gotten on the knife. During interrogation, West Memphis police suggested to Byers that he might have left the knife out accidentally, and Byers agreed with this. Byers later stated that he may have cut his thumb. Further testing of the knife produced inconclusive results about the source of the blood. Uncertainty remained due to the small amount of blood and because both John Mark Byers and Chris Byers had the same HLA-DQα genotype.

Byers agreed to and passed a polygraph test about the murders during the filming of &quot;Paradise Lost 2: Revelations&quot;, but the documentary indicated that Byers was under the influence of several psychoactive prescription medications that could have affected the test results.

===Possible teeth imprints (1996–1997)===
Following their convictions, Echols, Misskelley, and Baldwin submitted imprints of their teeth. These were compared to the alleged bite marks on Stevie Branch&#x27;s forehead that had not been mentioned in the original autopsy or trial. No matches were found. John Mark Byers had his teeth removed in 1997, after the first trial but before an imprint could be made. His stated reasons for the removal are apparently contradictory. He has claimed both that the seizure medication he was taking caused periodontal disease, and that he planned the removal because of other kinds of dental problems which had troubled him for years.

After an expert examined autopsy photos and noted what he thought might be the imprint of a belt buckle on Byers&#x27; corpse, the elder Byers revealed to the police that he had spanked his stepson shortly before the boy disappeared.

===Vicki Hutcheson&#x27;s recantation (2003)===
In October 2003, Vicki Hutcheson, who had played a part in the arrests of Misskelley, Echols, and Baldwin, gave an interview to the &quot;Arkansas Times&quot; in which she stated that every word she had given to the police was a fabrication. She further asserted that the police had implied that if she did not cooperate with them they would take away her child. She said that when she visited the police station, employees had photographs of Echols, Baldwin, and Misskelley on the wall and were using them as dart targets. She also claims that an audiotape the police said was &quot;unintelligible&quot; (and that they eventually lost) was perfectly clear and contained no incriminating statements.
===DNA testing and new physical evidence (2007)===
In 2007, DNA collected from the crime scene was tested. None was found to match DNA from Echols, Baldwin, or Misskelley. A hair &quot;not inconsistent with&quot; Stevie Branch&#x27;s stepfather, Terry Hobbs, was found tied into the knots used to bind one of the victims. The prosecutors, while conceding that no DNA evidence tied the accused to the crime scene, said: &quot;The State stands behind its convictions of Echols and his codefendants.&quot; Pamela Hobbs&#x27; May 5, 2009, declaration in the United States District Court, Eastern District of Arkansas, Western Division, indicates that &quot;one hair was consistent with the hair of [Terry&#x27;s] friend, David Jacoby&quot; (Point 16), and:

In 2013, written statements from two men, Billy Wayne Stewart and Bennie Guy, were introduced in the court. They both claimed to have had information on the case linking Terry Hobbs to the murders, but were ignored by police initially.

===Foreman and jury misconduct (2008)===
In July 2008, it was revealed that Kent Arnold, the jury foreman on the Echols–Baldwin trial, had discussed the case with an attorney prior to the beginning of deliberations. Arnold was accused of advocating for the guilt of the West Memphis Three and sharing knowledge of inadmissible evidence, like the Jessie Misskelley statements, with other jurors. At the time, legal experts agreed that this issue could result in the reversal of the convictions of Jason Baldwin and Damien Echols.

In September 2008, attorney (now judge) Daniel Stidham, who represented Misskelley in 1994, testified at a postconviction relief hearing. Stidham testified under oath that during the trial, Judge David Burnett erred by making an improper communication with the jury during its deliberations. Stidham overheard Judge Burnett discuss taking a lunch break with the jury foreman and heard the foreman reply that the jury was almost finished. He testified that Judge Burnett responded, &quot;You&#x27;ll need food for when you come back for sentencing,&quot; and that the foreman asked in return what would happen if the defendant was acquitted. Stidham said the judge closed the door without answering. He testified that his own failure to put this incident on the court record and his failure to meet the minimum requirements in state law to represent a defendant in a capital murder case was evidence of ineffective assistance of counsel and that Misskelley&#x27;s conviction should therefore be vacated.

===Request for retrial (2007–2010)===
On October 29, 2007, papers were filed in federal court by Echols&#x27;s defense lawyers seeking a retrial or his immediate release from prison. The filing cited DNA evidence linking Terry Hobbs (stepfather of one of the victims) to the crime scene, and new statements from Hobbs&#x27; now ex-wife. Also presented in the filing was new expert testimony that the supposed knife marks on the victims, including the injuries to Byers&#x27; genitals, were in fact the result of animal predation after the bodies had been dumped.

On September 10, 2008, Circuit Court Judge David Burnett denied the request for a retrial, citing the DNA tests as inconclusive. That ruling was appealed to the Arkansas Supreme Court, which heard oral arguments in the case on September 30, 2010.

===Arkansas Supreme Court ruling (2010)===
On November 4, 2010, the Arkansas Supreme Court ordered a lower judge to consider whether newly analyzed DNA evidence might exonerate the three. The justices also instructed the lower court to examine claims of misconduct by the jurors who sentenced Damien Echols to death and Jessie Misskelley and Jason Baldwin to life in prison.

In early December 2010, David Burnett was elected to the Arkansas State Senate. Circuit Court Judge David Laser was selected to replace David Burnett and preside in the evidentiary hearings mandated by the successful appeal.

===Plea deal and release (2011)===
After weeks of negotiations, on August 19, 2011, Echols, Baldwin and Misskelley were released from prison as part of a plea deal, making the hearings ordered by the Arkansas Supreme Court unnecessary. The three entered into Alford plea deals. Stephen Braga, an attorney with Ropes &amp; Gray who took up Echols&#x27;s defense on a &quot;pro bono&quot; basis beginning in 2009, negotiated the plea agreement with prosecutors.

Under the deal, Judge David Laser vacated the previous convictions, including the capital murder convictions for Echols and Baldwin, and ordered a new trial. Each man then entered an Alford plea to lesser charges of first- and second-degree murder while verbally stating their innocence. Judge Laser then sentenced them to time served, a total of 18 years and 78 days, and they were each given a suspended imposition of sentence for 10 years. If they re-offend they can be sent back to prison for 21 years.

Factors cited by prosecutor Scott Ellington for agreeing to the plea deal included that two of the victims&#x27; families had joined the cause of the defense, that the mother of a witness who testified about Echols&#x27;s confession had questioned her daughter&#x27;s truthfulness, and that the State Crime Lab employee who collected fiber evidence at the Echols and Baldwin homes after their arrests had died. As part of the plea deal, the three men cannot pursue civil action against the state for wrongful imprisonment.

Many of the men&#x27;s supporters, and opponents who still believe them guilty, were unhappy with the unusual plea deal. In 2011, supporters pushed Arkansas Governor Mike Beebe to pardon Echols, Baldwin, and Misskelley based on their innocence. Beebe said he would deny the request unless there was evidence showing someone else committed the murders. Prosecutor Scott Ellington said the Arkansas state crime laboratory would help seek other suspects by running searches on any DNA evidence produced in private laboratory tests during the defense team&#x27;s investigation. This would include running the results through the FBI&#x27;s Combined DNA Index System database. Ellington said that, although he still considered the men guilty, the three would likely be acquitted if a new trial were held because of the powerful legal counsel representing them now, the loss of evidence over time, and the change of heart among some of the witnesses.

==Family and law enforcement opinions==
The families of the three victims are divided in their opinions as to the guilt or innocence of the West Memphis Three. In 2000, the biological father of Christopher Byers, Rick Murray, expressed his doubts about the guilty verdicts on the West Memphis Three website. In 2007, Pamela Hobbs, the mother of victim Stevie Branch, joined those who have publicly questioned the verdicts, calling for a reopening of the verdicts and further investigation of the evidence. In late 2007, John Mark Byers—who was previously vehement in his belief that Echols, Misskelley, and Baldwin were guilty—also announced that he now believes that they are innocent. &quot;I had made the comment if it were ever proven the three were innocent, I&#x27;d be the first to lead the charge for their freedom,&quot; said Byers, and take &quot;every opportunity that I have to voice that the West Memphis Three are innocent and the evidence and proof prove they&#x27;re innocent.&quot; Byers has spoken to the media on behalf of the convicted, and has expressed his desire for justice for the families of both the victims and the three accused.

In 2010, district Judge Brian S. Miller ordered Terry Hobbs, the stepfather of victim Stevie Branch, to pay $17,590 to The Chicks (then known as the Dixie Chicks) singer Natalie Maines for legal costs stemming from a defamation lawsuit he filed against the band. Miller dismissed a suit Hobbs filed over Maines&#x27; remarks and writings implying that he was involved in killing his stepson. The judge said Hobbs had chosen to involve himself in public discussion over whether the convictions were just.

John E. Douglas, a former longtime FBI agent and current criminal profiler, said that the murders were more indicative of a single murderer intent on degrading and punishing the victims, than of a trio of &quot;unsophisticated&quot; teenagers. Douglas believed that the perpetrator had a violent history and was familiar with the victims and with local geography. Douglas served as FBI Unit Chief of the Investigative Support Unit of the National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime for 25 years. He stated in his report for Echols&#x27;s legal team that there was no evidence the murders were linked to satanic rituals and that post-mortem animal predation could explain the alleged knife injuries. He said that the victims had died from a combination of blunt force trauma and drowning, in a crime which he believed was driven by personal cause.

==Documentaries, publications, and studies==
Three films, &quot;Paradise Lost: The Child Murders at Robin Hood Hills&quot;, &quot;Paradise Lost 2: Revelations&quot;, and &quot;Paradise Lost 3: Purgatory&quot;, directed by Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky, have documented this case and are strongly critical of the verdict. The films marked the first time Metallica allowed their music to be used in a movie, which drew attention to the case.

There have been a number of books about the case, also arguing that the suspects were wrongly convicted: &quot;Devil&#x27;s Knot: The True Story of the West Memphis Three&quot; by Mara Leveritt, &quot;Blood of Innocents&quot; by Guy Reel, and &quot;The Last Pentacle of the Sun: Writings in Support of the West Memphis Three&quot;, edited by Brett Alexander Savory &amp; M. W. Anderson, and featuring dark fiction and non-fiction by well-known writers of speculative fiction. In 2005, Damien Echols completed his memoir, &quot;Almost Home, Vol 1&quot;, offering his perspective of the case. A biography of John Mark Byers by Greg Day named &quot;Untying the Knot: John Mark Byers and the West Memphis Three&quot; was published in May 2012.

Many songs were written about the case, and two albums were released in support of the defendants. In 2000, The album &quot;Free the West Memphis 3&quot; was released by KOCH Records. Organized by Eddie Spaghetti of the band Supersuckers, the album featured a number of original songs about the case and other recordings by artists such as Steve Earle, Tom Waits, L7, and Joe Strummer. In 2002, Henry Rollins worked with other vocalists from various rock, hip hop, punk, and metal groups and members of Black Flag and the Rollins Band on the compilation album &quot;Rise Above: 24 Black Flag Songs to Benefit the West Memphis Three&quot;. All money raised from sales of the album was donated to the legal funds of the West Memphis Three. Metalcore band Zao&#x27;s 2002 album &quot;Parade of Chaos&quot; included a track inspired by the case named &quot;Free The Three&quot;. On April 28, 2011, the band Disturbed released a song entitled &quot;3&quot; as a download on their website. The song is about the West Memphis Three, with 100% of the proceeds going to their benefit foundation for their release.

A website by Martin David Hill, containing approximately 160,000 words and intending to be a &quot;thorough investigation&quot;, collates and discusses many details surrounding the murders and investigation, including some anecdotal information.

Investigative journalist Aphrodite Jones undertook an exploration of the case on her Discovery Network show &quot;True Crime with Aphrodite Jones&quot; following the DNA discoveries. The episode premiered May 5, 2011, with extensive background information included on the show&#x27;s page at the Investigation Discovery site. In August 2011, White Light Productions announced that the West Memphis Three would be featured on their new program &quot;Wrongfully Convicted&quot;.

In January 2010, the CBS television news journal &quot;48 Hours&quot; aired &quot;The Memphis 3&quot;, an in-depth coverage of the history of the case, including interviews with Echols and supporters. On September 17, 2011, &quot;48 Hours&quot; re-aired the episode with the update of their release and interviews from Echols and his wife, and Baldwin. &quot;Piers Morgan Tonight&quot; aired an episode on September 29, 2011, about the three&#x27;s plans for the future and continued investigations on the case.

&quot;West of Memphis&quot;, directed and written by Amy J. Berg, and produced by Peter Jackson, as well as by Echols himself, premiered at the 2012 Sundance Film Festival. Actor Johnny Depp, a longtime supporter of the West Memphis Three and personal friend of Damien Echols, was on hand to support the film in its premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival in 2012.

Atom Egoyan directed a feature film of the case based on Mara Leveritt&#x27;s book, titled &quot;Devil&#x27;s Knot&quot;, starring Colin Firth and Reese Witherspoon, which was produced by Worldview Entertainment. The film premiered at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival and was released in U.S. theaters on May 9, 2014.

==Defendants==

===Jessie Misskelley===
Jessie Misskelley Jr. (born July 10, 1975) was arrested in connection to the murders of May 5, 1993. After a reported 12 hours of interrogation by police, Misskelley, who has an IQ of 72, confessed to the murders, and implicated Baldwin and Echols. However, the confession was at odds with facts known by police, such as the time of the murders. Under the &quot;Bruton&quot; rule, his confession could not be admitted against his co-defendants and thus he was tried separately. Misskelley was convicted by a jury of one count of first-degree murder and two counts of second-degree murder. The court sentenced him to life plus 40 years in prison. His conviction was appealed and affirmed by the Arkansas Supreme Court.

On August 19, 2011, Misskelley, along with Baldwin and Echols, entered an Alford plea. Judge David Laser then sentenced them to 18 years and 78 days, the amount of time they had served, and also levied a suspended sentence of 10 years. All three were released from prison that same day. Since his release, Misskelley has become engaged to his high school girlfriend and enrolled in a community college to train as an auto mechanic.

===Charles Jason Baldwin===
Charles Jason Baldwin (born April 11, 1977) along with Misskelley and Echols, entered an Alford plea on August 19, 2011. Baldwin pleaded guilty to three counts of first degree murder while still asserting his actual innocence. The judge then sentenced the three men to 18 years and 78 days, the amount of time they had served, and also levied a suspended sentence of 10 years.

Baldwin was initially resistant to agree to this deal, insisting as a matter of principle that he would not plead guilty to something he did not do. He then realized, he has said, that his refusal would have meant that Echols stayed on death row. &quot;This was not justice,&quot; he said of the deal. &quot;However, they&#x27;re trying to kill Damien.&quot; Since his release, Baldwin has moved to Seattle to live with friends. He is in a relationship with a woman who befriended him while he was in prison. He has stated that he plans on enrolling in college to become a lawyer in order to help wrongfully convicted persons prove their innocence. Baldwin said in a 2011 interview with Piers Morgan that he worked for a construction company and he was learning how to drive.

===Damien Wayne Echols===
Damien Wayne Echols (born Michael Wayne Hutchison, December 11, 1974) was on death row, locked-down 23 hours per day at the Varner Unit Supermax. Echols, ADC# 000931, entered the system on March 19, 1994. From prison in 1999, he married landscape architect Lorri Davis.

On August 19, 2011, Echols, along with Baldwin and Misskelley, was released from prison after their attorneys and the judge handling the upcoming retrial agreed to a deal. Under the terms of the Alford guilty plea, Echols and his co-defendants accepted the sufficiency of evidence supporting the three counts of first degree murder while maintaining their innocence. DNA evidence at the scene was not found to include any from Echols or his co-defendants. He moved to New York City after his release.

====Appeal====
Echols&#x27; mental stability during the years immediately prior to the murders and during his trial was the focus of his appellate legal team in their appeal attempts. In his efforts to win a new trial, Echols, 27 at the time of the appeal, claimed he was incompetent to stand trial because of a history of mental illness. The record on appeal spells out a long history of Echols&#x27; mental health problems, including a May 5, 1992, Arkansas Department of Youth Services referral for possible mental illness, a year to the day before the murders. Hospital records for his treatment in Little Rock 11 months before the killings show a history of self-mutilation and assertions to hospital staff that he gained power by drinking blood, that he had inside him the spirit of a woman who had killed her husband, and that he was having hallucinations. He also told mental health workers that he was &quot;going to influence the world.&quot;

The appellate legal team argued that Echols did not waive his assertion that he was not mentally competent before his 1994 trial because he was not competent to waive it. To assist in the appeals process, Echols&#x27; appellate legal team retained a Berkeley, California-based forensic psychiatrist, Dr. George Woods, to make their case.

Echols&#x27; lawyers claimed that his condition worsened during the trial, when he developed a &quot;psychotic euphoria that caused him to believe he would evolve into a superior entity&quot; and eventually be transported to a different world. His psychosis dominated his perceptions of everything going on in court, Woods wrote. Echols&#x27;s mental state while in prison awaiting trial was also called into question by his appellate team.

====Retrial request====
While in prison, Echols wrote letters to Gloria Shettles, an investigator for his defense team. Echols sought to overturn his conviction based on trial error, including juror misconduct, as well as the results of a DNA Status Report filed on July 17, 2007, which concluded &quot;none of the genetic material recovered at the scene of the crimes was attributable to Mr. Echols, Echols&#x27; co-defendant, Jason Baldwin, or defendant Jessie Misskelley ... Although most of the genetic material recovered from the scene was attributable to the victims of the offenses, some of it cannot be attributed to either the victims or the defendants.&quot; Advanced DNA and other scientific evidence – combined with additional evidence from several different witnesses and experts – released in October 2007 had cast strong doubts on the original convictions. A hearing on Echols&#x27; petition for a writ of habeas corpus was held in the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas.

====Release====
On August 19, 2011, Echols, along with Baldwin and Misskelley, entered an Alford plea, while asserting their innocence. The judge sentenced them to 18 years and 78 days, the amount of time they had served, and levied a suspended sentence of 10 years. Echols&#x27; sentence was reduced to three counts of first degree murder. Lawyers representing the West Memphis Three reached the plea deal that allowed the men to be released from prison. They were transferred to the hearing with their possessions. The plea deal did not technically result in a full exoneration; some of the convictions would stand, but the men would not admit guilt. The counsel representing the men said they would continue to pursue full exoneration.

====Aftermath====

Echols relocated to Salem, Massachusetts, with his wife and has no intentions of returning to Arkansas. In a 2013 interview with Piers Morgan, he said that he would like to have a career in writing and visual arts.

Echols self-published the memoir, &quot;Almost Home: My Life Story Vol. 1&quot; (2005), while still in prison. After his release, he has worked on a number of additional media projects.
;:Music
::*Echols co-wrote the lyrics to the song &quot;Army Reserve&quot;, on Pearl Jam&#x27;s self-titled album (2006).
::*Echols and punk musician Michale Graves, the latter a former vocalist for Misfits, released an album titled &quot;Illusions&quot; in October 2007.

;:Art
::*Echols began creating art while on death row as a &quot;side effect of my spiritual, magical practice.&quot; The Copro Gallery in Los Angeles exhibited Echols&#x27; artwork (March 19 – April 16, 2016). The focus of the exhibit, titled &#x27;SALEM,&#x27; draws attention to the comparison between the historical U.S. Salem witch trials and Echols&#x27; own experience during a modern-day U.S. witch-hunt known for false accusations of Satanic ritual abuse.
::*On March 23, 2016, Echols gave a presentation about his art processes at the Rubin Museum of Art.

;:Spoken word
::*The transcript of Echols&#x27; spoken word performance in &quot;The Moth&quot; is included in a written compilation of 50 stories from the show&#x27;s archives, published in 2013.

;:Written works
::*Echols&#x27; poetry has appeared in the &quot;Porcupine Literary Arts&quot; magazine (volume 8, issue 2).
::* He has written non-fiction for the &quot;Arkansas Literary Forum&quot;.
::*Since his release, he has published a non-fiction book about both his childhood and incarceration, &quot;Life After Death&quot; (2012), which includes material from his 2005 memoir.
::* He and Lorri Davis, a NYC landscape architect who initiated a correspondence with Echols in 1999 and ultimately became his wife, co-authored &quot;Yours for Eternity: A Love Story on Death Row&quot; (2014)

;:Television
::*Echols provided the voice of Darryl, a fish man (i.e., a fish situated on a robot body), in episode 3 of the animated Netflix series &quot;The Midnight Gospel&quot; (2020).

In August 2021, ten years after release from prison, Echols reiterated that he would not give up seeking any evidence that remained, so it could be retested to exonerate the three and lead to those actually responsible. In response to Echols&#x27; requests since early 2020 that remaining evidence undergo specialized DNA testing, officials told his legal team that such evidence had been lost or destroyed years ago in a fire, of which there is no public record. A FOIA request was submitted and the receiving attorney said any evidence testing would have to be ordered by a judge. Echols attorneys filed a Motion for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief in the Circuit Court of Crittendon County First Division, and asked for an expedited hearing. In December 2021, Echols&#x27; team was able to review remaining evidence and planned to move forward with new testing. In June 2022, a judge rejected a January request for DNA testing of the evidence. Echols&#x27; lawyers appealed the case to the Arkansas Supreme Court in January 2023. The state said in February that the appeal should be dismissed because the case was initially filed in the wrong county – Crittenden rather than Craighead County, where Echols&#x27; conviction was entered. In March, Echols&#x27; team responded that such a dismissal reason is irrelevant because both counties are within Arkansas&#x27; 2nd Judicial Circuit. In April 2023, the state supreme court ruled in favor of Echols&#x27;s appeal for DNA testing. In April 2024, the Arkansas Supreme Court again reversed a lower court&#x27;s order denying Echols&#x27; postconviction motion for DNA testing for lack of jurisdiction.

==See also==

* 1991 Austin yogurt shop murders
* Central Park Five
* False confession
* Moral panic
* Norfolk Four
* Witch-hunt (metaphorical usage)

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
;Article
*&quot;WM3 – Jason Baldwin.&quot; &quot;Arkansas Times&quot;. January 14, 2011.
;Video
*&quot;WM3: Life after Prison (Complete Series).&quot; &quot;KATV-TV&quot; (Channel 7). Ran on October 30 – November 1, 2011, video posted to YouTube on February 7, 2012.

==External links==
*The Encyclopedia of Arkansas History &amp; Culture entry (The Butler Center for Arkansas Studies)
*West Memphis Three at the Court TV Crime Library
*Archive of West Memphis Three reports from &quot;Memphis Commercial Appeal&quot;
*Chen, Stephanie. &quot;Echols of West Memphis 3 talks about appeal, death row .&quot; CNN. September 29, 2010.
*Investigation Collection Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q775538" start="4" end="22" title="West Memphis Three" label="West Memphis Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q80050" start="111" end="133" title="West Memphis, Arkansas" label="West Memphis, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515042" start="150" end="163" title="Damien Echols" label="Damien Echols"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="168" end="186" title="capital punishment" label="sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="213" end="230" title="life imprisonment" label="life imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268748" start="394" end="408" title="Satanic ritual abuse" label="Satanic ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900785" start="547" end="561" title="emotional bias" label="emotional bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314618" start="758" end="775" title="forensic evidence" label="forensic evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="884" end="900" title="DNA" label="genetic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791883" start="1088" end="1110" title="Arkansas Supreme Court" label="Arkansas Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q476697" start="1136" end="1148" title="DNA profiling" label="DNA evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154525" start="1163" end="1179" title="juror misconduct" label="juror misconduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q664736" start="1217" end="1229" title="plea bargain" label="plea bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722160" start="1281" end="1292" title="Alford plea" label="Alford plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737759" start="1524" end="1542" title="suspended sentence" label="suspended sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q454263" start="1904" end="1913" title="affidavit" label="affidavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365233" start="2927" end="2933" title="hogtie" label="hogtie"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="3888" end="3897" title="castration" label="castrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q422112" start="4259" end="4266" title="Ritalin" label="Ritalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="4328" end="4368" title="attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q410412" start="4419" end="4432" title="Carbamazepine" label="Carbamazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q587357" start="4735" end="4749" title="Cub Scout pack" label="Cub Scout pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q955617" start="5314" end="5330" title="Steele, Missouri" label="Steele, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q115475455" start="6017" end="6042" title="Forest Hill Cemetery East (Memphis, Tennessee)" label="Forest Hill Cemetery East"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="6046" end="6064" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q79261" start="6611" end="6627" title="Marion, Arkansas" label="Marion, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="7262" end="7271" title="vandalism" label="vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q383906" start="7276" end="7287" title="shoplifting" label="shoplifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="7606" end="7620" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q210181" start="7831" end="7841" title="Bible Belt" label="Bible Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="8005" end="8016" title="social work" label="social work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824618" start="8334" end="8364" title="Social Security Administration" label="Social Security Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="8477" end="8491" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="8566" end="8579" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q488924" start="9224" end="9245" title="Oceanside, California" label="Oceanside, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q190767" start="9516" end="9525" title="polygraph" label="polygraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q891163" start="10513" end="10528" title="Bojangles&amp;#x27; Famous Chicken &amp;#x27;n Biscuits" label="Bojangles&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14253958" start="10902" end="10922" title="Drive-through" label="drive-through window"/>
<link wikidata="Q190767" start="12170" end="12179" title="polygraph" label="polygraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="12908" end="12910" title="Intelligence quotient" label="IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q11861940" start="12938" end="12973" title="borderline intellectual functioning" label="borderline intellectual functioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q170079" start="12995" end="13000" title="minor (law)" label="minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q312199" start="13592" end="13599" title="Miranda warning" label="Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791883" start="13680" end="13702" title="Arkansas Supreme Court" label="Arkansas Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726978" start="13968" end="13985" title="The Commercial Appeal" label="Commercial Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190767" start="15539" end="15548" title="polygraph" label="polygraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="16125" end="16134" title="Satanism" label="Satanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="16145" end="16152" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="17038" end="17043" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q79291" start="17056" end="17073" title="Turrell, Arkansas" label="Turrell, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19091886" start="17708" end="17731" title="Bruton v. United States" label="&amp;quot;Bruton&amp;quot; rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q549246" start="17951" end="17964" title="Richard Ofshe" label="Richard Ofshe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911413" start="17979" end="17996" title="false confessions" label="false confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="18048" end="18059" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="18175" end="18183" title="coercion" label="coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791883" start="18961" end="18983" title="Arkansas Supreme Court" label="Arkansas Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149780" start="19254" end="19281" title="Columbia Pacific University" label="Columbia Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="19303" end="19309" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q105821122" start="20162" end="20175" title="Mara Leveritt" label="Mara Leveritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267178" start="20229" end="20246" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Knot" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360677" start="20689" end="20700" title="crime scene" label="crime scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q274095" start="21030" end="21042" title="rigor mortis" label="rigor mortis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21664" end="21716" title="Paradise Lost: The Child Murders at Robin Hood Hills" label="Paradise Lost: The Child Murders at Robin Hood Hills"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21740" end="21768" title="Paradise Lost 2: Revelations" label="Paradise Lost 2: Revelations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861562" start="22424" end="22445" title="Arkansas State Police" label="Arkansas State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q61346" start="22585" end="22602" title="Crittenden County, Arkansas" label="Crittenden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420623" start="24341" end="24352" title="exoneration" label="exoneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231924" start="24440" end="24453" title="David Burnett (politician)" label="David Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637614" start="24813" end="24826" title="Joe Berlinger" label="Joe Berlinger"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24876" end="24889" title="Paradise Lost: The Child Murders at Robin Hood Hills" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q338399" start="24929" end="24942" title="hunting knife" label="hunting knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394736" start="24959" end="24966" title="Kershaw Knives" label="Kershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q911125" start="26119" end="26122" title="Human leukocyte antigen" label="HLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="26340" end="26365" title="psychoactive drug" label="psychoactive prescription"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="26366" end="26377" title="Pharmaceutical drug" label="medications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="26924" end="26931" title="Epileptic seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q110245663" start="26964" end="26983" title="Periodontal pathology" label="periodontal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436248" start="27272" end="27279" title="spanking" label="spanked"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791888" start="27515" end="27529" title="Arkansas Times" label="Arkansas Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q131471" start="27887" end="27891" title="darts" label="dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035710" start="30464" end="30478" title="capital murder" label="capital murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028348" start="30500" end="30533" title="ineffective assistance of counsel" label="ineffective assistance of counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317910" start="30739" end="30746" title="retrial" label="retrial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31847" end="31868" title="Arkansas Senate#Members of the 89th Senate" label="Arkansas State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722160" start="32275" end="32286" title="Alford plea" label="Alford plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127537" start="32388" end="32396" title="pro bono" label="pro bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805430" start="32800" end="32811" title="time served" label="time served"/>
<link wikidata="Q361460" start="33675" end="33685" title="Mike Beebe" label="Mike Beebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265403" start="34145" end="34170" title="CODIS" label="Combined DNA Index System"/>
<link wikidata="Q142636" start="35733" end="35743" title="The Chicks" label="The Chicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q242605" start="35784" end="35798" title="Natalie Maines" label="Natalie Maines"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="35831" end="35841" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q724506" start="36119" end="36134" title="John E. Douglas" label="John E. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971388" start="36557" end="36606" title="National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime" label="National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37037" end="37089" title="Paradise Lost: The Child Murders at Robin Hood Hills" label="Paradise Lost: The Child Murders at Robin Hood Hills"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37103" end="37131" title="Paradise Lost 2: Revelations" label="Paradise Lost 2: Revelations"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37149" end="37175" title="Paradise Lost 3: Purgatory" label="Paradise Lost 3: Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208616" start="37195" end="37227" title="Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky" label="Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="37329" end="37338" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37528" end="37587" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Knot: The True Story of the West Memphis Three" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Knot: The True Story of the West Memphis Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500321" start="38282" end="38305" title="Free the West Memphis 3" label="Free the West Memphis 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273666" start="38328" end="38340" title="KOCH Records" label="KOCH Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611056" start="38355" end="38370" title="Eddie Spaghetti" label="Eddie Spaghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611056" start="38383" end="38395" title="Supersuckers" label="Supersuckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q781634" start="38498" end="38509" title="Steve Earle" label="Steve Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="38511" end="38520" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138185" start="38522" end="38524" title="L7 (band)" label="L7"/>
<link wikidata="Q310052" start="38530" end="38542" title="Joe Strummer" label="Joe Strummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q318509" start="38553" end="38566" title="Henry Rollins" label="Henry Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="38661" end="38671" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891331" start="38680" end="38692" title="Rollins Band" label="Rollins Band"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38724" end="38789" title="Rise Above: 24 Black Flag Songs to Benefit the West Memphis Three" label="Rise Above: 24 Black Flag Songs to Benefit the West Memphis Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q147129" start="38911" end="38914" title="Zao (US band)" label="Zao"/>
<link wikidata="Q131366" start="39061" end="39070" title="Disturbed (band)" label="Disturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858264" start="39536" end="39551" title="Aphrodite Jones" label="Aphrodite Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="39596" end="39613" title="Discovery Network" label="Discovery Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847392" start="39625" end="39656" title="True Crime with Aphrodite Jones" label="True Crime with Aphrodite Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031546" start="40044" end="40052" title="48 Hours (TV series)" label="48 Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387969" start="40348" end="40368" title="Piers Morgan Tonight" label="Piers Morgan Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567456" start="40508" end="40523" title="West of Memphis" label="West of Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740804" start="40555" end="40566" title="Amy J. Berg" label="Amy J. Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="40584" end="40597" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708409" start="40646" end="40673" title="2012 Sundance Film Festival" label="2012 Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="40681" end="40692" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="40834" end="40869" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q212167" start="40880" end="40891" title="Atom Egoyan" label="Atom Egoyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025443" start="40977" end="40994" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Knot (film)" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q162492" start="41011" end="41022" title="Colin Firth" label="Colin Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44063" start="41027" end="41044" title="Reese Witherspoon" label="Reese Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036757" start="41068" end="41091" title="Worldview Entertainment" label="Worldview Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q14326096" start="41119" end="41159" title="2013 Toronto International Film Festival" label="2013 Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q19091886" start="41607" end="41630" title="Bruton rule" label="&amp;quot;Bruton&amp;quot; rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="41867" end="41871" title="life in prison" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722160" start="42044" end="42055" title="Alford plea" label="Alford plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="42594" end="42613" title="first degree murder" label="first degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124012" start="43406" end="43426" title="miscarriage of justice" label="wrongfully convicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q557758" start="43496" end="43508" title="Piers Morgan" label="Piers Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916030" start="43736" end="43747" title="Varner Unit" label="Varner Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815948" start="43849" end="43868" title="landscape architect" label="landscape architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="44195" end="44214" title="first degree murder" label="first degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="45233" end="45247" title="hallucinations" label="hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="45589" end="45609" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="46435" end="46451" title="DNA" label="genetic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="47041" end="47054" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722160" start="47223" end="47234" title="Alford plea" label="Alford plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="47453" end="47472" title="first degree murder" label="first degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="47912" end="47932" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q557758" start="48021" end="48033" title="Piers Morgan" label="Piers Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="48094" end="48105" title="visual arts" label="visual arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="48373" end="48382" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q931609" start="48390" end="48407" title="Pearl Jam (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="48430" end="48434" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450911" start="48444" end="48458" title="Michale Graves" label="Michale Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q311785" start="48493" end="48500" title="Misfits (band)" label="Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="48892" end="48910" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="48968" end="48978" title="witch-hunt" label="witch-hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268748" start="49010" end="49030" title="Satanic ritual abuse" label="Satanic ritual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q63751" start="49112" end="49131" title="Rubin Museum of Art" label="Rubin Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752399" start="49215" end="49223" title="The Moth" label="The Moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="50063" end="50070" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q79225057" start="50084" end="50103" title="The Midnight Gospel" label="The Midnight Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="50585" end="50589" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="FOIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586704" start="51792" end="51823" title="1991 Austin yogurt shop murders" label="1991 Austin yogurt shop murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061609" start="51826" end="51843" title="Central Park Five" label="Central Park Five"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51846" end="51862" title="False confession#Cases by country" label="False confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="51865" end="51876" title="Moral panic" label="Moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051036" start="51879" end="51891" title="Norfolk Four" label="Norfolk Four"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51894" end="51904" title="Witch-hunt#Metaphorical usage" label="Witch-hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791888" start="52021" end="52035" title="Arkansas Times" label="Arkansas Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q936908" start="52129" end="52136" title="KATV-TV" label="KATV-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="52210" end="52217" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q60656247" start="52385" end="52393" title="Court TV" label="Court TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726978" start="52458" end="52483" title="Memphis Commercial Appeal" label="Memphis Commercial Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="52577" end="52580" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8833" wikidata="Q333158" url="?curid=8833" title="Donald Dewar">
<text>Donald Campbell Dewar (21 August 1937 – 11 October 2000) was a Scottish statesman and politician who served as the inaugural first minister of Scotland and leader of the Labour Party in Scotland from 1999 until his death in 2000. He was widely regarded as the &quot;Father of the Nation&quot; during his tenure as first minister, and the &quot;Architect of Devolution&quot; whilst serving as Secretary of State for Scotland from 1997 to 1999. He was Member of Parliament (MP) for Glasgow Anniesland (formerly Glasgow Garscadden) from 1978 to 2000. Dewar was also Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the equivalent seat from 1999 to 2000.

Born in Glasgow, Dewar studied history, and later law, at the University of Glasgow. Before entering politics, he worked as a solicitor in Glasgow. At the age of 28, he was elected to the House of Commons, representing Aberdeen South from 1966 to 1970. After losing his seat, he returned to law and hosted his own Friday evening talk show on Radio Clyde. Dewar was re-elected in the 1978 Glasgow Garscadden by-election and served as the MP until his death in 2000. Following Labour&#x27;s landslide victory in 1997, he was appointed Secretary of State for Scotland by Prime Minister Tony Blair. As the Scottish secretary, he was an advocate of Scottish devolution, and campaigned for a Scottish Parliament in the 1997 Scottish devolution referendum. Following a successful campaign, Dewar worked on creating the Scotland Act 1998.

Dewar led the Labour campaign through the first Scottish Parliament election and was elected a Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for Glasgow Anniesland. On 7 May 1999, he was appointed Leader of the Labour Party in Scotland and he led coalition talks with the Scottish Liberal Democrats. Following successful talks, the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition was announced. Dewar was elected as first minister on 13 May 1999, by a vote of the parliament, and formed the first Scottish Executive cabinet. As first minister, he set out the legislative programme for the Executive which included: an Education bill to improve standards in Scottish schools; land reform to give right of access to the countryside, a bill to abolish the feudal system of land tenure; and a bill to establish national parks in Scotland.

On 10 October 2000, Dewar sustained a fall, and the following day he died of a brain hemorrhage at the age of 63 while still in office. Deputy First Minister Jim Wallace served as the acting first minister, until Henry McLeish was announced to succeed Dewar. Dewar is known for his work and commitment to the re-establishment of the Scottish Parliament and being the inaugural first minister of Scotland.

== Early life and education ==
Donald Campbell Dewar was born on Saturday, 21 August 1937 in Glasgow. He grew up in a middle-class household in Kelvingrove as the only child of Dr. Alasdair Dewar, a consultant dermatologist, and Mary Howat Dewar (&quot;&quot; Bennett). Both of Dewar&#x27;s parents had ill health during his childhood; his father contracted tuberculosis and his mother suffered from a benign brain tumour when he was young.

Dewar attended a small school in the Scottish Borders during the Second World War. From the age of nine, he was educated at Mosspark Primary School and then The Glasgow Academy. He made few friends at school and blamed his &quot;shyness and gauche manner&quot; on his experience as being an only child. A year before his death, Dewar admitted that he had been an &quot;isolated misfit&quot; in his youth, which is a reasoning for his public image of being awkward. 

In 1957, Dewar attended the University of Glasgow where his father, mother, two uncles and aunt also attended. He met several future politicians at the university Dialectic Society, including John Smith, who would later become leader of the Labour Party, Sir Menzies Campbell, who would later become leader of the Liberal Democrats, and Lord Irvine of Lairg, who would serve as Lord Chancellor. He met Alison McNair at Glasgow University, who he would later marry in 1964.

Dewar was an editor of the &quot;Glasgow University Guardian&quot; and sales manager for &quot;Glasgow University Magazine&quot; in 1960. He served as chairman of the University Labour Club from 1961 from 1962 and president of the Glasgow University Union. Dewar was an Honorary Secretary of the Students&#x27; Representative Council. In 1962, he campaigned for Albert Luthuli, the banned African National Congress leader, as University Rector.

In 1961, Dewar gained a Master of Arts degree in History and in 1964 a second-class Bachelor of Law degree. After graduating, he worked as a solicitor in Glasgow.

==Member of Parliament (1966–1970)==
Dewar was a member of the Labour Party, and soon turned his sights towards being elected to parliament. In 1962, he was selected as the Labour candidate for the Aberdeen South constituency. In the 1964 general election, he failed to win the seat, but won it at the 1966 general election at the age of 28 defeating Priscilla Tweedsmuir by 1,799 votes.

In his maiden speech to the House of Commons on 4 May 1966, Dewar spoke against a proposed increase on potato tax. His speech became his first political success: as the tax was repealed the following year. Dewar was made a member of the public accounts committee and in October 1967, he was appointed a Parliamentary Private Secretary to the President of the Board of Trade, Anthony Crosland.

Dewar remained in that position at the Department of Education until 1969, in which year he opposed a visit to Aberdeen by the Springbok rugby team and staged a silent vigil near the team&#x27;s ground. In April 1968, he was proposed for a Minister of State position by Roy Jenkins, but was not appointed. Dewar lost his constituency seat to the Conservative candidate Iain Sproat at the 1970 general election by over 1,000 votes.

==Out of parliament==
Dewar spent much of the 1970s looking for another parliamentary seat. He hosted a Friday evening talk show on Radio Clyde, and in June 1971 was beaten by Dennis Canavan when he applied for the seat of West Stirlingshire. He worked as a solicitor for much of that decade and became a reporter on children&#x27;s panels and was involved with the Lanarkshire local authority. Dewar became a partner in Ross Harper Murphy, in 1975.

==Return to parliament (1979–1999)==
===1978 Glasgow Garscadden by-election===
Donald Dewar was selected for the seat of Glasgow Garscadden by a majority of three, after Dewar&#x27;s friend in the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers, MP Willie Small, died unexpectedly. He was returned to parliament at a by-election on 13 April 1978, a crucial victory which was seen as halting the rise of the Scottish National Party. 

===1979 devolution referendum===

In Scotland&#x27;s first referendum on devolution, held in March 1979, he campaigned for a &quot;Yes&quot; vote alongside the Conservative Alick Buchanan-Smith and the Liberal Russell Johnston. Though they won a narrow majority, it fell short of the 40% required, contributing to the downfall of the Callaghan Government, in May 1979.

===Front bench opposition===
Dewar gained a parliamentary platform as chairman of the Scottish Affairs Select Committee. After a year honing his inquisitorial skills, he joined the front bench in November 1980 as a Scottish affairs spokesman when Michael Foot became party leader. In 1981, as the Labour Party divided itself further due to internal disagreement, Dewar was almost deselected in his constituency by hard left activists, but he successfully defended himself against this threat.

He rose quickly through the ranks, becoming Shadow Scottish Secretary in November 1983. On 21 December 1988, Dewar was in Lockerbie after the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, as the member of the Shadow Cabinet in charge of Scottish affairs. In 1992, John Smith made him Shadow Social security Secretary and three years later, Dewar was made a Chief Whip for the Labour Party by Tony Blair.

==Secretary of State for Scotland (1997–1999) ==
At the 1997 general election, he became MP for Glasgow Anniesland, which was mostly the same constituency with minor boundary changes. Labour won this election by a landslide, and Dewar was given the post of Secretary of State for Scotland. He was able to start the devolution process he dreamt of years earlier, and worked on creating the Scotland Act, popularly referred to as &quot;Smith&#x27;s unfinished business&quot;. When ratified, this was to give Scotland its first Parliament for nearly 300 years.

In January 1998, he confirmed that he would stand for a seat in the Scottish Parliament. The first elections to the Scottish Parliament were held on 6 May 1999, with Dewar leading the Scottish Labour Party against their main opponents, the Scottish National Party led by Alex Salmond. He was elected as the Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for Glasgow Anniesland, having the unusual distinction of being both an MP and MSP for the same constituency.

==First Minister of Scotland (1999–2000)==

===Election===
On 13 May 1999, Dewar was elected by the Scottish Parliament for the nominee for First Minister of Scotland, after receiving 71 votes by MSPs. On 17 May, he received the Royal Warrant of Appointment by Her Majesty the Queen at Holyroodhouse and was officially sworn in at the Court of Session. 

=== Entering government ===
Although Scottish Labour won more seats than any other party, they did not have a majority in Parliament to allow them to form an Executive without the help of a smaller party. A deal was agreed with the Scottish Liberal Democrats to form a coalition, with Dewar agreeing to their demand for the abolition of up front tuition fees for university students.

On 13 May 1999, Dewar was nominated as first minister, and was officially appointed by the Queen on 17 May at a ceremony in the Palace of Holyroodhouse. He later travelled to the Court of Session to be sworn in by the lord president and receive the Great Seal of Scotland. 

Dewar made his initial appointments to the first Scottish cabinet in over 300 years in May 1999. Before the formal announcement of his cabinet appointments, Dewar said that he was &quot;confident&quot; that he had &quot;chosen a strong team who will serve Scotland well&quot;. 

Dewar decided to re–organise most of the former portfolios of the preceding Scottish Office, the department of the UK Government responsible for Scotland prior to the establishment of the Scottish Executive and Scottish Parliament. The only exception to this was the creation of a new ministerial post for justice and the introduction of new ministerial posts for children and education, social inclusion, local government and housing, a minister to be responsible for rural affairs and the first Scottish finance minister who would be directly responsible for the budget of the Scottish Parliament.

Ahead of announcing his cabinet, Dewar advocated that he had created his team in order to ensure the Scottish Labour and Scottish Liberal Democrat coalition would be an effective administration for Scotland. Some of the key appointments to Dewar&#x27;s cabinet included Jim Wallace as the deputy first minister and Minister for Justice, Henry McLeish was appointed as the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and Sam Galbraith who was appointed as the Minister for Health. 

As first minister, Dewar was also responsible for the appointment of the two highest law officers of Scotland. Both Lord Hardie and Colin Boyd continued in their respective roles as Lord Advocate and Solicitor General for Scotland following their initial appointments in 1997. Less than 24 hours after announcing his cabinet, Dewar announced the eleven junior ministers of his cabinet.

=== Legislation proposals ===

Ahead of forming the coalition with the Scottish Liberal Democrats, Dewar was urged not to succumb to pressure to scrap tuition fees in Scotland, mostly by the then Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown and education secretary David Blunkett of the UK Government. The Scottish Liberal Democrats claimed that any agreement to form a coalition administration with the Scottish Labour Party would require a commitment for tuition fees to be scrapped, and that the party would &quot;not compromise&quot; on the issue. 

On 16 June, Dewar set out the legislative programme for the Executive which included: an Education bill to improve standards in Scottish schools; land reform to give right of access to the countryside, a bill to abolish the feudal system of land tenure; and a bill to establish national parks in Scotland.

On 23 March 2000, Dewar presided over the launch of a consultation paper by his Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace, on stalking and harassment in Scotland. The Scottish Executive intended for the consultation paper to be used as an exercise to consult with the public to determine whether existing Scots law was sufficient enough in order to protect victims of stalking and harassment or whether to determine that new laws should be introduced. Wallace claimed that the &quot;Scottish Executive was well aware of the devastating consequences stalking can have&quot;.

=== Adult literacy rates ===

In May 2000, a report indicated that 400,000 Scots were unable to source employment as a result of poor adult literacy rates, with the estimated total being roughly one million adults deemed as &quot;functionally illiterate&quot;. In response, Henry McLeish, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning in the Dewar government confirmed that &quot;efforts would be made to gather exact statistics to tackle the issue&quot;. Dewar and the government were criticised due to there being a considerable lack of opportunities and programmes available to provide basic adult education similar to programmes that had already been established in England and in Wales.

=== Social justice and poverty === 
During his tenure as first minister, Dewar claiming that tackling poverty was the main agenda for the Scottish Executive. To reduce the level of poverty in Scotland, Dewar vowed that Scottish Executive policy would largely follow the policy agenda as set by the UK Government, claiming that the &quot;exchange of ideas with Westminster is vital&quot; but claimed that &quot;we must never be afraid to take a different path when that is in Scotland&#x27;s interest&quot;. Dewar supported an increase in spending available from the UK Government to be used by the Scottish Executive and had indicated that additional funds could be used to progress the executive&#x27;s work on tackling poverty.

Under Dewar, the Scottish Executive also spearheaded policy relating to social justice, including deprivation and disadvantage. Dewar stated that the executive was committed to tackling the core root of the issues to be &quot;sure that all our children have the best start in life&quot; whilst also advocating the role education and employment plays in social justice.

=== Education and employment === 

During his time in office, Dewar presided over record levels of employment in Scotland and advocated that this was in part the responsibility of his executives agenda and policies. Dewar claimed that the introduction of quality child-care, the national minimum income guarantee for pensioners and the establishment of the &quot;New Deal&quot; had &quot;laid the foundations&quot; for an increase in employment in the country. Additionally, Dewar was hopeful that strong numbers of 18 year olds in full time education would continue to increase under his premiership, stating that he wanted to &quot;skill the workforce, not only to make the Scottish economy truly competitive but to provide opportunities for the individual&quot;.

===Absence for surgery=== 

Around April 2000, Dewar temporarily stepped back from his duties as first minister to allow him to undergo heart surgery. For a period of four months, he was succeeded by his deputy first minister Jim Wallace as &quot;Acting&quot; first minister. Following his surgery, Dewar publicly thanked NHS Scotland for their &quot;care and commitment&quot; in which he claimed &quot;did so much for me over this period&quot;. 

Upon resuming his post of first minister in August 2000, Dewar praised Wallace&#x27;s tenure as acting first minister, acknowledging his &quot;distinction, style and energy&quot; and praised his &quot;success at question time is only the most visible aspect of a job well done&quot;. Additionally, Dewar issued a public message of thanks to both the Scottish Parliament and cabinet colleagues for messages following his surgery. Upon resuming his government duties, Dewar was said to be &quot;in fine form&quot; with Dewar claiming he was &quot;looking forward to working with colleagues to drive forward the Executive&#x27;s agenda&quot;.

=== Lobbygate scandal ===
One of the first scandals to hit the new Scottish Parliament occurred when allegations that the lobbying arm of public relations company Beattie Media had privileged access to ministers were published, prompting Dewar to ask the standards committee to investigate the reports. The minister for finance, Jack McConnell, was called to appear before the standards committee during the investigation although he was later cleared of any wrongdoing and the committee declared there was no evidence he had been influenced from lobbying by Beattie Media.

Dewar also threatened to sack any minister or aide who briefed the media against another member of the Scottish Executive, following public rows between Jack McConnell and Health Minister Susan Deacon over the budget allocated to health .

=== 2000 SQA examinations controversy ===

The introduction in Scotland of the reformed examinations system in 2000 was criticised in the press and by the Government after a series of administrative and computer errors led to several thousand incorrect Higher and Intermediate certificates being sent out by post. In a statement to the Scottish Parliament, Dewar stated he &quot;greatly regrets&quot; the errors made by the SQA but assured the parliament that he was aware that &quot;many people are working hard to put matters right&quot;. Dewar announced that independent consultants had been drafted in by the Scottish Executive to investigate the issue.

The crisis took several months to resolve, and several management figures including the Chief Executive, Ron Tuck, resigned or lost their jobs as a result.

On 15 August 2000, it was announced that several senior officials with the Scottish Qualification Authority (SQA) would be facing disciplinary action as a result of the error. &quot;BBC News&quot; suggested that Chief Executive Ron Tuck and the Minister for Education Sam Galbraith were &quot;kept in the dark&quot; about the problems. It had been announced that concerns were raised months prior to the error being made that exam results would not be ready when expected but assurances continued to be provided that results would be issued on time and when expected. Bill Morton became the new Chief Executive of the SQA, the organisations third in only five days, and upon his appointment said that the reassessing of exam results was his priority and that of the SQA.

===International relations and visits===

==Personal life==
Dewar was an atheist who while &quot;sceptical of religion&quot; treated religious beliefs with &quot;bemused tolerance&quot; and &quot;gracious respect&quot;. His political style in relation to religion was characterised as one of &quot;quiet, non-interfering, practical secularism&quot;; his political rival Alex Salmond credits this with enabling the &quot;Time for Reflection&quot; system at Holyrood, implemented as an alternative to the Westminster parliamentary prayers model.

On 20 July 1964, Dewar married Alison Mary McNair, with whom he had two children: a daughter, Marion, and a son, Ian. In 1972, McNair separated from Dewar and entered a relationship with the then Derry Irvine, a prominent Scottish barrister in London. Dewar and his wife divorced in 1973, and he never remarried. Dewar and Lord Irvine of Lairg never reconciled, even though they later served in the same Cabinet from May 1997 until 1999.

In September 2009, Dennis Canavan said Dewar reacted callously when Canavan&#x27;s son was diagnosed with skin cancer in 1989. The disease eventually killed him. Canavan said Dewar remarked, &quot;Oh no! That&#x27;s all we need. He was mad enough before but I shudder to think what he&#x27;ll be like now.&quot;

Dewar amassed a personal fortune in excess of £2,000,000 including public utility shares, antiques and artwork with a value of over £400,000.&lt;

==Death and funeral==

In early 2000, Dewar was admitted to the Glasgow Royal Infirmary after tests at Stobhill Hospital highlighted &quot;minor irregularity&quot; in his heart. In May 2000, tests revealed he had a faulty aortic valve and he underwent a four-hour heart operation to repair a leaking heart valve. His personal spokesperson, David Whitton, stated &quot;he is as concerned about his health as anyone else would be&quot;. Although Dewar was not going under surgery, considerations over whether to cancel foreign trips to Japan were under close watch.

Dewar was forced to take a three-month break and Deputy First Minister Jim Wallace took over as acting first minister. After returning to office, Dewar was described as being &quot;visibly tired&quot; and fears for his health at this stage were officially dismissed following a First Minister&#x27;s Question Time.

Dewar dealt with the 2000 exam results controversy and the lorry drivers&#x27; strike, and attended the Labour Party conference in Brighton, but on 29 September 2000 he told the historian Tom Devine in Dublin that if he did not feel any better, he would have to reappraise the situation in a few months&#x27; time.

On 10 October 2000, Dewar sustained a seemingly harmless fall outside his official residence at Bute House following a meeting of the Scottish Cabinet. He seemed fine at first, but later that day suffered a massive brain haemorrhage which was possibly triggered by the anticoagulant medication he was taking following his heart surgery. At 7pm, five hours after his fall, Dewar was admitted to the Western General Hospital in Edinburgh after his condition rapidly deteriorated. By 9pm, he was put on a life-support machine in the hospital&#x27;s intensive care unit. Dewar&#x27;s condition worsened and he failed to regain consciousness. On 11 October at 12:18pm, after his children gave permission for his life support to be switched off, Dewar was officially pronounced dead, aged 63.

=== Funeral ===
Dewar&#x27;s funeral service was held at Glasgow Cathedral, he was cremated on 18 October 2000 and his ashes were scattered at Lochgilphead in Argyll.

=== Guests ===

==== Royal family ====

* The Duke of Rothesay

==== Heads of government ====
* Tony Blair, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, and Cherie Blair
* Jim Wallace, Acting First Minister of Scotland
* Bertie Ahern, Taoiseach (Irish Prime Minister)
* David Trimble, First Minister of Northern Ireland 

==== Politicians ====
* Members of the Scottish Executive Cabinet, including; 
** Wendy Alexander, Minister for Communities
** Henry McLeish, Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning
* Members of the Cabinet of the United Kingdom, including;
** Gordon Brown, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Sarah Brown 
** Jack Straw, Home Secretary 
* John Swinney, Leader of the Scottish National Party 
* Charles Kennedy, Leader of the Liberal Democrats
* Neil Kinnock, Former Leader of the Labour Party
* Menzies Campbell, Liberal Democrats Member of Parliament
* James Douglas-Hamilton, Conservative Member of Parliament

==== Other dignitaries ====
* Ruth Wishart, Broadcaster and friend
* Lord Robertson, Secretary General of NATO
* Alastair Campbell, Downing Street Press Secretary
* Lord Hardie, Senator of the College of Justice
* John Monks, General Secretary of the Trades Union Congress (TUC) 

=== Reactions and aftermath ===
Dewar&#x27;s death came as a shock to Scotland. UK Foreign Secretary described his death as &quot;a tragedy for Donald and a tragedy for Scotland.&quot; Henry McLeish said: &quot;this is a day of enormous sadness for Scotland and for me personally. Donald was devolution. The architect of the most successful constitutional change this century.&quot;

&quot;Although he has become something of a political legend, Donald would have abhorred any attempt to turn him into some kind of secular saint. He would have been horrified at a Diana-style out-pouring of synthetic grief at his untimely death.&quot; — Iain Macwhirter, &quot;Sunday Herald&quot;, 15 October 2000.

Dewar was succeeded by Henry McLeish as First Minister.

== Legacy ==
Dewar&#x27;s commitment to re-establishing the Scottish Parliament and his tireless work on the Scotland Act 1998 has led to his epithet the &quot;Father of the Nation&quot; and the &quot;Father of Devolution&quot;. His advocacy for Scottish devolution began in the 1960s, at a time when devolution was fairly unpopular among Labour politicians. However, he persevered to gain support from all parties. 

Although Dewar did not associate with Scottish nationalism or support attempts for independence, he was a &quot;great unionist&quot; and saw the new Parliament as a &quot;journey not a destination&quot;, which left many Labour supporters questioning devolution. His leadership prioritised semi-proportional representation for Scottish parliamentary elections. At the time, many thought this, and devolution, would &quot;end the Scottish National Party&#x27;s success&quot;. However, in the late-2000s Labour&#x27;s popularity plummeted in Scotland while the SNP&#x27;s popularity grew rapidly. Dewar received nicknames such as &quot;Donald Dour&quot; for his stiff, matter-of-fact tone and &quot;The Gannet&quot; due to his large appetite.

In May 2002, then Prime Minister Tony Blair unveiled a statue of Dewar at the top of Glasgow&#x27;s Buchanan Street. In keeping with his famously unkempt appearance, it showed Dewar wearing a slightly crumpled jacket.

The statue was taken down in October 2005 to be cleaned, and was re-erected on a high plinth in December to protect it from vandalism. On the base of the statue was inscribed the opening words of the Scotland Act: &quot;There Shall Be A Scottish Parliament&quot;, a phrase to which Dewar himself famously said, &quot;I like that!&quot;

Dewar called the Old Royal High School on Calton Hill in Edinburgh a &quot;nationalist shibboleth&quot;, mainly because it had been the proposed site of the Scottish Assembly in the 1979 referendum. Dewar&#x27;s opposition to the Calton Hill site partly contributed to the selection of the Holyrood site, which proved expensive.

The First ScotRail Class 334 train &quot;334001&quot; was named &quot;Donald Dewar&quot; in his memory. The &quot;Dewar Arts Award&quot; was created by the Scottish Executive in 2002 dedicated to his memory. This award supports talented young Scottish artists.

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 



|-




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333158" start="0" end="21" title="Donald Dewar" label="Donald Campbell Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="125" end="151" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="first minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q110821655" start="156" end="194" title="leader of the Labour Party in Scotland" label="leader of the Labour Party in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918497" start="266" end="286" title="Father of the Nation" label="Father of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866421" start="357" end="367" title="Scottish devolution" label="Devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="392" end="423" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="450" end="470" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566749" start="480" end="498" title="Glasgow Anniesland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Glasgow Anniesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797246" start="509" end="527" title="Glasgow Garscadden" label="Glasgow Garscadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566814" start="534" end="538" title="1978 Glasgow Garscadden by-election" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566745" start="542" end="546" title="2000 Glasgow Anniesland by-elections" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="563" end="596" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529483" start="611" end="626" title="Glasgow Anniesland (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="equivalent seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269950" start="632" end="636" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="655" end="662" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="709" end="730" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="835" end="851" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q299997" start="866" end="880" title="Aberdeen South (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Aberdeen South"/>
<link wikidata="Q918430" start="886" end="890" title="1966 United Kingdom general election" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="894" end="898" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280736" start="989" end="1000" title="Radio Clyde" label="Radio Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566814" start="1030" end="1065" title="1978 Glasgow Garscadden by-election" label="1978 Glasgow Garscadden by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918503" start="1157" end="1161" title="1997 United Kingdom general election" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="1180" end="1211" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="1215" end="1229" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="1230" end="1240" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866421" start="1291" end="1310" title="Scottish devolution" label="Scottish devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="1333" end="1352" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690249" start="1360" end="1395" title="1997 Scottish devolution referendum" label="1997 Scottish devolution referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="1459" end="1476" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269950" start="1521" end="1555" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election" label="first Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="1574" end="1607" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529483" start="1618" end="1636" title="Glasgow Anniesland (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Glasgow Anniesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q110821655" start="1670" end="1708" title="Leader of the Scottish Labour Party" label="Leader of the Labour Party in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="1745" end="1771" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Scottish Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112009" start="1950" end="1982" title="Dewar government" label="first Scottish Executive cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974754" start="2246" end="2252" title="National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000" label="a bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997444" start="2266" end="2292" title="National parks of Scotland" label="national parks in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="2374" end="2390" title="brain hemorrhage" label="brain hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="2431" end="2452" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="Deputy First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q333807" start="2453" end="2464" title="Jim Wallace" label="Jim Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q333820" start="2508" end="2521" title="Henry McLeish" label="Henry McLeish"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="2628" end="2647" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="2819" end="2831" title="Middle class" label="middle-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q67666986" start="2845" end="2856" title="Kelvingrove, Glasgow" label="Kelvingrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q171171" start="2900" end="2924" title="Dermatologist" label="consultant dermatologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3059" end="3071" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="3180" end="3196" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3208" end="3224" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916694" start="3267" end="3290" title="Mosspark" label="Mosspark Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566738" start="3300" end="3319" title="The Glasgow Academy" label="The Glasgow Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q636156" start="3434" end="3444" title="only child" label="only child"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="3638" end="3659" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566946" start="3773" end="3790" title="Glasgow University Dialectic Society" label="Dialectic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q332377" start="3802" end="3812" title="John Smith (Labour Party leader)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="3851" end="3863" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q248021" start="3869" end="3885" title="Menzies Campbell" label="Menzies Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="3924" end="3941" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q337121" start="3947" end="3967" title="Lord Irvine of Lairg" label="Lord Irvine of Lairg"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="3988" end="4003" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566948" start="4117" end="4144" title="Glasgow University Guardian" label="Glasgow University Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566951" start="4179" end="4206" title="Glasgow University Magazine" label="Glasgow University Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566957" start="4315" end="4339" title="Glasgow University Union" label="Glasgow University Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566955" start="4380" end="4417" title="Glasgow University Students&amp;#x27; Representative Council" label="Students&amp;#x27; Representative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q212955" start="4446" end="4460" title="Albert Luthuli" label="Albert Luthuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="4473" end="4498" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960690" start="4510" end="4527" title="Rector of the University of Glasgow" label="University Rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785149" start="4554" end="4568" title="Master of Arts (Scotland)" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="4614" end="4629" title="Bachelor of Law" label="Bachelor of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="4757" end="4769" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="4823" end="4833" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q299997" start="4892" end="4906" title="Aberdeen South (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Aberdeen South"/>
<link wikidata="Q918430" start="4996" end="5017" title="1966 United Kingdom general election" label="1966 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245582" start="5045" end="5065" title="Priscilla Tweedsmuir" label="Priscilla Tweedsmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="5111" end="5127" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477321" start="5386" end="5417" title="Parliamentary Private Secretary" label="Parliamentary Private Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="5425" end="5456" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q301252" start="5458" end="5474" title="Anthony Crosland" label="Anthony Crosland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632935" start="5717" end="5734" title="Minister of State" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="5747" end="5758" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655384" start="5846" end="5857" title="Iain Sproat" label="Iain Sproat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280736" start="6041" end="6052" title="Radio Clyde" label="Radio Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189028" start="6085" end="6099" title="Dennis Canavan" label="Dennis Canavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986585" start="6132" end="6150" title="West Stirlingshire" label="West Stirlingshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797246" start="6481" end="6499" title="Glasgow Garscadden" label="Glasgow Garscadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195110" start="6557" end="6597" title="Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers" label="Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018514" start="6602" end="6614" title="William Small (Scottish politician)" label="Willie Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566814" start="6670" end="6681" title="1978 Glasgow Garscadden by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="6760" end="6783" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395662" start="6824" end="6870" title="1979 Scottish devolution referendum" label="Scotland&amp;#x27;s first referendum on devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633598" start="6960" end="6980" title="Alick Buchanan-Smith (politician)" label="Alick Buchanan-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q333754" start="6997" end="7013" title="Russell Johnston" label="Russell Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437608" start="7243" end="7276" title="Scottish Affairs Select Committee" label="Scottish Affairs Select Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="7404" end="7416" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="7804" end="7821" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="Pan Am Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q332377" start="7899" end="7909" title="John Smith (Labour Party leader)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="7926" end="7941" title="Welfare spending" label="Social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="8027" end="8037" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566749" start="8136" end="8154" title="Glasgow Anniesland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Glasgow Anniesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="8297" end="8328" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="8429" end="8441" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="8565" end="8575" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="8667" end="8686" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269950" start="8692" end="8734" title="1999 Scottish Parliament election" label="first elections to the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="8839" end="8862" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="8870" end="8882" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="8906" end="8939" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529483" start="8950" end="8968" title="Glasgow Anniesland (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Glasgow Anniesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="9157" end="9176" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="9197" end="9223" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942078" start="9286" end="9314" title="Royal warrant of appointment (United Kingdom)" label="Royal Warrant of Appointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="9318" end="9339" title="Elizabeth II" label="Her Majesty the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q505950" start="9343" end="9356" title="Holyroodhouse" label="Holyroodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="9392" end="9408" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="9644" end="9670" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Scottish Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q505950" start="9925" end="9948" title="Palace of Holyroodhouse" label="Palace of Holyroodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="9976" end="9992" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679873" start="10015" end="10029" title="Lord President of the Court of Session" label="lord president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599947" start="10046" end="10068" title="Great Seal of Scotland" label="Great Seal of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32859621" start="10121" end="10137" title="Scottish cabinet" label="Scottish cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11311619" start="10427" end="10442" title="Scottish Office" label="Scottish Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q333807" start="11222" end="11233" title="Jim Wallace" label="Jim Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="11241" end="11262" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="deputy first minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413677" start="11267" end="11287" title="Minister for Justice" label="Minister for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q333820" start="11289" end="11302" title="Henry McLeish" label="Henry McLeish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865814" start="11324" end="11369" title="Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning" label="Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216457" start="11374" end="11387" title="Sam Galbraith" label="Sam Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273722" start="11413" end="11432" title="Minister for Health" label="Minister for Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q505043" start="11552" end="11563" title="Lord Hardie" label="Lord Hardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108359" start="11568" end="11578" title="Colin Boyd, Baron Boyd of Duncansby" label="Colin Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807003" start="11618" end="11631" title="Lord Advocate" label="Lord Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154402" start="11636" end="11666" title="Solicitor General for Scotland" label="Solicitor General for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="12019" end="12046" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="12047" end="12059" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q264196" start="12084" end="12098" title="David Blunkett" label="David Blunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668266" start="12575" end="12581" title="Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc. (Scotland) Act 2000" label="a bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974754" start="12631" end="12637" title="National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000" label="a bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997444" start="12651" end="12677" title="National parks of Scotland" label="national parks in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="12977" end="12986" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="13921" end="13928" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="13936" end="13941" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="14046" end="14053" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q235007" start="15948" end="15961" title="heart surgery" label="heart surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q333807" start="16038" end="16049" title="Jim Wallace" label="Jim Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933548" start="16134" end="16146" title="NHS Scotland" label="NHS Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q132040" start="17230" end="17244" title="Jack McConnell" label="Jack McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q107694341" start="17648" end="17663" title="Cabinet Secretary for NHS Recovery, Health and Social Care" label="Health Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q544755" start="17664" end="17676" title="Susan Deacon" label="Susan Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310977" start="17969" end="17975" title="Higher (Scottish)" label="Higher"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="18463" end="18478" title="Chief executive officer" label="Chief Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919096" start="18607" end="18639" title="Scottish Qualification Authority" label="Scottish Qualification Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="18714" end="18722" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216457" start="18800" end="18813" title="Sam Galbraith" label="Sam Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="19674" end="19686" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q337121" start="20045" end="20057" title="Derry Irvine" label="Derry Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="20080" end="20089" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="20253" end="20260" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189028" start="20307" end="20321" title="Dennis Canavan" label="Dennis Canavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="20394" end="20405" title="skin cancer" label="skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566905" start="20812" end="20835" title="Glasgow Royal Infirmary" label="Glasgow Royal Infirmary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617773" start="20851" end="20868" title="Stobhill Hospital" label="Stobhill Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177153" start="21088" end="21101" title="David Whitton" label="David Whitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q333807" start="21384" end="21395" title="Jim Wallace" label="Jim Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q30582372" start="21591" end="21626" title="First Minister&amp;#x27;s Questions (Scottish Parliament)" label="First Minister&amp;#x27;s Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392726" start="21650" end="21679" title="2000 SQA examinations controversy" label="2000 exam results controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="21760" end="21768" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815571" start="21817" end="21827" title="Tom Devine" label="Tom Devine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="21831" end="21837" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928830" start="22041" end="22051" title="Bute House" label="Bute House"/>
<link wikidata="Q32859621" start="22079" end="22095" title="Scottish Cabinet" label="Scottish Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="22160" end="22177" title="brain haemorrhage" label="brain haemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="22214" end="22227" title="anticoagulant" label="anticoagulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987867" start="22343" end="22367" title="Western General Hospital" label="Western General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="22371" end="22380" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094647" start="22491" end="22510" title="intensive care unit" label="intensive care unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473348" start="22790" end="22807" title="Glasgow Cathedral" label="Glasgow Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017159" start="22876" end="22888" title="Lochgilphead" label="Lochgilphead"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="22892" end="22898" title="Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="22943" end="22963" title="Charles III" label="The Duke of Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="22997" end="23007" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="23009" end="23045" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q174214" start="23051" end="23063" title="Cherie Blair" label="Cherie Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q333807" start="23066" end="23077" title="Jim Wallace" label="Jim Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="23086" end="23112" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q154550" start="23115" end="23127" title="Bertie Ahern" label="Bertie Ahern"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="23129" end="23138" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q192556" start="23164" end="23177" title="David Trimble" label="David Trimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362221" start="23179" end="23213" title="First Minister of Northern Ireland" label="First Minister of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="23255" end="23281" title="Scottish Government Cabinet" label="Scottish Executive Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q511689" start="23298" end="23313" title="Wendy Alexander" label="Wendy Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865870" start="23315" end="23339" title="Minister for Communities and Housing" label="Minister for Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q333820" start="23343" end="23356" title="Henry McLeish" label="Henry McLeish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865814" start="23358" end="23403" title="Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning" label="Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="23421" end="23450" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="23466" end="23478" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="23480" end="23507" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986943" start="23513" end="23524" title="Sarah Jane Brown" label="Sarah Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="23529" end="23539" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="23541" end="23555" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333811" start="23559" end="23571" title="John Swinney" label="John Swinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q96418788" start="23573" end="23610" title="Leader of the Scottish National Party" label="Leader of the Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q332950" start="23614" end="23629" title="Charles Kennedy" label="Charles Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625186" start="23631" end="23662" title="Leader of the Liberal Democrats" label="Leader of the Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="23665" end="23677" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="23686" end="23712" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q248021" start="23715" end="23731" title="Menzies Campbell" label="Menzies Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="23751" end="23771" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q333795" start="23774" end="23796" title="James Douglas-Hamilton" label="James Douglas-Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q333056" start="23902" end="23916" title="George Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen" label="Lord Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q167662" start="23918" end="23943" title="Secretary General of NATO" label="Secretary General of NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q653236" start="23946" end="23963" title="Alastair Campbell" label="Alastair Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16989040" start="23965" end="23995" title="Downing Street Press Secretary" label="Downing Street Press Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q505043" start="23998" end="24009" title="Lord Hardie" label="Lord Hardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450071" start="24011" end="24044" title="Senator of the College of Justice" label="Senator of the College of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q577051" start="24047" end="24057" title="John Monks" label="John Monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532179" start="24059" end="24076" title="General Secretary of the TUC" label="General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="24084" end="24105" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980527" start="24752" end="24767" title="Iain Macwhirter" label="Iain Macwhirter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639411" start="24775" end="24788" title="Sunday Herald" label="Sunday Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q333820" start="24837" end="24850" title="Henry McLeish" label="Henry McLeish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="24854" end="24868" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="24931" end="24950" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="24980" end="24997" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="Scotland Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918497" start="25031" end="25051" title="Father of the Nation" label="Father of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509280" start="25104" end="25112" title="advocacy" label="advocacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866421" start="25117" end="25136" title="Scottish devolution" label="Scottish devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336993" start="25327" end="25347" title="Scottish nationalism" label="Scottish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="25372" end="25384" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401913" start="25401" end="25415" title="Unionism in the United Kingdom" label="great unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449320" start="25578" end="25610" title="semi-proportional representation" label="semi-proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354822" start="25615" end="25647" title="Elections in Scotland" label="Scottish parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="25717" end="25747" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="26063" end="26073" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q110900021" start="26083" end="26100" title="Statue of Donald Dewar" label="a statue of Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567908" start="26130" end="26145" title="Buchanan Street" label="Buchanan Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q861866" start="26603" end="26624" title="Old Royal High School" label="Old Royal High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199959" start="26628" end="26639" title="Calton Hill" label="Calton Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336993" start="26661" end="26672" title="Scottish nationalist" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q840625" start="26673" end="26683" title="shibboleth" label="shibboleth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437624" start="26743" end="26760" title="Scottish Assembly" label="Scottish Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395662" start="26768" end="26783" title="1979 Scottish devolution referendum" label="1979 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625364" start="26876" end="26884" title="Holyrood, Edinburgh" label="Holyrood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26891" end="26913" title="Scottish Parliament Building#Problems" label="which proved expensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q779036" start="26935" end="26944" title="British Rail Class 334" label="Class 334"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8835" wikidata="Q193884" url="?curid=8835" title="Digimon">
<text>, short for &quot;Digital Monsters&quot; ( &quot;Dejitaru Monsutā&quot;), is a Japanese media franchise, which encompasses virtual pet toys, anime, manga, video games, films, and a trading card game. The franchise focuses on the eponymous creatures that inhabit a &quot;Digital World&quot;, which is a parallel universe that originated from Earth&#x27;s various communication networks.

The franchise was created in 1997 as a series of digital pets, and it was intended as the masculine counterpart to Tamagotchi. The creatures were first designed to look cute and iconic even on the devices&#x27; small screens. Later developments had them created with a harder-edged style, which was influenced by American comics. The franchise gained momentum with an early video game, &quot;Digimon World&quot;, originally released in Japan in January 1999. Several anime series and films have been released; the video game series has expanded into genres, such as role-playing, racing, fighting, and MMORPGs. The franchise generated over $500 million in sales by 2000.

==Conception and creation==

The &quot;Digimon&quot; franchise began as a series of virtual pets created by WiZ and Bandai, intended as a masculine counterpart to the more female-oriented Tamagotchi pets. It was released in June 1997 with the name Digimon, short for &quot;Digital Monster&quot;. This device shows to players a virtual pet composed entirely of data and designed to play and fight. In February 1998, the &quot;DigiMon&quot; fighting game, compatible with Windows 95 and developed by Rapture Technologies, Inc., was announced. The one-shot manga &quot;C&#x27;mon Digimon&quot;, designed by Tenya Yabuno, was published in the Japanese magazine V-Jump by Shueisha in 1997.

A second generation of &quot;virtual pets&quot; was marketed six months after the launch of the first, followed by a third in 1998. Each player starts with a baby-level digital creature that has a limited number of attacks and transformations and to make the creature stronger by training and nourishing the creature; when the player is successful in a workout, the Digimon becomes strong, when the player fails, the Digimon becomes weak. Two devices can be connected, allowing two players to battle with their respective creatures, an innovation at the time, however, the battle is only possible from the moment the creature is in the child level or bigger. Playgrounds and subways were where the majority of users of the apparatus were concentrated; the virtual pet was banned in some Asian schools, being considered by parents and teachers as very noisy and violent. The first Digimon were created by Japanese designer Kenji Watanabe, influenced by American comics, which were beginning to gain popularity in Japan, and as such began to make his characters look stronger and &quot;cool.&quot; Other types of Digimon, which until the year 2000 totalled 279, came from extensive discussions and collaborations between the Bandai company members.

The original Digital Monster model that was released in 1997 sold units worldwide, including million units in Japan and million overseas, up until March 2004. By 2005, more than Digital Monster units had been sold worldwide.

==Premise==
Several media in the franchise are contained within their own continuity; however, they all share a similar setting and premise. For instance, most &quot;Digimon&quot; stories begin with a human child, who comes into contact with a Digimon. This generally occurs either through an accidental entrance into the so-called Digital World or an encounter with a Digimon who has come into the human world. The child or children then often find themselves equipped with a &quot;digivice&quot;, which is a device modelled after the series&#x27; virtual pets; this device enables them to empower their partner Digimon.

While some Digimon act like wild beasts, there are many who form small societies and follow governing bodies. Digimon can change through evolution (or &quot;digivolution&quot; in most English-language dubs), where they absorb additional data that allows them to change forms. This process is normally linear, but there are other methods, depending upon the media within the franchise. For example, &quot;Jogress&quot; (a portmanteau of &quot;joint progress&quot;; &quot;DNA Digivolution&quot; in most English-language dubs) is when two or more Digimon combine into a single being. Though evolution can occur naturally, Digimon can progress into stronger forms more quickly, when they are partnered with a human.

==Media==
===Anime===
====Television series====
Multiple &quot;Digimon&quot; anime series have been produced by Toei Animation since 1999. The first of these was &quot;Digimon Adventure&quot;; it began as a short film, but after its storyboard was finished, a request for the film to become a television series was made. The film debuted in theaters a day before the series debuted on TV.

There are seven &quot;Digimon&quot; series were adapted into English for release in Western markets, with the first four treated as a single show under the collective title &quot;Digimon: Digital Monsters&quot;. The sixth series, &quot;Digimon Fusion&quot;, was only partially dubbed; its third season was never dub into English.

====Films====
Several &quot;Digimon&quot; featurette films were released in Japan, with some of them seasonal tie-ins for their respective television series. Footage from the first three films was used for the American-produced &quot;Digimon: The Movie&quot;.

====OVA====
====Distribution and localization====
In the United States, the first three series that made up &quot;Digimon: Digital Monsters&quot; first aired on Fox Kids from August 14, 1999 to June 8, 2002. The localized series was produced by Saban Entertainment, which would be acquired by The Walt Disney Company during the show&#x27;s Fox Kids run. Some scenes from the original shows were modified or omitted in order to comply with Fox&#x27;s standards and practices. The show also featured more jokes and added dialogue, along with a completely different musical score. As a cross-promotional stunt, 2001 and 2002 saw &quot;Digi-Bowl&quot; specials co-produced with Fox Sports; &quot;NFL on Fox&quot; commentator Terry Bradshaw provided interstitial segments in-between episodes as if the episodes were actually a football game.

Disney&#x27;s acquisition of Saban would result in &quot;Digimon&quot; airing on Disney&#x27;s TV networks and programming blocks. Reruns of the show would begin airing on the cable network ABC Family on March 4, 2002, while the fourth series, &quot;Digimon Frontier&quot;, premiered on UPN&#x27;s Disney&#x27;s One Too block. UPN aired the series until late August 2003, when they severed their ties to Disney. &quot;Frontier&quot; would also air in reruns on ABC Family and on Toon Disney under the Jetix branding. An English version of &quot;Digimon Data Squad&quot;, produced by Studiopolis, would premiere October 1, 2007, on Toon Disney. Around this time, the remaining Digimon Adventure 02 movie, both Tamers movies and the Frontier movie would also be dubbed and aired on Toon Disney in the US, with most actors from the TV series reprising their roles. The Data Squad/Savers movie however would not get a North American localised English dub produced.

In September 2012, Saban Brands, a successor to Saban Entertainment, announced it had acquired the &quot;Digimon&quot; anime franchise. Saban would announce that they would be producing an English dub for &quot;Digimon Xros Wars&quot;, retitled &quot;Digimon Fusion&quot;, for broadcast on Nickelodeon in the United States starting September 7, 2013. Saban Capital Group would later sell most of Saban Brands&#x27; entertainment properties to Hasbro in 2018 and shutter the division in July of that year.

The &quot;Digimon Adventure tri.&quot; series would be distributed in North America by Eleven Arts. The English dub would utilize localized names from Saban&#x27;s original dub, reunite several voice actors from the original cast, and feature a remixed version of the English opening theme, while retaining the original Japanese score. Shout! Factory would acquire the broadcast and home media distribution rights for the films.

====International====
In Canada, the English versions of &quot;Digimon&quot; were broadcast on YTV, with the exception of &quot;Data Squad&quot;, which aired in Family Channel&#x27;s Jetix block. YTV would eventually acquire &quot;Digimon Fusion&quot;, but only the first 26 episodes were shown.

In the United Kingdom, &quot;Digimon&quot; first aired on Fox Kids. ITV&#x27;s children&#x27;s slot CITV would broadcast &quot;Adventure&quot;, &quot;Adventure 02&quot; and several episodes of &quot;Tamers&quot; during after school hours from 2001–2002. The rest of &quot;Tamers&quot; aired on Fox Kids from 2002–03. &quot;Digimon Frontier&quot; was originally announced to be broadcast on Jetix, but the series was later dropped. The series eventually saw a release on October 29, 2018. In 2011, &quot;Digimon Data Squad&quot; aired on Kix!. 
According to Fox Kids&#x27; (2000–03) and Kix&#x27;s (2010–) BARB Television ratings, &quot;Adventure&quot;, &quot;Adventure 02&quot; &amp; &quot;Tamers&quot; have been the most popular series&#x27;/seasons in the United Kingdom and was consistently in the weekly top 10 broadcasts for both channels for new episodes. Broadcast rights and merchandising sub-licensing rights for &quot;Digimon Fusion&quot; in the UK have been acquired by ITV Studios Global Entertainment. &quot;Digimon Fusion&quot; had aired since Spring 2014 on digital terrestrial channel, CITV.

In the Philippines, &quot;Digimon&quot; was first aired on ABS-CBN in Filipino English language from June 2, 2000 to October 21, 2001. And later, it was shift to Filipino in April 6, 2002.

===Manga===
&quot;Digimon&quot; first appeared in narrative form in the one-shot manga &quot;C&#x27;mon Digimon&quot;, released in the summer of 1997. &quot;C&#x27;mon Digimon&quot; spawned the popular &quot;Digimon Adventure V-Tamer 01&quot; manga, written by Hiroshi Izawa, which began serialization on November 21, 1998. The following are the known &quot;Digimon&quot; manga:

====&quot;Digimon Next&quot;====
Written by Tatsuya Hamazaki and illustrated by Takeshi Okano, was serialized in Shueisha&#x27;s magazine &quot;V Jump&quot; from 2005 to 2008. Shueisha collected its chapters in four &quot;tankōbon&quot; volumes, released from July 4, 2006, to February 4, 2008. The story follow Tsurugi Tatsuno and his digimon partner, Greymon (later Agumon). Tsurugi makes contact with the Digital World through his virtual pet device called Digimon Mini and a &quot;Battle Terminal&quot;, a virtual reality interface. Digimon can use the technology to materialize in the human world as well.

====&quot;Digimon Dreamers&quot;====

In 2021, a manga called &quot;Digimon Dreamers&quot; was announced.

====Yuen Wong Yu manhua====
A Chinese manhua was written and drawn by (余 遠鍠 &quot;Yu Yuen-wong&quot;), who based its storyline on the television series. This adaptation covers &quot;Digimon Adventure&quot; in five volumes, &quot;Digimon Adventure 02&quot; in two, &quot;Digimon Tamers&quot; in four, and &quot;Digimon Frontier&quot; in three. The original stories are heavily abridged, though on rare occasions events play out differently from the anime. The Chinese-language version was published by Rightman Publishing Ltd. in Hong Kong. Yu also wrote &quot;D-Cyber&quot;.

Two English versions were also released. The first one was published by Chuang Yi in Singapore. The second one, which was adapted by Lianne Sentar, was released by Tokyopop in North America.&lt;br&gt;The three volumes for &quot;Digimon Frontier&quot; have been released by Chuang Yi in English. These have not been released by TOKYOPOP in North America or Europe. However, the Chuang Yi releases of &quot;Digimon Frontier&quot; were distributed by Madman Entertainment in Australia.

====Dark Horse====
Dark Horse Comics published American-style Digimon comic books, adapting the first thirteen episodes of the English dub of &quot;Digimon Adventure&quot; in 2001. The story was written by Daniel Horn and Ryan Hill, and illustrated by Daniel Horn and Cara L. Niece.

====Panini====
The Italian publishing company Panini published &quot;Digimon&quot; titles in several ways in different countries. Germany had their own adaptations of episodes, the UK reprinted the Dark Horse titles and translated some of the German adaptations of &quot;Adventure 02&quot; episodes. Eventually the UK comics had their own original stories, which appeared in both the UK&#x27;s &quot;Digimon Magazine&quot; and the UK Fox Kids companion magazine &quot;Wickid&quot;. These original stories roughly followed the continuity of &quot;Adventure 02&quot;. When the comic switched to the &quot;Tamers&quot; series the storylines adhered to continuity more strictly; sometimes it would expand on subject matter not covered by the original Japanese anime (such as Mitsuo Yamaki&#x27;s past) or the English adaptations of the television shows and movies (such as Ryo&#x27;s story or the movies that remained undubbed until 2005). In a money saving venture, the original stories were later removed from &quot;Digimon Magazine&quot;, which returned to printing translated German adaptations of &quot;Tamers&quot; episodes. Eventually, both magazines were cancelled.

===Video games===
The &quot;Digimon&quot; series has inspired various video games, including the &quot;Digimon World&quot; and &quot;Digimon Story&quot; sub-series of role-playing games. Other genres have included life simulation, adventure, video card game, strategy, and racing games.

By March 2001, Bandai had sold approximately video games worldwide, including 400,000 in Japan. In February 2010, a website for the MMORPG &quot;Digimon Battle Online&quot; was launched. On September 22, 2011, online game publisher Joymax announced the release of an MMORPG game called &quot;Digimon Masters&quot;, which was developed by the Korean publisher DIGITALIC. In June 2021 it was announced that they were developing a new MMORPG titled &quot;Digimon Super Rumble&quot;.

In 2011, a new entry in the &quot;Digimon World&quot; series was announced after a seven-year hiatus, titled &quot;Digimon World Re:Digitize&quot;. The game would be released in Japan on July 19, 2012, followed by an enhanced version for Nintendo 3DS released in 2013.

&quot;Digimon Story: Cyber Sleuth&quot; was first released in Japan in 2015. It would be the first game in the &quot;Digimon Story&quot; series to be released in North America under its original title; &quot;Digimon World DS&quot; and &quot;Digimon World Dawn and Dusk&quot; were originally marketed as entries in the &quot;Digimon World&quot; series, with the latter game being the last to be released in the West for nine years until &quot;Cyber Sleuth&quot;&#x27;s release on February 2, 2016.

There have also been several mobile games. &quot;Digimon Links&quot; was active from March 2016 to July 2019, and was similar to the &quot;Story&quot; games in that the player raised digimon in a farm and fought enemies using a team of three of their Digimon. It was succeeded by &quot;Digimon ReArise&quot;, which launched June 2018 in Japan and October 2019 in America.

===Web novel===
In February 2023, Bandai announced a web novel titled to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the franchise. The novel will serialize on the Digimon Web website for about a year, starting on April 3, simultaneously in English, Chinese, and Japanese.

===Webcomic===
In December 2023, Bandai announced a webcomic titled &quot;Digimon Liberator&quot; for Spring 2024.

===Card game===
The Digimon Collectible Card Game is a card game based on Digimon, first introduced in Japan in 1997 and published by Bandai. The third season (&quot;Digimon Tamers&quot;) utilized this aspect of the franchise by making the card game an integral part of the season. Versions of the card game are also included in some of the Digimon video games including &quot;Digital Card Battle&quot; and &quot;Digimon World 3&quot;.

During the fourth anime (&quot;Digimon Frontier&quot;), Bandai created the &quot;D-Tector Card Game&quot; to tie in to their own D-Tector virtual pet toys. This was a West-only card game. From February 25, 2011 to September 28, 2012, &quot;Digimon Jintrix&quot; was an online card game supported by physical card releases. It was followed up by the mobile game &quot;Digimon Crusader&quot;, which lasted from December 2012 to December 2017. In 2020 a new card game was launched to coincide with &quot;Digimon Adventure:&quot; using a new system, this was released in the West in January 2021.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* , outside-of-Asia series </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="88" end="103" title="media franchise" label="media franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187635" start="123" end="134" title="virtual pet" label="virtual pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="141" end="146" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="148" end="153" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="155" end="166" title="Video game" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q734698" start="181" end="198" title="trading card game" label="trading card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="302" end="319" title="Parallel universes in fiction" label="parallel universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747487" start="426" end="448" title="Digital Monster" label="series of digital pets"/>
<link wikidata="Q207786" start="502" end="512" title="Tamagotchi" label="Tamagotchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004" start="709" end="715" title="comics" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320677" start="779" end="792" title="Digimon World" label="Digimon World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250389" start="897" end="918" title="List of Digimon video games" label="the video game series"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="953" end="965" title="role-playing video game" label="role-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q860750" start="967" end="973" title="racing game" label="racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="975" end="983" title="fighting game" label="fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="989" end="996" title="massively multiplayer online role-playing game" label="MMORPGs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207786" start="1247" end="1257" title="Tamagotchi" label="Tamagotchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747487" start="1307" end="1314" title="Digital Monster (virtual pet)" label="Digimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187635" start="1386" end="1397" title="virtual pet" label="virtual pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="1529" end="1539" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q933530" start="1604" end="1612" title="one-shot (comics)" label="one-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="1613" end="1618" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q193884" start="1625" end="1643" title="C&amp;#x27;mon Digimon" label="C&amp;#x27;mon Digimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81073" start="1716" end="1722" title="V-Jump" label="V-Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q844822" start="1726" end="1734" title="Shueisha" label="Shueisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004" start="2706" end="2712" title="comics" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141130" start="3293" end="3303" title="Continuity (fiction)" label="continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="4263" end="4274" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q730179" start="4667" end="4681" title="Toei Animation" label="Toei Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q689114" start="4723" end="4740" title="Digimon Adventure (1999 TV series)" label="Digimon Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="4993" end="5000" title="Dub localization" label="adapted"/>
<link wikidata="Q626178" start="5698" end="5706" title="Fox Kids" label="Fox Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719775" start="5782" end="5801" title="Saban Entertainment" label="Saban Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="5830" end="5853" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598425" start="5987" end="6010" title="standards and practices" label="standards and practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q75776" start="6211" end="6221" title="Fox Sports (United States)" label="Fox Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q633263" start="6258" end="6272" title="Terry Bradshaw" label="Terry Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="6551" end="6564" title="cable network" label="cable network"/>
<link wikidata="Q287149" start="6565" end="6575" title="Freeform (TV channel)" label="ABC Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q311940" start="6625" end="6641" title="Digimon Frontier" label="Digimon Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="6662" end="6665" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282397" start="6673" end="6694" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s One Too" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s One Too"/>
<link wikidata="Q313173" start="6854" end="6865" title="Toon Disney" label="Toon Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q156073" start="6876" end="6881" title="Jetix" label="Jetix"/>
<link wikidata="Q666569" start="6920" end="6938" title="Digimon Data Squad" label="Digimon Data Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11304980" start="7356" end="7368" title="Saban Brands" label="Saban Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q275676" start="7588" end="7602" title="Digimon Fusion" label="Digimon Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="7627" end="7638" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277355" start="7688" end="7707" title="Saban Capital Group" label="Saban Capital Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="7780" end="7786" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359752" start="7930" end="7941" title="Eleven Arts" label="Eleven Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="8179" end="8193" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789910" start="8368" end="8371" title="YTV (TV channel)" label="YTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481717" start="8434" end="8448" title="Family Channel (Canadian TV network)" label="Family Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089865" start="8628" end="8636" title="Disney XD (UK and Ireland)" label="Fox Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="8638" end="8641" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997305" start="8670" end="8674" title="CITV" label="CITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089865" start="8864" end="8872" title="Disney XD (UK and Ireland)" label="Fox Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q311940" start="8893" end="8909" title="Digimon Frontier" label="Digimon Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418935" start="9107" end="9111" title="Kix!" label="Kix!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972121" start="9175" end="9179" title="Broadcasters&amp;#x27; Audience Research Board" label="BARB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9551" end="9583" title="ITV Studios#ITV Studios Global Entertainment" label="ITV Studios Global Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022113" start="9738" end="9745" title="ABS-CBN" label="ABS-CBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="9919" end="9928" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q933530" start="9941" end="9949" title="One shot (comic)" label="one-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q844822" start="10362" end="10370" title="Shueisha" label="Shueisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q81073" start="10393" end="10399" title="V Jump" label="V Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q241996" start="10471" end="10479" title="tankōbon" label="tankōbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276765" start="10602" end="10609" title="Greymon" label="Greymon"/>
<link wikidata="Q754669" start="11006" end="11012" title="manhua" label="manhua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11469" end="11493" title="Rightman Publishing" label="Rightman Publishing Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q3027778" start="11528" end="11535" title="D-Cyber" label="D-Cyber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418447" start="11616" end="11625" title="Chuang Yi" label="Chuang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11677" end="11690" title="Lianne Sentar" label="Lianne Sentar"/>
<link wikidata="Q315736" start="11708" end="11716" title="Tokyopop" label="Tokyopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816526" start="11992" end="12012" title="Madman Entertainment" label="Madman Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="12047" end="12064" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="12098" end="12108" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="12163" end="12166" title="dubbing (filmmaking)" label="dub"/>
<link wikidata="Q703322" start="12358" end="12364" title="Panini Comics" label="Panini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141130" start="12838" end="12848" title="Continuity (fiction)" label="continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q696346" start="13083" end="13096" title="Mitsuo Yamaki" label="Mitsuo Yamaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320677" start="13586" end="13599" title="Digimon World" label="Digimon World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250389" start="13616" end="13629" title="Digimon Story" label="Digimon Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="13650" end="13668" title="role-playing games" label="role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199309" start="13697" end="13712" title="life simulation game" label="life simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="13714" end="13723" title="adventure game" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q142714" start="13731" end="13740" title="card game" label="card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q472055" start="13742" end="13750" title="strategy video game" label="strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q860750" start="13756" end="13762" title="racing video game" label="racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="13903" end="13909" title="MMORPG" label="MMORPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074377" start="13916" end="13937" title="Digimon Battle Online" label="Digimon Battle Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146772" start="14003" end="14009" title="Joymax" label="Joymax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027781" start="14063" end="14078" title="Digimon Masters" label="Digimon Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074377" start="14130" end="14139" title="Digitalic" label="DIGITALIC"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14367" end="14392" title="Digimon World Re:Digitize" label="Digimon World Re:Digitize"/>
<link wikidata="Q203597" start="14490" end="14502" title="Nintendo 3DS" label="Nintendo 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14528" end="14555" title="Digimon Story: Cyber Sleuth" label="Digimon Story: Cyber Sleuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071044" start="14730" end="14746" title="Digimon World DS" label="Digimon World DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568498" start="14763" end="14790" title="Digimon World Dawn and Dusk" label="Digimon World Dawn and Dusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552040" start="15446" end="15455" title="web novel" label="web novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q696346" start="15939" end="15953" title="Digimon Tamers" label="Digimon Tamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224677" start="16186" end="16201" title="Digimon World 3" label="Digimon World 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q311940" start="16241" end="16257" title="Digimon Frontier" label="Digimon Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q83133117" start="16711" end="16729" title="Digimon Adventure (2020 TV series)" label="Digimon Adventure:"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8837" wikidata="Q335013" url="?curid=8837" title="David Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty">
<text>Admiral of the Fleet David Richard Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty, (17 January 1871 – 12 March 1936) was a Royal Navy officer. After serving in the Mahdist War and then the response to the Boxer Rebellion, he commanded the Battle Cruiser Fleet at the Battle of Jutland in 1916, a tactically indecisive engagement after which his aggressive approach was contrasted with the caution of his commander Admiral Sir John Jellicoe. He is remembered for his comment at Jutland that &quot;There seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today&quot;, after two of them exploded. 

Later in the war he succeeded Jellicoe as Commander in Chief of the Grand Fleet, in which capacity he received the surrender of the German High Seas Fleet at the end of the war. He then followed Jellicoe&#x27;s path a second time, serving as First Sea Lord—a position that Beatty held longer (7 years 9 months) than any other First Sea Lord. While First Sea Lord, he was involved in negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 in which it was agreed that the United States, Britain and Japan should set their navies in a ratio of 5:5:3, with France and Italy maintaining smaller ratio fleets of 1.75 each.

==Family and childhood==
Beatty was born into an Anglo-Irish family at Howbeck Lodge in the parish of Stapeley, near Nantwich, Cheshire, on 17 January 1871. He was the second son of five children born to Captain David Longfield Beatty and Katherine (or Katrine) Edith Beatty (née Sadleir), both from Ireland: David Longfield had been an officer in the Fourth Hussars where he formed a relationship with Katrine, the wife of another officer.

After the affair between David Longfield and Katrine became known, David Longfield&#x27;s father (Beatty&#x27;s grandfather), David Vandeleur Beatty (1815–1881), arranged for his son to be posted to India in the hope that the scandalous relationship might end. David Longfield resigned from the regiment on 21 November 1865, with the honorary rank of Captain. He took up residence with Katrine in Cheshire and in 1869 sold his commission. David Longfield was unable to marry Katrine until Katrine had obtained a divorce on 21 February 1871, after the birth of their first two sons. Beatty&#x27;s birth certificate recorded his mother&#x27;s surname as Beatty, and his parents&#x27; eventual marriage at St Michael&#x27;s Church in Liverpool was kept secret.

Beatty&#x27;s early education concentrated on horsemanship, hunting and learning to be a gentleman. Beatty had a close relationship with his elder brother Charles, who became his ally against their oppressive and overbearing father. They remained close throughout life, so much so that the only time Beatty felt despair was at his brother&#x27;s death. Beatty later wrote to his wife about Charles, &quot;we lived together, played together, rode together, fought together.&quot; His brothers would later join the British Army, but early on young David developed an interest in ships and the sea and expressed a desire to join the Royal Navy. In 1881 Beatty&#x27;s grandfather died and David Longfield succeeded to the 18th century mansion, &#x27;Borodale&#x27;, outside Enniscorthy, in County Wexford. After retiring from the army David Longfield established a business training horses first in Cheshire and then at &#x27;The Mount&#x27;, near Rugby, Warwickshire. On inheriting and following the death of his wife at &#x27;The Mount&#x27;, David Longfield returned to Ireland abandoning the training business.

Beatty was educated at Kilkenny College and in 1882 entered Burney&#x27;s Naval Academy at Gosport, which was a &#x27;crammer&#x27; for boys wishing to take the entrance examinations for the Royal Navy.

==Early career==

Beatty joined the Royal Navy as a cadet passing into the training ship HMS &quot;Britannia&quot; tenth out of ninety-nine candidates in January 1884. During his two years at &quot;Britannia&quot;, moored at Dartmouth, he was beaten three times for various infractions. He passed out of &quot;Britannia&quot; eighteenth out of the thirty-three remaining cadets at the end of 1885. Beatty&#x27;s letters home made no complaint about the poor living conditions in &quot;Britannia&quot;, and generally he was extrovert, even aggressive, and resented discipline. However, he understood how far he could transgress without serious consequences, and this approach continued throughout his career.

Beatty was given orders to join the China Station in January 1886, but the posting did not appeal to his mother, who wrote to Lord Charles Beresford, then a senior naval officer, member of parliament and personal friend, to use his influence to obtain something better. Beatty was, in February 1886, instead appointed to , flagship of Admiral the Duke of Edinburgh, Queen Victoria&#x27;s second son, who was Commander-in-Chief of the Mediterranean Squadron. This proved an excellent social opening for Beatty, who established a longstanding relationship with the Duke&#x27;s eldest daughter, Marie, and with other members of the court. &quot;Alexandra&quot; was a three-masted sailing ship with auxiliary steam power, nonetheless, remaining flagship in a navy which was steadily transitioning from sail to steam. Life in the Mediterranean fleet was considerably easier than cadet life, with visits to friendly ports all around the Mediterranean, but Beatty was concerned to work diligently towards naval examinations, which would determine seniority and future promotion prospects. Beatty was promoted to midshipman on 15 May 1886 and assigned to assist Lieutenant Stanley Colville on watchkeeping duties: Colville was to play an important part in Beatty&#x27;s future career.

Beatty left HMS &quot;Alexandra&quot; in March 1889 and joined the cruiser in July 1889 for manoeuvres before joining the sailing corvette in September 1889, in which he was promoted to sub-lieutenant on 14 May 1890. Next he attended courses at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich during which he was somewhat distracted from his naval career by the delights of London. Beatty scored a first-class examination pass in Torpedoes, but only seconds in Seamanship, Gunnery and Pilotage, and a third in Navigation. A biography states that &quot;his cabin at Greenwich was full of photographs of actresses, some of which were signed in the most endearing terms&quot;. After attending the gunnery school, , he undertook a posting to a torpedo boat in July 1891 and then a tour in from 19 January 1892.

Beatty joined the Royal Yacht &quot;Victoria and Albert&quot; in July 1892 while Queen Victoria was holidaying in the Mediterranean: Victoria was in mourning for her grandson, Albert Duke of Clarence, who had died January 1892. Promoted to lieutenant on 25 August 1892, he rejoined HMS &quot;Ruby&quot; in August 1892 and then transferred to the battleship in September 1893 (which had only recently been involved in the fleet accident where she had rammed and sunk the battleship ). He transferred to the battleship in September 1895.

==Sudan Campaign==
Beatty gained recognition during the Mahdist War for his actions in the campaign to recapture the Sudan. Stanley Colville was placed in command of the gunboats attached to the British expeditionary force in Egypt and as Beatty&#x27;s former commander in HMS &quot;Trafalgar&quot; and superior in HMS &quot;Alexandra&quot; he requested that Beatty join him. Control of the river Nile was considered vitally important for any expedition into Egypt and the Sudan. Beatty was seconded to the Egyptian government on 3 June 1896 and appointed second in command of the river flotilla. Colville was wounded during the operation, leaving Beatty in command of the gunboats for the successful attack on Dongola. The campaign halted at Dongola to regroup and Beatty returned to Britain on leave. He was commended by Kitchener for his part in the campaign and as a result was awarded the Distinguished Service Order.

Beatty was again seconded to the Egyptian government for the next phase of the campaign. This was now at Lord Kitchener&#x27;s specific request, for the Khartoum expedition. Beatty first commanded the gunboat &quot;El Teb&quot; but this was capsized attempting to ascend the Fourth Cataract. Beatty then took command of gunboat &quot;Fateh&quot; between October 1897 and August 1898: the gunboats were frequently in action advancing along the Nile ahead of the army and saw action at the Battle of Omdurman, where Beatty made the acquaintance of Winston Churchill who had become a cavalry officer in Beatty&#x27;s father&#x27;s old regiment, the 4th Hussars, and had there learnt his family history. In a few hours 10,000 Dervishes were killed by rifle and machine gun fire without any of them getting within 600 yards of the British force. This battle marked the effective end of resistance to the expeditionary force, but the gunboats were called into service to transport troops to Fashoda, south along the White Nile, where a small force of French troops had made a difficult land crossing and staked a claim to the area. Despite the ensuing crisis, the French were persuaded to withdraw without incident. Kitchener commended Beatty for his efforts in the campaign and as a result Beatty was promoted to commander, ahead of 400 other lieutenants, on 15 November 1898.

==Boxer Rebellion==
Beatty was appointed executive officer of the small battleship , flagship of the China Station, on 20 April 1899. The first year of his tour of duty was uneventful, but unrest against foreigners was growing in China. The Boxer movement was a secret Chinese peasant society committed to resisting oppression both from foreigners and from the Chinese government. The Empress Dowager Tzu-hsi partly encouraged the Boxer&#x27;s opposition to foreigners in an attempt to turn their attention away from herself. The name was derived from ritual exercises supposed to make their users immune to bullets, which resembled boxing.

In the summer of 1900 the rebellion reached Peking, where the German legation was attacked and foreign nationals withdrew to the relative safety of the Legation Quarter. Government troops joined forces with the rebels and the railway to the Treaty Port of Tientsin was interrupted. Admiral Sir Edward Seymour, then the Commander-in-Chief of the China Station, sent reinforcements to Peking, but they were insufficient to defend the legation. An attempt was therefore made to send more troops from Tientsin, where British ships had been joined by French, German, Russian, American, Austrian, Italian and Japanese. The international naval brigade force of naval marines placed itself under the senior officer present, which was Seymour. After an urgent call for help from the legation, Seymour set out on 10 June 1900 with 2,000 troops to attempt to break through to Peking in the Seymour Expedition. The force got about halfway before abandoning the attempt because the railway line had been torn up. By now rebels had begun destroying the track behind the force, cutting it off from Tientsin.
On 11 June 1900, Beatty and 150 men from HMS &quot;Barfleur&quot; landed as part of a force of 2,400 defending Tientsin from 15,000 Chinese troops plus Boxers. On 16 June 1900 the Taku forts were bombarded and captured to ensure ships could still reach the port. Fierce fighting broke out throughout the foreign areas and railway station, and Beatty was injured. He later took part in the successful relief of the naval brigade and was promoted to captain on 8 November 1900. Beatty returned to Britain, where he required an operation to restore proper use of his left arm.

==Marriage==
Beatty had returned from leave after the Sudan campaign, but finding life in Ireland at the family home not to his taste, stayed instead with his brother at Newmarket, Suffolk. The location allowed him good hunting, and access to aristocratic houses where his recent heroic reputation from the campaign made him an honoured guest. Out hunting one day he chanced to meet Ethel Tree, daughter of Chicago department store founder Marshall Field. Beatty was immediately taken with her, for her good looks and her ability to hunt. The immediate difficulty with the match was that Ethel was married already to Arthur Tree, with a son, Ronald Tree.

After the Boxer Campaign, the couple had at first exchanged letters, which Beatty signed &#x27;Jack&#x27;, as Ethel was still a married woman and discretion was advised. Ethel became involved with another man and the exchange of letters ceased but on Beatty&#x27;s return she sent him a telegram and letter inviting him to resume their friendship. Beatty did not respond until after surgery on his arm in September 1900 when he wrote, &quot;I landed from China with my heart full of rage, and swore I did not care if I ever saw you again, or if I were killed or not. And now I have arrived with the firm determination not to see you at all in my own mind... Unfortunately I shall go on loving you to the bitter end... To me always a Queen, if not always mine, Good-bye.&quot;

Despite this estrangement, the couple again met foxhunting and resumed a discreet relationship. Marshall Field was at first unimpressed by the impecunious Beatty as a future son-in-law, but was persuaded by his heroic reputation, impressive record of promotion and future prospects. There was the possibility that Field might revoke the settlement he had made on his daughter at the time of her first marriage and the new couple would have no means of support. Beatty&#x27;s father was also unhappy about the match, fearing a repeat of the difficulties he had faced with his own relationship with a married woman, but with the added risk of publicity because both Beatty and Ethel were famous and the risk that Beatty&#x27;s illegitimacy might be exposed. Beatty went so far as to consult a fortune teller, Mrs. Roberts, who predicted a fine outcome to the match. Ethel wrote to Arthur, telling him that it was her firm intention never to live with him again as his wife, though not naming any particular person or reason. Arthur agreed to co-operate, and filed for divorce in America on the grounds of desertion, which was granted 9 May 1901. Beatty and Ethel married on 22 May 1901 at the registry office, St. George&#x27;s, Hanover Square, London, with no family attending. Although Arthur Tree was himself from a wealthy American family, he now had to adjust to reduced circumstances without Ethel&#x27;s support. He elected to remain in Britain and their son Ronald remained with him. Ronald and his mother were never reconciled from his perception that she had deserted his father, but he visited in later life and became friendly with Beatty. Ronald later became a member of parliament and, during the Second World War became a link between the British and United States governments, lending his country house, Ditchley Park near Oxford, to Winston Churchill for weekend visits when the official residences were considered unsafe. Beatty and Ethel set up home at Hanover Lodge in Regent&#x27;s Park, London.

The couple had two sons, David Field Beatty, 2nd Earl Beatty (1905–1972) born at the Capua Palace in Malta, and the Hon. Peter Randolph Louis Beatty (1910–1949). His marriage to a very wealthy heiress allowed Beatty an independence that most other officers lacked. She is reputed to have commented after he was threatened with disciplinary action following the straining of his ship&#x27;s engines, &quot;What? Court-martial my David? I&#x27;ll buy them a new ship.&quot;

==Advancement==
In May 1902 Beatty was passed fit for sea duty and was appointed captain of the cruiser on 2 June, spending two months in exercises with the Channel Fleet under Admiral Sir Arthur Wilson before joining the Mediterranean Fleet. Beatty worked hard to raise efficiency so that she was highly rated in gunnery and other competitions by the time he left the ship 19 December 1902. Ethel decided not to be left behind so rented the Capua Palace on Malta, home port of the Mediterranean Fleet, where she became part of the island&#x27;s high society.

Beatty took command of the cruiser in the Mediterranean Fleet in November 1903 and then commanded the cruiser in the Mediterranean Fleet from October 1904. He then became the naval advisor to the Army Council in 1906 and, after having been appointed a naval Aide-de-Camp to the King on 5 November 1908, he became captain of the battleship in the Atlantic Fleet in December 1908. At the request of Alfred Winsloe, the Fourth Sea Lord, he was promoted to rear-admiral on 1 January 1910 by a special order in council since he had not completed the requisite time as a captain. He was offered the post of second-in-command of the Atlantic Fleet, but declined it and asked for one in the Home Fleet. As the Atlantic Fleet post was a major command, the Admiralty were very unimpressed and his attitude nearly ruined his career. Beatty, as a rapidly promoted war hero, with no financial worries and with a degree of support in Royal circles, felt more confident than most naval officers in standing firm on requesting a posting nearer home. He was approaching two years on half pay (which would trigger automatic retirement from the navy) when on 8 January 1912 his career was saved by the new First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill. Churchill had met Beatty when Beatty was commander of a gunboat on the Nile supporting the army at the Battle of Omdurman, in which Churchill took part as a cavalry officer. A &quot;probably apocryphal&quot; story relates that as Beatty walked into Churchill&#x27;s office at the Admiralty, Churchill looked him over and said, &quot;You seem very young to be an Admiral.&quot; Unfazed, Beatty replied, &quot;And you seem very young to be First Lord.&quot; Churchill – who was himself only thirty-eight years old in 1912 – took to him immediately and he was appointed Naval Secretary.
Beatty became Rear-Admiral Commanding the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron on 1 March 1913. Beatty was late taking up his new post, choosing not to cut short a holiday in Monte Carlo. On his eventual arrival, he set about drafting standing orders regarding how the squadron was to operate. He noted, &quot;Captains...to be successful must possess, in a marked degree, initiative, resource, determination, and no fear of accepting responsibility&quot;. He went on &quot;...as a rule instructions will be of a very general character so as to avoid interfering with the judgement and initiative of captains...The admiral will rely on captains to use all the information at their disposal to grasp the situation quickly and anticipate his wishes, using their own discretion as to how to act in unforeseen circumstances...&quot; The approach outlined by Beatty contradicted the views of many within the navy, who felt that ships should always be closely controlled by their commanding admiral, and harked back to reforms attempted by Admiral George Tryon. It is argued that Tryon had attempted to introduce greater independence and initiative amongst his captains, which he believed would be essential in the confusion of a real war situation, but had ironically been killed in an accident caused by captains rigorously obeying incorrect but precise orders issued by Tryon himself.

Beatty chose Lieutenant Ralph Seymour as his flag lieutenant, despite Seymour being unknown to him. Seymour had aristocratic connections, which may have appealed to Beatty since he sought connections in society, but it was also the case that Seymour&#x27;s sister was a longstanding close friend of Churchill&#x27;s wife. Appointments by influence were common in the navy at this time, but the significance of Beatty&#x27;s choice lay in Seymour&#x27;s relative inexperience as a signals officer, which later resulted in difficulties in battle.

==First World War==

On the eve of the First World War in 1914, Beatty was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath and promoted to acting vice-admiral in February 1915 and given command of the Battle Cruiser Fleet a month later. He was confirmed in the rank of vice-admiral on 9 August 1915. He led the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron at the actions at Heligoland Bight (1914), Dogger Bank (1915) and Jutland (1916).

Jutland proved to be decisive in Beatty&#x27;s career, despite the loss of two of his battlecruisers. Beatty is reported to have remarked (to his Flag Captain, Ernle Chatfield, later First Sea Lord in the early 1930s), &quot;there seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today,&quot; after two of them had exploded within half an hour during the battle. In any case Beatty&#x27;s actions succeeded in drawing the German High Seas Fleet into action against the British Grand Fleet.

Beatty succeeded Admiral John Jellicoe as commander-in-chief of the Grand Fleet and received promotion to the acting rank of admiral in December 1916. With his dashing style, he was the antithesis of his predecessor. Beatty&#x27;s marriage was failing disastrously at the time, and the result was to be a decade-long love affair between Beatty and Eugénie Godfrey-Faussett, wife of Captain Bryan Godfrey-Faussett. Under Beatty&#x27;s command the Grand Fleet maintained its dominance of the North Sea until the end of the War.

Beatty escorted the German High Seas Fleet to internment at Scapa Flow in November 1918 giving the order from his flagship that &quot;the German Flag will be hauled down at sunset and will not be raised again without permission&quot;. This was not a lawful order, as the fleet remained the property of the German Government having been interned rather than having surrendered, but nevertheless Beatty enforced it.

==First Sea Lord==
Beatty was promoted to substantive full admiral on 1 January 1919 and to Admiral of the Fleet on 1 May 1919. He was created 1st Earl Beatty, Viscount Borodale and Baron Beatty of the North Sea and Brooksby on 18 October 1919. He became First Sea Lord on 1 November 1919. In this capacity he was involved in negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 in which it was agreed that the United States, Britain and Japan should set their navies in a ratio of 5:5:3, with France and Italy maintaining smaller fleets.

During the First Labour Government of 1924, with Japan increasingly hostile to the UK, Beatty lobbied the Clynes Committee for construction of the Singapore Naval Base to continue. Beatty wrote out, but did not send, a threat of resignation. The government were trying to cut back on the numbers of cruisers constructed; the other Sea Lords attributed the building of the &quot;Kent&quot; class to Beatty&#x27;s lobbying, but government desire to alleviate shipyard unemployment was probably a more important factor.

Despite further rumours that he would resign, Beatty remained in office when the Conservatives took power in the autumn of 1924. Supported by the First Lord of the Admiralty William Bridgeman, he clashed with the new Chancellor of the Exchequer, Winston Churchill, once again over the number of cruisers required by the Royal Navy. At this stage of his career Churchill was opposed to what he saw as excessive defence spending. This may seem odd in light of his previous and subsequent reputation, but in the 1920s no major war seemed to be on the horizon. Beatty also at this time pressed hard for the return of responsibility for naval aviation from the newly formed Royal Air Force to the Royal Navy.

In 1926 Beatty was considered for the post of Governor General of Canada but was rejected by the Colonial Secretary Leo Amery as he had &quot;no manners and an impossible American wife&quot;.

By the time of his retirement from the Royal Navy in July 1927 a great deal of time was being spent preparing for the Coolidge Conference in Geneva, although Beatty did not himself attend as he had to remain in London to supervise the deployment of naval and marine forces against nationalist unrest in China and Egypt. On his last day in office (30 July) he attended a Cabinet at which Bridgeman reported the breakdown of the Geneva Conference as the Americans refused to accept any gun smaller than 8-inch for their cruisers, and after leaving office he congratulated Bridgeman that the Americans had not been able to achieve &quot;command of the sea at any cost&quot;. Beatty was appointed a member of the Privy Council on 25 July 1927. Stephen Roskill wrote that whilst Beatty and his disciple Chatfield deserve some praise for the Royal Navy&#x27;s comparative readiness in 1939, his main achievement was to maintain the morale of the Navy at a time of serious defence cuts, and that without his strong leadership the Royal Navy might have suffered more events like the Invergordon Mutiny of 1931.

==Retirement and death==
Beatty spent much of his life (when not at sea) in Leicestershire, and lived at Brooksby Hall and Dingley Hall. In July 1930 he denounced the London Naval Treaty in the House of Lords as &quot;a great and deplorable blunder to which we are about to be committed by signing away the sea power by which the British Empire came into being&quot;. Beatty also claimed: &quot;If any sane man erects an edifice, or has great possessions, he protects them by insurance. The Navy is the insurance company of the economic unity of the Empire. Under the Naval Treaty of London the Navy will be totally and entirely inadequate to provide that insurance&quot;.

Beatty&#x27;s old commander Admiral John Jellicoe died on 19 November 1935. Already suffering from heart failure, and sick with influenza, Beatty defied doctors&#x27; orders and left his bed to act as a pallbearer, saying, &quot;What will the Navy say if I fail to attend Jellicoe&#x27;s funeral?&quot; He was so obviously ill that, as the funeral procession passed up Fleet Street, a bystander sent a glass of brandy out to him. He also insisted on attending the funeral of King George V in January 1936. These acts hastened his own death.
Beatty died at around 1 am on 12 March 1936.
At Beatty&#x27;s funeral his coffin was draped in the Union Flag flown by his flagship in 1919. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Cosmo Lang, said &quot;In him something of the spirit of Nelson seemed to have come back&quot;. The Prime Minister, Stanley Baldwin, called in the House of Commons for a public memorial to Beatty to be erected, but no action was taken until after the Second World War, when busts of Beatty and Jellicoe were unveiled in Trafalgar Square on 21 October (Trafalgar Day) 1948.

Beatty had requested in his will that he would like to be buried next to his wife Ethel at Dingley: however he was actually buried at St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral and therefore the double grave at Dingley Church contains only his wife&#x27;s body.

==Assessment==
The outcome of the Battle of Jutland was inconclusive, leading to controversy and a search for someone to blame, especially since the British lost more ships. Beatty was particularly unhappy with the official account of the battle and other historians took sides in support of him or Jellicoe. Beatty did not publish his analysis of the battle, while Jellicoe wrote two memoirs.

A number of serious errors have been identified in Beatty&#x27;s handling of the Battle Cruiser Fleet at the Battle of Jutland:
*He failed to engage the German battlecruisers (the I Scouting Group) with all his ships, thus throwing away a two-to-one numerical superiority and instead fighting six-to-five. Beatty was given command of the 5th Battle Squadron to replace a squadron of battlecruisers away for training. These were four of the most powerful ships in the world, but he positioned them so far away from his six battlecruisers that they were unable to take part in most of the engagement with Admiral Hipper&#x27;s squadron of five battlecruisers.
*Beatty did not take advantage of the time available to him between sighting the enemy and the start of fighting to position his battlecruisers to most effectively attack the enemy. At the point the German ships opened fire with accurately determined ranges for their guns, Beatty&#x27;s ships were still manoeuvring, some could not see the enemy because of their own smoke, and hardly any had the opportunity of a period of steady course as they approached to properly determine target range. As a result, the German ships had a significant advantage in early hits, with obvious benefit. During this time he also lost the potential advantage of the larger guns on his ships: they could have commenced firing at a longer range than the German ships.
*He did not ensure that signals sent to his ships were handled properly and received by the intended ships. Lost signals added to the confusion and lost opportunities during the battle. This issue had already arisen in previous battles, where the same signals officer, Ralph Seymour, had been involved, but no changes had been made. Although Beatty was supposed to act as a fast armoured scout and report to Jellicoe the exact position of the German ships he encountered, or to keep in contact with the German fleet while he retreated to the main British Grand Fleet, he failed to do so. This information was important to Jellicoe to know how best to position the main fleet to make the most of its eventual engagement with the German High Seas Fleet. Despite this, Jellicoe succeeded in positioning his ships to good advantage, relying on other closer cruisers for final knowledge of the German&#x27;s position, but necessitating last-minute decisions. 
*Additionally, the gunnery of Beatty&#x27;s ships was generally poor compared to the rest of the fleet. This was partly a consequence of his ships being stationed at Rosyth, rather than Scapa Flow with the main fleet, since local facilities at Rosyth were limited, but this was a problem identified months before Jutland which Beatty had failed to correct.

After the war a report of the battle was prepared by the Admiralty under First Sea Lord Rosslyn Wemyss. Before the report was published, Beatty was himself appointed First Sea Lord, and immediately requested amendments to the report. When the authors refused to comply, he ordered it to be destroyed and instead had prepared an alternative report, which proved highly critical of Jellicoe. Considerable argument broke out as a result, with significant numbers of servicemen disputing the published version, including Admiral Reginald Bacon, who wrote his own book about the battle, criticising the version sponsored by Beatty and highly critical of Beatty&#x27;s own part in the battle.

Besides encouraging the publication of books and articles designed to praise his role at the Battle of Jutland and denigrate Jellicoe&#x27;s, after his retirement Beatty assisted with the preparation of a 5,200 line poem &quot;The Epic of Jutland&quot; by Shane Leslie.

In 2022 U.S. Air Force Academy military historian Chuck Steele found Beatty&#x27;s failures to improve communications between vessels before Jutland more glaring in light of his own personal awareness of how that had kept earlier victories at Heligoland Bight and Dogger Bank from being as overwhelming as they could have been. Gordon Moore, Steele writes, was transferred to the Canary Islands after the latter engagement not for his failures in it but for complaining about Beatty&#x27;s poor communications to Churchill, then First Lord of the Admiralty and a strong supporter of Beatty&#x27;s. Steele also argues that Beatty should also have known how to effectively use his battle cruisers due to the role they had played in smashing the German East Asia Squadron at the Falkland Islands. He faults Beatty for having learned too much from his earlier experience leading troops on land, and Churchill and others for being too impressed with Beatty as the supposed second coming of Horatio Nelson to see that unlike Nelson Beatty did not appreciate the value of newer naval technology.

==Honours and awards==
(ribbon bar, as it would look today)










===British===
*Companion of the Distinguished Service Order (DSO)-17 November 1896
*Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath (GCB)-31 May 1916 (KCB: 19 June 1914; CB: 19 June 1911)
*Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order (GCVO)-25 June 1917 (KCVO: 17 June 1916 Member Fourth Class (present-day Lieutenant)(MVO): 28 April 1905)
*Member of the Order of Merit (OM)-3 June 1919
*Earl Beatty, Viscount Borodale of Wexford in the County of Wexford, Baron Beatty of the North Sea and of Brooksby in the County of Leicester-18 October 1919

Beatty was granted the Freedom of the City of London on 16 June 1919 at the same ceremony as Lord Haig. In June 1920, the Great Central Railway gave the name &quot;Earl Beatty&quot; to one of their newly built 4-6-0 express passenger locomotives, no. 1164 of class 9P (LNER class B3). It carried the name until withdrawal in September 1947. In 1925, he became the President of the Society for Nautical Research.

===Foreign===
*Order of Majid, 4th Class (&quot;Nishan-i-Majidieh&quot;) of the Ottoman Empire-3 October 1898
*Order of St George, Fourth Class of the Russian Empire-25 August 1916
*Grand Officer of the Military Order of Savoy of the Kingdom of Italy-11 August 1917
*Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun of the Empire of Japan-29 August 1917
*Grand Cross of the Legion d&#x27;Honneur of France-23 May 1919 (Grand Officer-15 September 1916)
*Croix de Guerre of France-15 February 1919
*Grand Cross of the Order of the Star of Romania of the Kingdom of Romania-17 March 1919
*Grand Cross of the Order of the Redeemer of the Kingdom of Greece-21 June 1919
*Distinguished Service Medal (United States)-16 September 1919
*Grand Cordon with Brilliants of the Order of the Precious Brilliant Golden Grain of the Republic of China – 22 January 1920
*Grand Cordon of the Order of the Paulownia Flowers of the Empire of Japan – 20 January 1922

===Namesakes===
*Admiral Beatty Avenue in Mount Roskill, Auckland, was named as a tribute to Beatty in the late 1920s.
*Beatty Secondary School (Singapore), was named after him in 1953.

===Arms===
==Quotations==


==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*

==Further reading==
*
*
*


==External links==
*
*
*Portrait of Admiral Sir David Beatty by American artist Cecilia Beaux.

 

 

 

 
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2501631" start="0" end="20" title="Admiral of the Fleet (Royal Navy)" label="Admiral of the Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q335013" start="21" end="58" title="David Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty" label="David Richard Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="100" end="110" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q31944" start="141" end="152" title="Mahdist War" label="Mahdist War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="182" end="197" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605019" start="216" end="236" title="Battle Cruiser Fleet" label="Battle Cruiser Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q156554" start="244" end="261" title="Battle of Jutland" label="Battle of Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335028" start="399" end="416" title="John Jellicoe, 1st Earl Jellicoe" label="Sir John Jellicoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q644266" start="640" end="651" title="Grand Fleet" label="Grand Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q275599" start="711" end="726" title="High Seas Fleet" label="High Seas Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362267" start="814" end="828" title="First Sea Lord" label="First Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="971" end="994" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="1232" end="1243" title="Anglo-Irish people" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600359" start="1285" end="1293" title="Stapeley" label="Stapeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077003" start="1300" end="1308" title="Nantwich" label="Nantwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="1387" end="1394" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340760" start="1535" end="1549" title="4th Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Hussars" label="Fourth Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="1976" end="1983" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379908" start="2043" end="2062" title="sale of commissions" label="sold his commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="2356" end="2365" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="2897" end="2909" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3014" end="3024" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3130" end="3138" title="Borodale" label="Borodale"/>
<link wikidata="Q987759" start="3154" end="3165" title="Enniscorthy" label="Enniscorthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184599" start="3170" end="3184" title="County Wexford" label="County Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q623765" start="3328" end="3333" title="Rugby, Warwickshire" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407035" start="3519" end="3535" title="Kilkenny College" label="Kilkenny College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999700" start="3556" end="3583" title="Burney&amp;#x27;s Academy" label="Burney&amp;#x27;s Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q936263" start="3587" end="3594" title="Gosport" label="Gosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3736" end="3746" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q316498" start="3752" end="3757" title="cadet" label="cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q628548" start="3789" end="3814" title="HMS Prince of Wales (1860)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Britannia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007083" start="3925" end="3934" title="Dartmouth, Devon" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031289" start="4445" end="4458" title="China Station" label="China Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q323773" start="4535" end="4557" title="Lord Charles Beresford" label="Lord Charles Beresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q158143" start="4756" end="4773" title="Alfred, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940268" start="4843" end="4865" title="Mediterranean Fleet" label="Mediterranean Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="5001" end="5006" title="Marie of Edinburgh" label="Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="5514" end="5524" title="midshipman" label="midshipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599531" start="5574" end="5590" title="Stanley Colville" label="Stanley Colville"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="5754" end="5761" title="cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q10918728" start="5873" end="5887" title="sub-lieutenant" label="sub-lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089213" start="5936" end="5966" title="Royal Naval College (Greenwich)" label="Royal Naval College, Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="6563" end="6577" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q159670" start="6658" end="6681" title="Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale" label="Albert Duke of Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q31944" start="7075" end="7086" title="Mahdist War" label="Mahdist War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="7136" end="7141" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q821321" start="7730" end="7737" title="Dongola" label="Dongola"/>
<link wikidata="Q821321" start="7762" end="7769" title="Dongola" label="Dongola"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="7913" end="7940" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q216129" start="8048" end="8062" title="Horatio Kitchener, 1st Earl Kitchener" label="Lord Kitchener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="8096" end="8104" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137302" start="8431" end="8449" title="Battle of Omdurman" label="Battle of Omdurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="8489" end="8506" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888763" start="8928" end="8935" title="Fashoda" label="Fashoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q722699" start="9077" end="9095" title="Fashoda Crisis" label="the ensuing crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="9251" end="9260" title="commander" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031289" start="9417" end="9430" title="Commander-in-Chief, China" label="China Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="9557" end="9562" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="9701" end="9724" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Empress Dowager Tzu-hsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="10002" end="10008" title="Beijing" label="Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="10214" end="10222" title="Tianjin" label="Tientsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q694458" start="10248" end="10266" title="Edward Hobart Seymour" label="Sir Edward Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981769" start="10589" end="10602" title="naval brigade" label="naval brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459167" start="10837" end="10855" title="Seymour Expedition" label="Seymour Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890708" start="11231" end="11256" title="Battle of Dagu Forts (1900)" label="Taku forts were bombarded"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036514" start="11499" end="11506" title="Captain (Royal Navy)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382713" start="11796" end="11814" title="Newmarket, Suffolk" label="Newmarket, Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q20810826" start="12009" end="12019" title="Ethel Beatty" label="Ethel Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902746" start="12066" end="12080" title="Marshall Field" label="Marshall Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q130257328" start="12268" end="12279" title="Ronald Tree (politician)" label="Ronald Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14768" end="14784" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4453742" start="14877" end="14890" title="Ditchley" label="Ditchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="14896" end="14902" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="14907" end="14924" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231233" start="15100" end="15135" title="David Beatty, 2nd Earl Beatty" label="David Field Beatty, 2nd Earl Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126980" start="15160" end="15172" title="Capua Palace" label="Capua Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="15176" end="15181" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19832401" start="15196" end="15223" title="Peter Beatty" label="Peter Randolph Louis Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596417" start="15268" end="15275" title="Beneficiary" label="heiress"/>
<link wikidata="Q744224" start="15705" end="15718" title="Channel Fleet" label="Channel Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800708" start="15733" end="15750" title="Arthur Wilson (Royal Navy officer)" label="Sir Arthur Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940268" start="15770" end="15789" title="Mediterranean Fleet" label="Mediterranean Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126980" start="15990" end="16002" title="Capua Palace" label="Capua Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794124" start="16305" end="16317" title="Army Council (1904)" label="Army Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="16367" end="16379" title="Aide-de-Camp" label="Aide-de-Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="16383" end="16391" title="Edward VII" label="the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q489231" start="16455" end="16469" title="Atlantic Fleet (United Kingdom)" label="Atlantic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723645" start="16506" end="16520" title="Alfred Winsloe" label="Alfred Winsloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8565154" start="16526" end="16541" title="Fourth Sea Lord" label="Fourth Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q156945" start="16562" end="16574" title="rear-admiral" label="rear-admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q489231" start="16735" end="16749" title="Atlantic Fleet (United Kingdom)" label="Atlantic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548213" start="16792" end="16802" title="Home Fleet" label="Home Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="16856" end="16865" title="Admiralty (United Kingdom)" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333895" start="17296" end="17323" title="Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="17325" end="17342" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137302" start="17447" end="17465" title="Battle of Omdurman" label="Battle of Omdurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="17535" end="17545" title="apocryphal" label="apocryphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981914" start="17911" end="17926" title="Naval Secretary" label="Naval Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596220" start="17970" end="17996" title="1st Battlecruiser Squadron" label="1st Battlecruiser Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="18093" end="18104" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508380" start="18959" end="18971" title="George Tryon" label="George Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846667" start="19324" end="19337" title="Ralph Seymour (naval officer)" label="Ralph Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19885" end="19900" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="19933" end="19974" title="Order of the Bath" label="Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q214443" start="19998" end="20010" title="vice-admiral" label="vice-admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605019" start="20053" end="20073" title="Battle Cruiser Fleet" label="Battle Cruiser Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q677660" start="20208" end="20224" title="Battle of Heligoland Bight (1914)" label="Heligoland Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q73194" start="20233" end="20244" title="Battle of Dogger Bank (1915)" label="Dogger Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q156554" start="20256" end="20263" title="Battle of Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q214190" start="20359" end="20372" title="battlecruiser" label="battlecruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291802" start="20433" end="20448" title="Ernle Chatfield, 1st Baron Chatfield" label="Ernle Chatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q275599" start="20703" end="20718" title="High Seas Fleet" label="High Seas Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q644266" start="20751" end="20762" title="Grand Fleet" label="Grand Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q335028" start="20790" end="20803" title="John Jellicoe, 1st Earl Jellicoe" label="John Jellicoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="20890" end="20897" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980122" start="21155" end="21177" title="Bryan Godfrey-Faussett" label="Bryan Godfrey-Faussett"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="21352" end="21362" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="21766" end="21773" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501631" start="21799" end="21819" title="Admiral of the Fleet (Royal Navy)" label="Admiral of the Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276998" start="21854" end="21865" title="Earl Beatty" label="Earl Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362267" start="21962" end="21976" title="First Sea Lord" label="First Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="22049" end="22072" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453246" start="22253" end="22276" title="First MacDonald ministry" label="First Labour Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q332915" start="22348" end="22354" title="John Robert Clynes" label="Clynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926923" start="22389" end="22409" title="Singapore Naval Base" label="Singapore Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q287978" start="22614" end="22636" title="County-class cruiser" label="&amp;quot;Kent&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514413" start="22841" end="22865" title="Second Baldwin ministry" label="Conservatives took power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586304" start="22934" end="22951" title="William Bridgeman, 1st Viscount Bridgeman" label="William Bridgeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="23429" end="23444" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="23511" end="23537" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="23562" end="23580" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="Colonial Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333573" start="23581" end="23590" title="Leo Amery" label="Leo Amery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="23776" end="23784" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="23917" end="23923" title="Royal Marines" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533024" start="24085" end="24102" title="Geneva Naval Conference" label="Geneva Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498640" start="24398" end="24413" title="Stephen Roskill" label="Stephen Roskill"/>
<link wikidata="Q590776" start="24733" end="24751" title="Invergordon Mutiny" label="Invergordon Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="24838" end="24852" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975074" start="24867" end="24880" title="Brooksby Hall" label="Brooksby Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24885" end="24897" title="Dingley, Northamptonshire#Dingley Hall" label="Dingley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q704536" start="24929" end="24948" title="London Naval Treaty" label="London Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="25564" end="25573" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="25911" end="25924" title="George V of the United Kingdom" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="26122" end="26146" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q336344" start="26148" end="26158" title="Cosmo Lang" label="Cosmo Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="26205" end="26211" title="Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="26264" end="26279" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26399" end="26415" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="26468" end="26484" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761288" start="26500" end="26513" title="Trafalgar Day" label="Trafalgar Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="26656" end="26680" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605019" start="27243" end="27263" title="Battle Cruiser Fleet" label="Battle Cruiser Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978872" start="27342" end="27358" title="I Scouting Group" label="I Scouting Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641249" start="27500" end="27519" title="5th Battle Squadron" label="5th Battle Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q57587" start="27765" end="27786" title="Franz von Hipper" label="Admiral Hipper&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q511450" start="28088" end="28092" title="naval artillery" label="guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131496" start="28281" end="28312" title="gun laying" label="properly determine target range"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="29423" end="29430" title="cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225006" start="29971" end="29985" title="Baron Wester Wemyss" label="Rosslyn Wemyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377389" start="30408" end="30422" title="Reginald Bacon" label="Reginald Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276851" start="30827" end="30839" title="Shane Leslie" label="Shane Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="30850" end="30872" title="U.S. Air Force Academy" label="U.S. Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q677660" start="31085" end="31101" title="Battle of Heligoland Bight (1914)" label="Heligoland Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q73194" start="31106" end="31117" title="Battle of Dogger Bank (1915)" label="Dogger Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585577" start="31170" end="31182" title="Gordon Moore (Royal Navy officer)" label="Gordon Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="31222" end="31236" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="31371" end="31398" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q702819" start="31592" end="31610" title="East Asia Squadron" label="East Asia Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q160011" start="31618" end="31634" title="Battle of the Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="31827" end="31841" title="Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson" label="Horatio Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="32034" end="32061" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="32086" end="32129" title="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q94050" start="32187" end="32234" title="Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q94056" start="32356" end="32370" title="Order of Merit" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276998" start="32389" end="32400" title="Earl Beatty" label="Earl Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q111292721" start="32570" end="32599" title="Freedom of the City of London" label="Freedom of the City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q312564" start="32640" end="32649" title="Douglas Haig, 1st Earl Haig" label="Lord Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q688684" start="32669" end="32690" title="Great Central Railway" label="Great Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q483711" start="32757" end="32762" title="4-6-0" label="4-6-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q20870279" start="32806" end="32814" title="GCR Class 9P" label="class 9P"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552181" start="32928" end="32957" title="Society for Nautical Research" label="Society for Nautical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q599024" start="32975" end="32989" title="Order of the Medjidieh" label="Order of Majid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="33040" end="33054" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q831282" start="33071" end="33089" title="Order of St George" label="Order of St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="33111" end="33125" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559783" start="33163" end="33186" title="Military Order of Savoy" label="Military Order of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="33194" end="33210" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q818600" start="33247" end="33270" title="Order of the Rising Sun" label="Order of the Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="33278" end="33293" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="33329" end="33350" title="Legion d&amp;#x27;Honneur" label="Legion d&amp;#x27;Honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727598" start="33408" end="33423" title="Croix de guerre 1914–1918 (France)" label="Croix de Guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q950604" start="33471" end="33499" title="Order of the Star of Romania" label="Order of the Star of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="33507" end="33525" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q614661" start="33560" end="33581" title="Order of the Redeemer" label="Order of the Redeemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="33589" end="33606" title="Kingdom of Greece" label="Kingdom of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086458" start="33621" end="33648" title="Navy Distinguished Service Medal" label="Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355712" start="33720" end="33764" title="Order of the Precious Brilliant Golden Grain" label="Order of the Precious Brilliant Golden Grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156958" start="33829" end="33859" title="Order of the Paulownia Flowers" label="Order of the Paulownia Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="33867" end="33882" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66269909" start="33944" end="33957" title="Mount Roskill" label="Mount Roskill"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="33959" end="33967" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q466677" start="34259" end="34272" title="Cecilia Beaux" label="Cecilia Beaux"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8838" wikidata="Q5254422" url="?curid=8838" title="Dictum of Kenilworth">
<text>The Dictum of Kenilworth (), issued on 31 October 1266, was a pronouncement designed to reconcile the rebels of the Second Barons&#x27; War with the royal government of England. After the baronial victory at the Battle of Lewes in 1264, Simon de Montfort took control of royal government, but at the Battle of Evesham the next year Montfort was killed, and King Henry III restored to power. A group of rebels held out in the stronghold of Kenilworth Castle, however, and their resistance proved difficult to crush.

A siege of the castle was started, but through papal intervention King Henry later entered on a more conciliatory path. A commission was appointed to draw up an arrangement that would be acceptable to both sides. The resulting Dictum of Kenilworth offered the rebels the right to buy back forfeited estates, at prices depending on their level of involvement in the rebellion. After initial resistance, the terms were eventually accepted. By the summer of 1267, the country was pacified, and this spirit of reconciliation would last until the 1290s. The Dictum of Kenilworth was later incorporated into the Statute of Marlborough.

==Background==
At the Battle of Lewes in 1264, the rebellious barons, led by Simon de Montfort, had defeated the royal army and taken King Henry III captive. For the next year, the reins of government were in Montfort&#x27;s hands, but his support soon began to crumble. On 4 August 1265, Montfort faced an army led by Prince Edward (later King Edward I) and the powerful Earl of Gloucester, who had recently defected to the royalist side, at the Battle of Evesham. The battle resulted in a complete royal victory; Montfort was killed, and King Henry III was restored to full power.

Part of the rebellious forces held out, however, and their stronghold was the virtually impregnable Kenilworth Castle. In the summer of 1266, a siege of the castle was initiated, but the effort proved futile. There were rumours that Montfort&#x27;s son Simon the Younger was planning an invasion of England from Normandy, and this was the hope that the rebels hung on to. It was in this situation that the papal legate Ottobuono Fieschi exerted his influence, to make the king pursue a more conciliatory policy. In August, the king summoned a parliament at Kenilworth, where the siege was ongoing. He commissioned a number of earls, barons and bishops to draft a treaty of reconciliation.

==The Dictum of Kenilworth==
The commission was created by parliament appointing three bishops and three barons, who then selected one more bishop, two earls, and three more barons.
The final committee consisted of the bishops of Exeter, Bath and Wells, Worcester and St. David&#x27;s, the earls of Gloucester and Hereford, and six barons (Philip Basset, John Balliol, Robert Walerand, Alan la Zouche, Roger de Somery and Warin Basingbourne). This committee was given until All Saints Day (1 November) to come up with provisions for a settlement. The result, known as the Dictum of Kenilworth, was made public on 31 October 1266.

The primary point of the Dictum was the re-establishment of royal authority. The Provisions of Oxford, that had been forced on the king were repudiated, and it was made clear that the appointment of ministers was entirely a royal prerogative. King Henry in turn reconfirmed Magna Carta and the Charter of the Forest. At the same time, Henry was faced with the increasing veneration of the fallen Simon de Montfort, whom some were already starting to consider a martyr and a possible saint.

The rebels had previously been completely disinherited, and their land taken into the king&#x27;s hands. The Dictum instead extended a pardon, and restored land to their previous owners, contingent on payment of certain penalties that were proportional to the level of involvement in the rebellion. It was traditional to value land at ten times its annual yield, and most of the rebels were subsequently fined at half of this amount: five times the annual yield of their lands.

Robert Ferrers, Earl of Derby, was singled out in particular for his central involvement in the rebellion, and for him the multiple was seven rather than five. The same was the case for Henry de Hastings, who was the commander of Kenilworth Castle. Those who had not taken part in the fighting themselves, but had incited others to rise up against the king, were fined at two years&#x27; value, while those who had been compelled to fight, or played only a minor part, had to pay one year&#x27;s value of their land. The proceedings from the fines were awarded to royal supporters, some of whom had already been awarded parts of the rebels&#x27; land, and now had to give it back.

==Aftermath==
Hostilities did not end with the publication of the Dictum. The garrison at Kenilworth refused to accept the terms given, and held out until 14 December, when deprivation forced them to surrender. In April 1267, the earl of Gloucesterwho had been central both to the royal victory at Evesham and to the drafting of the Dictumturned against the king. He occupied the city of London, and set himself up as the champion of the disinherited. After negotiations involving both Edward and Ottobuono, Gloucester relented, and by June a settlement was reached. Gloucester had forced a change to the conditions of the Dictum, whereby the disinherited were allowed to recover their lands before they had paid their fines rather than after; an arrangement that made repayment much easier. In the summer of that year, Prince Edward moved at the Isle of Ely, where the last of the rebels still held out, and forced them into submission under terms favourable to the rebels.

In November 1267, parliament met at Marlborough in Wiltshire. Here an important provision was issued that would become known to history as the Statute of Marlborough. This statute incorporated the clauses of the Dictum of Kenilworth that dealt with the restoration of royal power, and reconciliation between the loyalists and the rebels. The Statute of Marlborough became a basis for royal government, and the relationship between the king and his subjects, and as such the Dictum lived on in English constitutional history.

The spirit of peace and reconciliation established by the Dictum of Kenilworth lasted for the remainder of Henry III&#x27;s reign and into the 1290s. In 1270, Prince Edward left the country to go on crusade in the Holy Land. When his father died in 1272, Edward felt in a safe enough position to wait until 1274 before returning home to claim the throne.

==References==
==Sources==
*Maddicott, J. R. (1994), &quot;[ Simon de Montfort]&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
*Powicke, F. M. (1947), &quot;King Henry III and the Lord Edward: The Community of the Realm in the Thirteenth Century&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
*Powicke, F. M. (1953), &quot;The Thirteenth Century: 1216-1307&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon. .
*Prestwich, Michael (1988), &quot;[ Edward I]&quot;, English Monarchs series, London: Methuen London. .
*Prestwich, Michael (2005), &quot;[ Plantagenet England: 1225–1360]&quot;, Oxford: Oxford University Press (pub. 28 July 2005). .
*Rothwell, H. (ed.) (1975), &quot;English Historical Documents III, 1189–1327&quot;, London, Eyre &amp; Spottiswoode. .

==Further reading==
*Altschul, M. (1965), &quot;A Baronial Family in Medieval England: The Clares, 1217-1314&quot;, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press.
*Brand, P.A. (2003), &quot;Kings, Barons and Justices: The Making and Enforcement of Legislation in Thirteenth-Century England&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
*Carpenter, D.A. (1996), &quot;The Reign of Henry III&quot;, London: Hambledon. .
*Denholm-Young, N. (1947), &quot;Richard of Cornwall&quot;, Oxford: Blackwell.
*Jacob, E.F. (1925), &quot;Studies in the Period of Baronial Reform and Rebellion, 1258-1267&quot;, Oxford, Clarendon Press.
*Knowles, C.H. (1982), &quot;The resettlement of England after the Barons&#x27; War&quot;, &quot;Transactions of the Royal Historical Society&quot;, 5th ser. 32.
*Knowles, C.H. (1986), &quot;Provision for the families of the Montfortians disinherited after the Battle of Evesham&quot;, in P.R. Coss and S.D. Lloyd (eds.) &quot;Thirteenth Century England I&quot;, Woodbridge: Boydell.
*Lewis, A. (1939), &quot;Roger Leyburn and the Pacification of England, 1265-7&quot;, &quot;English Historical Review&quot;, 54.
*Lloyd, T.H. (1986), &quot;Gilbert de Clare, Richard of Cornwall and the Lord Edward&#x27;s Crusade&quot;, &quot;Nottingham Medieval Studies&quot;, 31.
*Maddicott, J.R. (1986), &quot;Edward I and the lessons of baronial reform: local government, 1258-80&quot;, in P.R. Coss and S.D. Lloyd (eds.) &quot;Thirteenth Century England I&quot;, Woodbridge: Boydell.
*Treharne, R.F. (1932), &quot;The Baronial Plan of Reform&quot;, Manchester: Manchester University Press.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5254422" start="4" end="24" title="Dictum of Kenilworth" label="Dictum of Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q657967" start="116" end="139" title="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="169" end="176" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164009" start="212" end="227" title="Battle of Lewes" label="Battle of Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q310092" start="237" end="254" title="Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester" label="Simon de Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339928" start="300" end="317" title="Battle of Evesham" label="Battle of Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="362" end="371" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625487" start="409" end="417" title="Siege of Kenilworth" label="held out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738764" start="439" end="456" title="Kenilworth Castle" label="Kenilworth Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625487" start="518" end="537" title="Siege of Kenilworth" label="siege of the castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604654" start="1122" end="1144" title="Statute of Marlborough" label="Statute of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164009" start="1169" end="1184" title="Battle of Lewes" label="Battle of Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q310092" start="1224" end="1241" title="Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester" label="Simon de Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="1286" end="1295" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1492" end="1500" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360375" start="1519" end="1537" title="Gilbert de Clare, 6th Earl of Hertford" label="Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339928" start="1594" end="1611" title="Battle of Evesham" label="Battle of Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="1692" end="1701" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738764" start="1831" end="1848" title="Kenilworth Castle" label="Kenilworth Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287867" start="1984" end="2001" title="Simon de Montfort the Younger" label="Simon the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="2043" end="2051" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173000" start="2150" end="2167" title="Pope Adrian V" label="Ottobuono Fieschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281103" start="2288" end="2298" title="Kenilworth" label="Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964365" start="2651" end="2657" title="Walter Branscombe" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964947" start="2659" end="2673" title="Walter Giffard" label="Bath and Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026488" start="2675" end="2684" title="Nicholas of Ely" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2689" end="2705" title="Richard Carew (bishop)" label="St. David&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002601" start="2720" end="2730" title="Gilbert de Clare, 8th Earl of Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q445991" start="2735" end="2743" title="Humphrey de Bohun, 2nd Earl of Hereford" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183184" start="2761" end="2774" title="Philip Basset" label="Philip Basset"/>
<link wikidata="Q323643" start="2776" end="2788" title="John I de Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350793" start="2790" end="2805" title="Robert Walerand" label="Robert Walerand"/>
<link wikidata="Q21031557" start="2807" end="2821" title="Alan la Zouche (died 1270)" label="Alan la Zouche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2823" end="2838" title="Roger de Somery" label="Roger de Somery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2843" end="2861" title="Warin Basingbourne" label="Warin Basingbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630360" start="3133" end="3153" title="Provisions of Oxford" label="Provisions of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="3276" end="3293" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="3326" end="3337" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086779" start="3346" end="3367" title="Charter of the Forest" label="Charter of the Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436643" start="4022" end="4051" title="Robert de Ferrers, 6th Earl of Derby" label="Robert Ferrers, Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133191" start="4208" end="4225" title="Henry de Hastings, 1st Baron Hastings" label="Henry de Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5092" end="5098" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q935339" start="5551" end="5562" title="Isle of Ely" label="Isle of Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q539528" start="5716" end="5727" title="Marlborough, Wiltshire" label="Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604654" start="5823" end="5845" title="Statute of Marlborough" label="Statute of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q316743" start="6405" end="6412" title="Ninth Crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="6420" end="6429" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246354" start="6590" end="6606" title="John Maddicott" label="Maddicott, J. R."/>
<link wikidata="Q5423969" start="6691" end="6705" title="F. M. Powicke" label="Powicke, F. M."/>
<link wikidata="Q3308461" start="6934" end="6952" title="Michael Prestwich" label="Prestwich, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047376" start="6986" end="7009" title="English Monarchs series" label="English Monarchs series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232178" start="7612" end="7627" title="David Carpenter (historian)" label="Carpenter, D.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q5321856" start="7773" end="7784" title="E. F. Jacob" label="Jacob, E.F."/>
<link wikidata="Q7173401" start="8186" end="8195" title="Peter Coss" label="P.R. Coss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173401" start="8674" end="8683" title="Peter Coss" label="P.R. Coss"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8839" wikidata="Q124041" url="?curid=8839" title="London Docklands">
<text>London Docklands is an area of London encompassing the city’s former docks. It is located in inner east and southeast London, in the boroughs of Southwark, Tower Hamlets, Lewisham, Newham and Greenwich. The docks were formerly part of the Port of London, at one time the world&#x27;s largest port. After the docks closed, the area had become derelict and poverty-ridden by the 1980s. The Docklands&#x27; regeneration began later that decade; it has been redeveloped principally for commercial and residential use. The name &quot;London Docklands&quot; was used for the first time in a government report on redevelopment plans in 1971 and has since been almost universally adopted. The redevelopment created wealth, but also led to some conflict between the new and old communities in the area.

==Establishment==
In Roman and medieval times, ships arriving in the River Thames tended to dock at small quays in the present-day City of London or Southwark, an area known as the Pool of London. However, these gave no protection against the elements, were vulnerable to thieves and suffered from a lack of space at the quayside. The Howland Great Dock in Rotherhithe (built in 1696, and later to form the core of the Surrey Commercial Docks) was designed to address these problems, providing a large, secure and sheltered anchorage with room for 120 large vessels. It was a major commercial success, and provided for two phases of expansion during the Georgian and Victorian eras.

The first of the Georgian docks was the West India (opened in 1802), followed by the London (1805), the East India (also 1805), the Surrey (1807), the Regent&#x27;s Canal Dock (1820), St Katharine (1828) and the West India South (1829). The Victorian docks were mostly further east, comprising the Royal Victoria (1855), Millwall (1868) and Royal Albert (1880). The King George V Dock (1921) was a late addition.

==Development==

Three principal kinds of docks existed. Wet docks were where ships were laid up at anchor and loaded or unloaded. Dry docks, which were far smaller, took individual ships for repairing. Ships were built at dockyards along the riverside. In addition, the river was lined with innumerable warehouses, piers, jetties and dolphins (mooring points). The various docks tended to specialise in different forms of produce. The Surrey Docks concentrated on timber, for instance; Millwall took grain; St Katharine took wool, sugar and rubber; and so on.

The docks required an army of workers, chiefly lightermen (who carried loads between ships and quays aboard small barges called lighters) and quayside workers, who dealt with the goods once they were ashore. Some of the workers were highly skilled: the lightermen had their own livery company or guild, while the deal porters (workers who carried timber) were famous for their acrobatic skills. Most were unskilled and worked as casual labourers. They assembled at certain points, such as pubs, each morning, where they were selected more or less at random by foremen. For these workers, it was effectively a lottery whether they would get work on any particular day. This arrangement continued until as late as 1965, although it was somewhat regularised after the creation of the National Dock Labour Scheme in 1947.

The main dockland areas were originally low-lying marshes, mostly unsuitable for agriculture and lightly populated. With the establishment of the docks, the dock workers formed a number of tight-knit local communities with their own distinctive cultures and slang. Due to poor communications with other parts of London, they tended to develop in some isolation. Road access to the Isle of Dogs, for example, was only via two swing bridges. Local sentiment there was so strong that Ted Johns, a local community campaigner, and his supporters, in protest at the lack of social provision from the state, unilaterally declared independence for the area, set up a so-called &quot;Island Council&quot; with Johns himself as its elected leader, and blocked off the two access roads.

==20th century==
The docks were originally built and managed by a number of competing private companies. From 1909, they were managed by the Port of London Authority (PLA) which amalgamated the companies in a bid to make the docks more efficient and improve labour relations. The PLA constructed the last of the docks, the King George V, in 1921, as well as greatly expanding the Tilbury docks.

German bombing during the Second World War caused massive damage to the docks, with 380,000 tons of timber destroyed in the Surrey Docks in a single night. Nonetheless, following post-war rebuilding they experienced a resurgence of prosperity in the 1950s.

Before the later Docklands&#x27; redevelopment and gentrification, the dock workers often made ends meet with petty and not so petty criminality, such as theft from the not yet containerized cargo, smuggling and fencing. As a result, the docks became &quot;centres of excellence for criminal practice&quot;. Many of Britain&#x27;s most proficient criminals learnt their trade here, including those behind the Hatton Garden heist, the Great Train Robbery, the Brink&#x27;s-Mat robbery, the Security Express robbery and the Tonbridge cash depot robbery.

The end came suddenly, between approximately 1960 and 1970, when the shipping industry adopted the newly invented container system of cargo transportation. London&#x27;s docks were unable to accommodate the much larger vessels needed by containerization, and the shipping industry moved to deep-water ports such as Tilbury and Felixstowe. Between 1960 and 1980, all of London&#x27;s docks were closed, leaving around eight square miles (21 km2) of derelict land in East London.

==Redevelopment==

Efforts to redevelop the docks began almost as soon as they were closed, although it took a decade for most plans to move beyond the drawing board and another decade for redevelopment to take full effect. The situation was greatly complicated by the large number of landowners involved: the PLA, the Greater London Council (GLC), the British Gas Corporation, five borough councils, British Rail and the Central Electricity Generating Board.
To address this problem, in 1981 the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, formed the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) to redevelop the area. This was a statutory body appointed and funded by central government (a quango), with wide powers to acquire and dispose of land in the Docklands. It also served as the development planning authority for the area.

Another important government intervention was the designation in 1982 of an enterprise zone, an area in which businesses were exempt from property taxes and had other incentives, including simplified planning and capital allowances. This made investing in the Docklands a significantly more attractive proposition and was instrumental in starting a property boom in the area.

The LDDC was controversial; it was accused of favouring elitist luxury developments rather than affordable housing, and it was unpopular with the local communities, who felt that their needs were not being addressed. Nonetheless, the LDDC was central to a remarkable transformation in the area, although how far it was in control of events is debatable. It was wound up in 1998 when control of the Docklands area was handed back to the respective local authorities.

The massive development programme managed by the LDDC during the 1980s and 1990s saw a huge area of the Docklands converted into a mixture of residential, commercial and light industrial space. The clearest symbol of the whole effort was the ambitious Canary Wharf project that constructed Britain&#x27;s tallest building at the time and established a second business district (CBD) in London. However, there is no evidence that the LDDC foresaw this scale of development; nearby Heron Quays had already been developed as low-density offices when Canary Wharf was proposed, and similar development was already underway on Canary Wharf itself, Limehouse Studios being the most famous occupant.

Canary Wharf was far from trouble-free; the property slump of the early 1990s halted further development for several years. Developers found themselves, for a time, saddled with property that they were unable to sell or let.

==Transport==

The Docklands historically had poor transport connections. This was addressed by the LDDC with the construction of the Docklands Light Railway (DLR), which connected the Docklands with the city. According to Transport for London, the owner of the project, it was a remarkably inexpensive development, costing only £77 million in its first phase, as it relied on reusing disused railway infrastructure and derelict land for much of its length. The LDDC originally requested a full London Underground line, but the Government refused to fund it.

The LDDC also built the Limehouse Link tunnel, a cut and cover road tunnel linking the Isle of Dogs to The Highway (the A1203 road) at a cost of over £150 million per kilometre, one of the most expensive stretches of road ever built.

The LDDC also contributed to the development of London City Airport (IATA airport code LCY), opened in October 1987 on the spine of the Royal Docks.

The London Underground&#x27;s Jubilee line was extended eastwards in 1999; it now serves Rotherhithe/Surrey Quays at Canada Water station, the Isle of Dogs at Canary Wharf tube station, Greenwich at North Greenwich tube station and the nearby Royal Docks at Canning Town station. The DLR was extended in 1994 to serve much of the Royal Docks area when the Beckton branch was opened. The Isle of Dogs branch was extended further south, and in 1999 it began serving Greenwich town centre—including the Cutty Sark museum—Deptford and finally Lewisham. In 2005, a new branch of the DLR opened from Canning Town to serve what used to be the eastern terminus of the North London Line, including a station at London City Airport. It was then further extended to Woolwich Arsenal in 2009.

===Future developments===
Further development projects are being proposed and put into practice within the London Dockland area, such as:

* Extensions of the DLR, possibly to Dagenham.
* Further development of Canada Water.
* Redevelopment of Blackwall Basin and Wood Wharf, east of Canary Wharf.
* New skyscrapers to be built at Canary Wharf, including the Riverside South towers, the Heron Quays West double-skyscraper development and the North Quay project, consisting of three towers.

In the early 21st century, redevelopment is spreading into the more suburban parts of east and southeast London, and into the parts of the counties of Kent and Essex that abut the Thames Estuary. See Thames Gateway and Lower Lea Valley for further information on this trend.

===Docklands series buses===

====History====
The numbers of several London Buses routes are prefixed &quot;D&quot; for Docklands; all run on the north bank of the River Thames as part of the London bus network, and act as feeder buses to the DLR. The &quot;D&quot; network was developed in the early stages of Docklands redevelopment; it was originally much larger, but as transport rapidly improved across east London, the need for the &quot;D&quot; routes reduced. Today only four remain, running primarily in Tower Hamlets and briefly into Newham and Hackney. Stagecoach London operate routes D6, D7 and D8, and Blue Triangle operate route D3.

==21st century==
The population of the Docklands has more than doubled during the last 30 years, and the area has become a major business centre. Canary Wharf has emerged as one of Europe&#x27;s biggest clusters of skyscrapers and a major extension to the financial services district of the City of London.

Although most of the old wharfs and warehouses have been demolished, some have been restored and converted into flats. Many of the docks themselves have survived and are now used as marinas or watersports centres; a major exception is the Surrey Commercial Docks, which are now largely filled in. Although large ships can—and occasionally still do—visit the old docks, all of the commercial traffic has moved downriver further east.

The revival of the Docklands has had major effects in other run-down surrounding areas. Greenwich and Deptford are undergoing large-scale redevelopment, chiefly as a result of the improved transport links making them more attractive to commuters.

The Docklands&#x27; redevelopment has, however, had some less beneficial aspects. The massive property boom and consequent rise in house prices has led to friction between the new arrivals and the old Docklands communities, who have complained of being squeezed out. It has also made for some of the most striking disparities to be seen anywhere in Britain: luxury executive flats constructed alongside run-down public housing estates.

The Docklands&#x27; status as a symbol of Margaret Thatcher&#x27;s Britain has also made it a target for terrorists. After a failed attempt to bomb Canary Wharf in 1992, a large IRA bomb exploded at South Quay on 9 February 1996. Two people died in the explosion, forty people were injured and an estimated £150 million of damage was caused. This bombing ended an IRA ceasefire. James McArdle was sentenced to 25 years of jail time but released in 2000 under the terms of the Good Friday Agreement and royal prerogative of mercy officially signed by Queen Elizabeth II.

In a further sign of regeneration in the area, the Docklands now has its own symphony orchestra, Docklands Sinfonia; which was formed in January 2009 and is based at St Anne&#x27;s Limehouse.

===Economy===
The offices of &quot;The Independent&quot; group of publications were at one time situated in the Docklands. In 2008, Independent News &amp; Media announced that &quot;The Independent&quot; would be moving its offices to Northcliffe House in Kensington.

London&#x27;s Docklands has become one of the world&#x27;s leading global internet hubs since the opening in 1990 of the carrier-neutral Telehouse campus, which hosts the vast majority of LINX&#x27;s internet peering traffic, occupying over 73,000 square metres. In August 2016, Telehouse Europe opened the $177 million North Two data centre of 24,000 square metres that became the only UK data centre to own a 132 kV on-campus grid substation that is directly connected to the National Grid, reducing transmission losses and improving power density and service continuity.

==See also==

* Burrells Wharf
* Island History Trust
* Port of London
* Safeguarded wharf
* Stepney Historical Trust
* University of East London

==References==
==Further reading==
*Kevin d&#x27;Arcy. &quot;London&#x27;s 2nd City: Creating Canary Wharf.&quot; Rajah Books .

==External links==

* The Docklands newspaper
* History of Docklands redevelopment 
* London East Research Institute 
* Royal Docks Trust (London)
* West Silvertown Online
* Royal Docks Information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q124041" start="0" end="16" title="London Docklands" label="London Docklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="31" end="37" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="145" end="154" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q208152" start="156" end="169" title="London Borough of Tower Hamlets" label="Tower Hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q215030" start="171" end="179" title="London Borough of Lewisham" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q208139" start="181" end="187" title="London Borough of Newham" label="Newham"/>
<link wikidata="Q693450" start="192" end="201" title="Royal Borough of Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q124282" start="207" end="212" title="Dock (maritime)" label="docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545354" start="239" end="253" title="Port of London" label="Port of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634467" start="271" end="296" title="world&amp;#x27;s largest port" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest port"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="816" end="821" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="826" end="834" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="864" end="876" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="926" end="940" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273898" start="944" end="953" title="Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q276997" start="976" end="990" title="Pool of London" label="Pool of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544727" start="1130" end="1148" title="Greenland Dock" label="Howland Great Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886632" start="1152" end="1163" title="Rotherhithe" label="Rotherhithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368643" start="1214" end="1237" title="Surrey Commercial Docks" label="Surrey Commercial Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="1449" end="1457" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="1462" end="1475" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642944" start="1519" end="1529" title="West India Docks" label="West India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488404" start="1564" end="1570" title="London Docks" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277908" start="1583" end="1593" title="East India Docks" label="East India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825422" start="1630" end="1654" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s Canal Dock" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Canal Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003616" start="1663" end="1675" title="St Katharine Docks" label="St Katharine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171143" start="1777" end="1791" title="Royal Victoria Dock" label="Royal Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519503" start="1800" end="1808" title="Millwall Dock" label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170948" start="1820" end="1832" title="Royal Albert Dock, London" label="Royal Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742029" start="1845" end="1863" title="King George V Dock, London" label="King George V Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q124282" start="1950" end="1958" title="Wet dock" label="Wet dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="2024" end="2032" title="Dry dock" label="Dry dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="2116" end="2124" title="dockyard" label="dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626671" start="2197" end="2236" title="List of locations in the Port of London" label="warehouses, piers, jetties and dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971467" start="2342" end="2364" title="British timber trade" label="concentrated on timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q105686672" start="2502" end="2512" title="lightermen" label="lightermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694199" start="2583" end="2590" title="Lighter (barge)" label="lighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139056" start="2733" end="2747" title="livery company" label="livery company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245884" start="2768" end="2780" title="deal porters" label="deal porters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972323" start="3236" end="3263" title="National Dock Labour Scheme" label="National Dock Labour Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q124295" start="3655" end="3667" title="Isle of Dogs" label="Isle of Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q950431" start="3699" end="3711" title="swing bridge" label="swing bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231179" start="4192" end="4216" title="Port of London Authority" label="Port of London Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q608190" start="4309" end="4325" title="labour relations" label="labour relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419586" start="4431" end="4444" title="Port of Tilbury" label="Tilbury docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="4447" end="4461" title="The Blitz" label="German bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4473" end="4489" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="4547" end="4553" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873991" start="5114" end="5133" title="Hatton Garden heist" label="Hatton Garden heist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140155" start="5139" end="5158" title="Great Train Robbery (1963)" label="Great Train Robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968393" start="5164" end="5188" title="Brink&amp;#x27;s-Mat robbery" label="Brink&amp;#x27;s-Mat robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599539" start="5194" end="5218" title="Security Express robbery" label="Security Express robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247927" start="5227" end="5255" title="Securitas depot robbery" label="Tonbridge cash depot robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q428072" start="5372" end="5388" title="Containerization" label="container system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398484" start="5585" end="5595" title="Port of Felixstowe" label="Felixstowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476542" start="6056" end="6078" title="Greater London Council" label="Greater London Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925725" start="6090" end="6113" title="British Gas Corporation" label="British Gas Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="6138" end="6150" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061023" start="6159" end="6195" title="Central Electricity Generating Board" label="Central Electricity Generating Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122313" start="6234" end="6272" title="Secretary of State for the Environment" label="Secretary of State for the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q332314" start="6274" end="6291" title="Michael Heseltine" label="Michael Heseltine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258953" start="6304" end="6344" title="London Docklands Development Corporation" label="London Docklands Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940786" start="6447" end="6453" title="quango" label="quango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344719" start="6666" end="6681" title="enterprise zone" label="enterprise zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q124377" start="7686" end="7698" title="Canary Wharf" label="Canary Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223735" start="7914" end="7925" title="Heron Quays" label="Heron Quays"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549183" start="8077" end="8094" title="Limehouse Studios" label="Limehouse Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="8488" end="8511" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="8849" end="8867" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549180" start="8938" end="8959" title="Limehouse Link tunnel" label="Limehouse Link tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="8963" end="8976" title="cut and cover" label="cut and cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739663" start="9017" end="9028" title="The Highway (London)" label="The Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8982" start="9197" end="9216" title="London City Airport" label="London City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q192824" start="9218" end="9235" title="IATA airport code" label="IATA airport code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795188" start="9285" end="9296" title="Royal Docks" label="Royal Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q961290" start="9329" end="9341" title="Jubilee line" label="Jubilee line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415880" start="9400" end="9412" title="Surrey Quays" label="Surrey Quays"/>
<link wikidata="Q800610" start="9416" end="9436" title="Canada Water station" label="Canada Water station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032842" start="9458" end="9483" title="Canary Wharf tube station" label="Canary Wharf tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="9485" end="9494" title="Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757132" start="9498" end="9526" title="North Greenwich tube station" label="North Greenwich tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033431" start="9557" end="9577" title="Canning Town station" label="Canning Town station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417728" start="9655" end="9662" title="Beckton" label="Beckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q171255" start="9799" end="9809" title="Cutty Sark" label="Cutty Sark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308650" start="9817" end="9825" title="Deptford" label="Deptford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537297" start="9838" end="9846" title="Lewisham" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854601" start="9959" end="9976" title="North London Line" label="North London Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868954" start="10001" end="10020" title="London City Airport DLR station" label="London City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q801639" start="10054" end="10070" title="Woolwich Arsenal station" label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075299" start="10257" end="10265" title="Dagenham" label="Dagenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032006" start="10292" end="10304" title="Canada Water" label="Canada Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642944" start="10325" end="10340" title="Blackwall Basin" label="Blackwall Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032285" start="10345" end="10355" title="Wood Wharf" label="Wood Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496849" start="10440" end="10455" title="Riverside South (Canary Wharf)" label="Riverside South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743521" start="10468" end="10484" title="Heron Quays West" label="Heron Quays West"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059601" start="10523" end="10533" title="North Quay, London" label="North Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="10723" end="10727" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="10732" end="10737" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059075" start="10752" end="10766" title="Thames Estuary" label="Thames Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116189" start="10772" end="10786" title="Thames Gateway" label="Thames Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264389" start="10791" end="10807" title="Lower Lea Valley" label="Lower Lea Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="10917" end="10929" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q208152" start="11361" end="11374" title="London Borough of Tower Hamlets" label="Tower Hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q208139" start="11392" end="11398" title="London Borough of Newham" label="Newham"/>
<link wikidata="Q205679" start="11403" end="11410" title="London Borough of Hackney" label="Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596856" start="11412" end="11429" title="Stagecoach London" label="Stagecoach London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929965" start="11464" end="11477" title="Blue Triangle" label="Blue Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="12966" end="12983" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591331" start="13106" end="13152" title="1996 Docklands bombing" label="bomb exploded at South Quay on 9 February 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="13288" end="13291" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="13400" end="13421" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240694" start="13426" end="13452" title="royal prerogative of mercy" label="royal prerogative of mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="13480" end="13492" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287228" start="13592" end="13610" title="Docklands Sinfonia" label="Docklands Sinfonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150581" start="13661" end="13685" title="St Anne&amp;#x27;s Limehouse" label="St Anne&amp;#x27;s Limehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="13723" end="13738" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662047" start="13820" end="13848" title="Independent News &amp;amp; Media" label="Independent News &amp;amp; Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="13944" end="13954" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517302" start="14094" end="14103" title="Telehouse Europe" label="Telehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319971" start="14145" end="14149" title="London Internet Exchange" label="LINX"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261121" start="14435" end="14448" title="National Grid (Great Britain)" label="National Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000413" start="14548" end="14562" title="Burrells Wharf" label="Burrells Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059613" start="14565" end="14585" title="Island History Trust" label="Island History Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545354" start="14588" end="14602" title="Port of London" label="Port of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398566" start="14605" end="14622" title="Safeguarded wharf" label="Safeguarded wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q123627" start="14625" end="14649" title="Stepney Historical Trust" label="Stepney Historical Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345942" start="14652" end="14677" title="University of East London" label="University of East London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14715" end="14732" title="Kevin d&amp;#x27;Arcy" label="Kevin d&amp;#x27;Arcy"/>
</links>
</doc>
